


















































November 22. 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3029 
 November 22, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to welcome a group sitting up in the west gallery 
today. I have a group from the Regina Christian School which 
is in my constituency. They’re accompanied by Ms. Jane 
Robertson, who’s been here a couple of times, Mr. Bernard 
Krogsgaard, and educational assistants Lisa Fogerty and Ms. 
Jennifer Alcantara. I’m really looking forward to the 
opportunity to spend some time with these young people later 
today. Please join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you and 
to all the members of this House, I would like to introduce my 
son, Kashif, who is here today. Kashif is a 12-year-old and goes 
to École Massey in grade 7, and not very busy these days, since 
the garage got cold, in the many projects, Mr. Speaker. He was 
with me this season in hunting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I picked him up from school after he 
hit the steel staircase while he was sledding, and we went to the 
hospital, had two staples. He is okay now. And I ask all the 
members to welcome him in the legislative. Thank you very 
much. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed this petition wish to bring 
to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of domestic violence amongst all of the provinces in 
Canada. Employers should be obligated to reasonably 
accommodate survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. 
Employees who are survivors of domestic violence should be 
able to take a leave of absence from their employment without 
penalty, and Saskatchewan must do much more to protect 
survivors of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve called for in our private 
member’s bill, Bill No. 605. I’m very hopeful that government 
members — and in particular, the Minister of Justice and the 
Minister of Labour who right now is the same person — will 

support this bill and will pass it this session. 
 
Those who signed this petition today come from Moose Jaw 
and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I’m pleased to rise today to present a 
petition from citizens who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully submit 
the Legislative Assembly take the following action: to 
cause the Government of Saskatchewan to take the 
necessary steps to stop the federal government from 
imposing a carbon tax on the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Weekes, 
Porcupine Plain, Humboldt, and Chelan. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
present a petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. The people who have 
signed this petition would like to bring to our attention the 
following: the Sask Party hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families 
and businesses by $1 billion in their most recent budget, and 
because of that increase, Saskatchewan has become the only 
province in the country, the only province in the country where 
people are charged PST [provincial sales tax] on life and health 
insurance premiums. 
 
We know that this new tax on insurance is also on crop 
insurance. It’s a devastating hit on producers, Mr. Speaker. 
Small and medium-sized businesses, including those in the 
restaurant, tourism, and construction industries, will be hit hard 
by the Sask Party tax hikes, and these businesses will be forced 
to pass the rising costs on to their customers. So I’ll read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed the petition today 
are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place on behalf of the residents of Balgonie, 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting on 
their behalf today concerns the permanent closure of Main 
Street access to Highway No. 1 in the town of Balgonie. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 
 
They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the many, many, 
many pages of petitions to support the community of Balgonie 
are from all around the area and all throughout Saskatchewan. 
We present these pages each and every day. And on this 
particular day, the page that I’m about to present, the people 
that have signed this petition are primarily from Balgonie. And 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place to provide a petition for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. The individuals that signed this petition would like to 
draw these following points to your attention: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the communities of Regina and Moose Jaw. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point 
out that the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre 
left 15 people out of work, and financial impact on their 

families and the local businesses was certainly significant. They 
point out that the closure hurt elders within the community 
who’d received the help of inmates doing odd jobs. 
 
They point out that the closure of the BNCC [Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre] hurt the families of the inmates while 
learning new skills working with skilled employees to obtain 
employment upon release. They point out that the closure of the 
centre took inmates far away from their families, which makes 
visitation difficult or non-existent at all, Mr. Speaker. And they 
point out that the closure of the centre took away inmates from 
treatment possibilities and the opportunities to get training that 
of course is so critical in the fight against reoffending, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre to better our community for future 
generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the region, in particular in Dillon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to stop cuts to our kids’ classrooms. 
Those who signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: that the Sask Party has cut at least $674 in 
government funding for every student across this province; that 
the Sask Party hiked education taxes by 67 million but cut total 
government funding for education by $121 million; even 
though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids are 
actually getting less; and that the Sask Party cuts mean that 
students will lose much needed supports in their classroom, 
including funding for busing for kindergartners and for 
programs to help children with special needs.  
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Those who have signed this petition today reside in the city of 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
House to return to introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I note in 
your gallery someone who will be no stranger to many 
members in the House, who certainly deserves and warrants 
recognition. Mike Couros has joined us in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s a resident of Saskatoon, a business person, 
originally I think from Humboldt, Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, he’s also well known as a commentator. He’s a pretty 
good stand-up comic, actually. Sometimes when he’s trying to 
be, he’s a good stand-up comic, Mr. Speaker, and he’s also a 
very good friend. 
 
Many members on this side of the House have known him for 
some time. Some of them are fellow bike enthusiasts. I’ve been 
told by the Deputy Premier that Mike was once devoted to 
Harley-Davidson but had some issues with the company and 
has now decided on another bike. I think he rides an Indian 
now. 
 
I would also note that he’s in the insurance business and so 
given, you know, his willingness to switch brands, we’re going 
to work very hard to continue to earn Mike’s support into the 
future. But he has contributed much to his home city of 
Saskatoon and to the province, and I would just ask all 
members to welcome Mike Couros to his Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll join with 
the Premier to welcome Mr. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d like to join with the Premier to 
welcome Mr. Couros to his Assembly. I enjoy much of what he 
adds to the public sphere and to debate. I know we might not 
always be on the same side of the issue. We certainly are on the 
insurance piece there.  
 
But I welcome Mike to his Assembly and I would like to say I 
get along a lot better with his two brothers, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
nice to have Mike Couros here today. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Walk to Raise Awareness of Suicide 
 
Mr. Vermette: — On August 25th, 2017 a group of family and 
friends of lost loved ones walked along Highway No. 2 between 
Prince Albert and La Ronge. They were walking to raise 
awareness about the suicide epidemic in northern 
Saskatchewan. 

Linda and Michael Roberts from La Ronge helped organize the 
walk after they lost their 14-year-old daughter, Jadene Irving, to 
suicide in 2016. Their vehicle was plastered with photos of their 
beautiful daughter. They were joined by Sally Ratt from Stanley 
Mission, who also lost her 14-year-old daughter, Ariana 
Roberts, to suicide. In October of 2016 there were six young 
girls who took their lives. 
 
The walkers were from Prince Albert, Little Red River, 
Montreal Lake, Sturgeon Lake, Stanley Mission, and other 
communities which have been impacted by suicides. It has been 
a rough road, and a hard road. They were walking to heal 
wounds and find positives in life. These parents who walked 
want to send a message to all people, including all 
governments, that suicide in our communities is a real problem. 
The issue of youth suicide takes us back to the calls of action in 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and we must act 
upon them now before one more young life is lost. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Partnership Receives Premier’s  
Board of Education Award 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, last week I had the pleasure of 
awarding the 2017 Premier’s Board of Education Award for 
innovation and excellence in education. This award was 
established in 1999 and is sponsored by Xerox Canada. It 
recognizes educational innovations that focus on improving 
student learning outcomes leading to greater achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients were Greater Saskatoon 
Catholic Schools, the Saskatoon Tribal Council, and the 
University of Saskatchewan’s Indian Teacher Education 
Program. This award went to these three partners thanks to their 
exceptional work building an indigenous language pathway to 
improve student learning outcomes at St. Frances Cree bilingual 
school in Saskatoon. 
 
The program embraces indigenous language, culture, identity, 
and community. It provides the foundation for students to 
achieve their full potential and offers opportunities for 
innovations in indigenizing the curriculum and improving First 
Nations and Métis student learning outcomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was a trustee with the Greater Saskatoon 
Catholic school board in 2007 when this program was 
implemented, and I was so pleased to be part of this inspiring 
journey. It’s very rewarding to see all of the success this 
program has achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of this Assembly, I’d 
like to congratulate these worthy recipients of this prestigious 
award and thank them for all their innovative work improving 
our education system. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview 
 
 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

Regina Teachers Receive Governor General’s  
History Award 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 
incredible work of two Regina teachers, their students, and First 
Nations educators. Yesterday in Ottawa, Naomi Fortier-Fréçon 
and Leia Laing received the 2017 Governor General’s History 
Award for excellence in teaching. These amazing and deserving 
educators collaborated with about 25 education colleagues, 
including Elder Noel Starblanket and retired Aboriginal 
education coordinator Calvin Racette, to establish a program 
that makes treaty education more relatable for students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principal aim of the Treaty4Project is for 
students to understand their generation’s relationship with 
Treaty 4 in Saskatchewan, both today and into the future. 
Through the participation of elders, indigenous artists, 
university professors, activists, and education students, the 
project provides students with a chance to engage with 
community members and gain the fundamental knowledge they 
need to tackle the very complex issues that face our province. 
 
The project was first implemented in 2015 with the support of 
the Saskatchewan Arts Board, and now has two main 
components. The first is a youth conference for high school 
students at the First Nations University of Canada, which 
features workshops, group discussions, and reflections on treaty 
history and education. As a new component in 2016, elementary 
students collaborate with local artists on a project that explores 
the concept of reconciliation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Fortier-Fréçon and Ms. Laing are enthusiastic 
and dedicated to the teaching of Canadian history, and the 
Treaty4Project serves as a shining example of how educators 
can incorporate meaningful acts of reconciliation in their 
classrooms. And I would ask all members to join me in 
honouring the participants of the Treaty4Project, recipients of 
the 2017 Governor General’s Award. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Knights of Columbus Dinner  
Benefits Children’s Hospital 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another piece of 
great news for our children’s hospital which will be opening in 
less than two years. The Knights of Columbus Council 8215 
held their fourth annual Celebrity Dinner, presented by Les and 
Irene Dubé, on October 27th. I was proud to attend with 
members from Saskatoon Westview and Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
The funds raised this year will go towards the construction and 
furnishing of a state-of-the-art maternal room at the new Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon. This room will be 
one of many that will allow mothers, families, and children to 
stay together through the whole experience of childbirth. 
 
Former Riders coach Ken Miller was the keynote speaker, and 
he shared with all of us his story of leadership, faith, and 
family. Unified head of pediatrics, Dr. Givelichian, spoke 
passionately about how the children’s hospital is progressing. 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s event raised over $90,000. An integral 
part of this year’s fundraising efforts was Knights of Columbus 
Landis Council 5549 presented a cheque for $23,000. 
 
This was the fourth gala these tireless volunteers have 
presented, raising to date over $250,000. We are just two years 
away from seeing the efforts of events such as this bring the 
children’s hospital to reality, opening its doors and providing 
world-class care for our mothers and children. Mr. Speaker, I 
ask all members, please join me in thanking the Knights of 
Columbus Council 8215 as well as the many sponsors for their 
commitment to the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Queen City Marathon Raises Funds for Charity 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier this 
fall I had the pleasure of participating in the Queen City 
Marathon, running a full half-marathon. Established in 2001, 
the Queen City Marathon has grown into an important event in 
our city of Regina. Last year the event hosted over 6,000 
participants from all across the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the marathon was not established as a fundraising 
event. It was simply organized to offer local members a chance 
to participate in a local marathon. But over the years, the 
marathon became a partner with charities and brought in 
opportunities for participants to donate. 
 
In true Saskatchewan fashion, participants jumped onto this 
opportunity. This year over $20,000 was raised by the 
participants, making total donations up to approximately 
$50,000. This year’s charity partners were Raise a Reader, 
YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association], KidSport, 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation, Regina Food Bank, North 
Central Family Centre, and Special Olympics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Queen City Marathon has grown into an 
impressive event reflecting the generous nature of people of our 
province. I do like to congratulate the marathon for all of their 
success this year and thank all of those who participated and 
donated into it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Caroncrest Farms Celebrates 50 Years 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to share 
with you a local success story. This October, Caroncrest Farms 
celebrated its 50th year of dairy production. Located just off 
Highway 1 near Caronport, Caroncrest Farms has been a staple 
of the community since it was first started producing milk in 
1967. 
 
Current owner Blaine McLeod was eight years old when his 
father and uncle bought the existing dairy farm. It has remained 
family owned and operated to this day, run by Blaine and his 
two sons, Michael and Marc. Although ownership has remained 
steady, production has grown immensely since the farm was 
first started. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

Caroncrest milks over 300 cattle twice a day, producing 
millions of gallons of milk annually. Approximately 21 000 
litres of milk are shipped from the farm every two days. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as Caroncrest’s productions grew, they expanded 
their partnerships within the community. They now provide 
milk for Coteau Hills Creamery, a local producer of artisan 
cheese, located in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the story of Caroncrest Farms is a familiar one 
across Saskatchewan. They’re a local farm that has created an 
incredible product with international demand. Saskatchewan 
truly does feed the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Caroncrest Farms on their 50th year of production, 
and wish them the best in 50 more. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Joint-Use School Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 
encouraging to see and hear about so many successful P3 
schools opening this fall on time — on time and on budget. 
Students and teachers across Saskatchewan deserve the best 
facilities and services possible, and it is a shame that the 
members opposite took so many of those resources away, as 
they closed 176 schools in their time in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I would like to highlight two schools that 
are now open in Saskatoon, Ernest Lindner School and St. 
Lorenzo Ruiz Catholic School, which are part of this 
government’s nine joint school openings this fall. 
 
Ernest Lindner, named after an artist, has encouraged teachers 
and staff to explore more into visual arts and incorporate it into 
their curriculums, now that they have the proper resources and 
the space to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principal from St. Lorenzo Ruiz, François 
Rivard, is very excited to see this school open, stating, 
“Hampton Village is such a great community, and it’s an 
honour to be a part of its growth and maturation as an 
educator.” 
 
Thanks to the P3 schools built, Saskatchewan residents are 
saving millions of dollars, and this school will also play host to 
a child care centre. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please 
join me in congratulating Ernest Lindner School and St. 
Lorenzo Ruiz on opening their new spaces. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Acquisitions 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party still isn’t doing 
anything to help make public information readily accessible to 
the public. The government spent over $100 million buying 
land for the Regina bypass and GTH [Global Transportation 

Hub] and, knowing what we already know about the Sask 
Party’s GTH scandal, I think most reasonable people would 
agree that these land purchases need a second look. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the land that was bought or 
expropriated and the millions in penalties and fees that were 
paid, there are a number of lawsuits on the go and some that 
have already been settled. We don’t know anything about how 
much they were settled for. It’s millions, certainly, but how 
many? All we know for certain is that this is Saskatchewan 
people’s money. 
 
So will the Premier show us that most open and accountable 
government in the history of the province that he promised a 
decade ago? And will he let the people of Saskatchewan know 
how much of their money was spent on this GTH and bypass 
land and how much is being spent on lawsuits? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the amounts were provided to 
the member for Nutana, who asked the questions. In fact the 
member for Nutana received a significant amount of 
information from the Information Services Corporation. She 
received . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they asked a question. They 
don’t want to hear the answer. They asked a question of ISC 
[Information Services Corporation], and she received all the 
Crown titles with the Ministry of Highways address in Excel 
format, a detailed map with the parcel numbers for the Regina 
bypass area, which greatly reduces the work for individual 
searches, Mr. Speaker. The amounts would be known, Mr. 
Speaker, as well. 
 
These rules, by the way, that we’re operating under, these rules 
of transparency are the rules that were implemented by the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] in 2006 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well just a modicum of self-awareness over on the other side 
might be welcomed by the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I guess their argument is they weren’t open 
and accountable in 2006, Mr. Speaker. And I would say that 
when it came to the registrar and land information, there is 
information available. 
 
Now the member opposite from Nutana, she wants more 
information. She wants certain records available from ISC, 
which are available to her for $10 a record. There’s a cost to 
preparing these things. I think $10 a record is a pretty 
reasonable amount of money. It’s under 2,000. I don’t know; 
there’s ways to raise money. There’s GoFundMe. There’s mass 
texting. Maybe they can figure out a way to raise $1,900. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, despite all that flourish we just 
heard from the Premier, we haven’t received any information 
with respect to the lawsuits, which is what the question was 
actually about. 
 
The secrecy and private deals that make corporations and their 
supporters rich, like their GTH scandal and the Regina bypass, 
are simply the beginning. The Sask Party promised not to sell 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

off our Crowns, but they scrapped and are selling off STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. The Premier said he 
heard Saskatchewan people and said they’d repeal Bill 40. But 
instead of repealing all of it, they kept the part they used on 
STC. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, their latest move is to move SaskEnergy’s 
exclusive rights to distribute gas from the protection of 
legislation into regulations that they can change at any time, 
behind closed doors, at the stroke of a pen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they tried selling off our Crowns through the front 
door and Saskatchewan people said no. They tried the back 
door with Bill 40 and Saskatchewan people said no. So why are 
they now trying to sell off SaskEnergy through — I don’t know 
— the window, the cellar? They’re really running out of doors 
here. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Sask Party stop the 
manoeuvring, keep their promise, and stop selling off our 
Crowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again there is so much 
wrong with what’s explicitly in the member’s preamble and 
what’s inferred in the member’s preamble. This is about 
fearmongering. I mean, Mr. Speaker, we have an NDP 
opposition that after a very, very difficult budget brought in by 
the NDP, after some admitted challenges that we’ve faced in 
government, they’re still 15 points behind in the polls. So 
they’re struggling, Mr. Speaker, to make up issues that don’t 
exist. 
 
Let me share with members opposite the explanation which I 
got into a little bit with the media with respect to Bill 40. We 
need to keep the . . . There’s an element. There’s some judicial 
opinion within government that says we need to preserve the 
wind-down provision in Bill 40 to complete the wind-down of 
STC, obviously something we don’t agree on. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Well now the Leader of the Opposition is asking more 
questions from her seat. I’ll just finish this one and then she’ll 
have the chance to ask more questions. Mr. Speaker, when the 
wind-down’s complete, there is no need to have the wind-down 
provision in Bill 40 and the whole bill can change. The whole 
bill can change, Mr. Speaker. And I expect, I expect — and I’m 
not going to be around for it — but I expect that’ll be exactly 
what happens. 
 
With respect to SaskEnergy, what she’s trying to . . . What I 
would say what she’s torquing about the change in SaskEnergy 
is simply removing a lot of the red tape around allowing the 
transportation of liquefied natural gas. So that if somebody, the 
trucking company wants to move liquefied natural gas, the 
process, the approval can be regulatory. It can’t be legislative. 
Well the member for Nutana doesn’t support that, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are the changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is listed in the Crown protection Act, 
something what we voted for, something that members opposite 
voted for. Mr. Speaker, our commitment on those Crown 
corporations, that they remain publicly owned, stands. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, regulations can be changed with 
the stroke of a pen, and there’s no reason for this change unless 
the Sask Party have a plan to sell off those rights. Mr. Speaker, 
it was just a few weeks ago that the Premier sent a message into 
the homes of Saskatchewan people and said, we heard you. But 
apparently he heard wrong because, instead of keeping their 
promise, the Sask Party are leaving the door open to scrap any 
of our Crowns the same way they did STC. And the Premier, I 
hope is committing to what he just said in the last answer. And 
now they’re opening the door to hive off SaskEnergy too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he understood that Saskatchewan 
people know that selling off any part, any part at all, of a Crown 
is privatization. That goes for STC. And yet, the routes, depots 
and buses are all being sold. That also goes for SaskEnergy. 
And yet, they want to sell off the rights to deliver gas. And that 
goes for every other Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is SaskTel next? How can Saskatchewan people 
have any faith any Crown is safe while the Sask Party fire sale 
goes on? 
 
The Speaker: — Members will respectfully listen to the 
question, and now will respectfully listen to the response from 
the Premier. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is just so much nonsense 
in that question. There really is. Mr. Speaker, there is not a way 
. . . There’s not a reasonable person in the province who would 
think that we wouldn’t undertake the change with respect to Bill 
40 that we have taken if we weren’t completely, completely 
serious about the long-term ownership of the Crown 
corporations remaining with the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, here in this 
Legislative Assembly debate, in question period today. 
 
What she has, what she’s sort of pulling out of thin air is a 
provision that we’re going to change so that trucking of liquid 
natural gases is allowed for without a lot of red tape, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the kind of transportation that’s always 
happened. The Crown corporation itself, SaskEnergy, is still in 
the Crown protection Act. It’s still in the Crown protection Act. 
 
And I know it frustrates members opposite. The members 
opposite look at the very difficult budget we brought down, 
look at some of the difficult political circumstances, and they’re 
frustrated because they’re 15 points behind. They’re absolutely 
disconnected from Saskatchewan people. So, Mr. Speaker, and 
they have an uninspiring leadership race from the back bench, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that. 
 
And so what do they do? They torque issues. They try to make 
up issues. Well I remember they tried to do that for years prior 
to 2007. They tried it again in 2011. They tried it again in 2016. 
And each time they tried it, their numbers got smaller and 
smaller and smaller, Mr. Speaker. The people of the province 
see through those kinds of tactics. We support the Crown 
protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

Access to Bus Services 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about our 
Crown corporations. We’re talking about a promise that was 
made by that Premier and every one of those Sask Party MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] over there. And we’re 
talking about trust, Mr. Speaker. They promised they wouldn’t 
sell off our Crowns, but then they passed Bill 40, put SaskTel 
on the chopping block, scrapped STC. And, Mr. Speaker, 
according to the minister’s own numbers, just last year STC 
was serving 253 communities, connecting 253 communities, 
with 1,005,753 people living in those communities. Families, 
students, grandparents, seniors, people living with disabilities 
— our province’s most vulnerable were all abandoned by the 
Sask Party when they scrapped STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier break his promise? Why 
won’t he stop his desperate sell-off of STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it was a very difficult decision to wind down STC, Mr. Speaker. 
There was no sell-off of it. It was a wind-down, Mr. Speaker. It 
was a very tough decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ridership had declined: 18,000 people or 18,000 
rides in just the last year, Mr. Speaker. It continued to decline. 
That subsidy, Mr. Speaker, of $85, almost $100 per ride, Mr. 
Speaker, was unacceptable. And I know the members opposite, 
when it was $5, when it was $5 a subsidy per ride, Mr. Speaker, 
they considered, they considered closing routes and winding 
STC down. In fact they did wind down 13 routes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the subsidy was $85 and going up to $17 
million and $100 million over the next five years, Mr. Speaker, 
it was reasonable and a business decision that we had to make. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 
Premier. STC was a service that Saskatchewan people relied on, 
Mr. Speaker, that connected 253 communities all across our 
province and over a million people. 
 
Lenore McTaggart was one of those people. Ms. McTaggart 
lives in Lloyd and is currently living with mobility challenges. 
Lloydminster still gets a bus service through another company, 
so Ms. McTaggart is luckier than most Saskatchewan people. 
Still she had a terrible experience trying to get home on the bus 
from Saskatoon recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is our province’s largest city, and the bus 
station is in the corner of a private business. It’s poorly 
advertised. Passengers can’t see when the buses are coming and 
going, and it’s an expensive taxi ride to go to and from this 
makeshift bus stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell Ms. McTaggart and all 
Saskatchewan people why they changed the definition so they 

could break their promise and scrap STC, why they rushed the 
sell-off without having a plan in place? And will he finally do 
the right thing and scrap this desperate sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank the member opposite for that question. Mr. Speaker, as 
I’ve said many, many times before in this House, Mr. Speaker, 
it was a very difficult decision to scrap STC, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, more than . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Whoa. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
you know, more than half of the communities in the province 
were not served by STC, Mr. Speaker. What about those 
people, Mr. Speaker? I mean those were . . . and lots of routes, 
Mr. Speaker, that members opposite, members opposite closed 
those routes, Mr. Speaker, when they were in power, Mr. 
Speaker. But now they think that it’s not right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a very tough decision, but $100 million 
over the next five years could be more better placed, Mr. 
Speaker, in social services, in education, and in health care, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues 
 in the Regina Area 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I asked the 
minister about the drainage problems at the GTH that are 
causing headaches for local landowners, including James Farley 
who has lost over 40 acres, with Mr. Farley in the Chamber the 
minister offered to help. Then when speaking with the media, 
the minister said this is on the city of Regina and said they 
should form a watershed association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does anyone over there understand anything about 
accountability? This has been going on for years, and the 
minister needs to understand that pointing fingers isn’t helping 
our producers. In 2014 the city told Mr. Farley that it was the 
GTH that is responsible. In 2016 the Water Security Agency 
said they couldn’t do anything until the GTH and the city get 
together and stop fighting over who is responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister commit to Mr. Farley that he will 
stop the finger pointing, take responsibility, and take care of at 
least this part of the mess at GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, so just to be clear, there is a section of this drainage 
project that is on Global Transportation Hub land. They are 
responsible for that. The remainder of the drainage project is 
licensed to the city of Regina. And until that changes, until 
perhaps hopefully a watershed association is formed including 
the city of Regina, including the Global Transportation Hub, 
including the RM [rural municipality] of Sherwood and other 
interested stakeholders, at this point the city of Regina holds the 
permit for the drainage project. 
 
We would expect that all individuals or organizations that hold 
permits on drainage projects would take responsibility for their 
project, Mr. Speaker. So we are working with the city of Regina 
to bring a long-term solution that will involve all of the 
stakeholders in this matter. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the water is backing up and 
flooding the fields, but the flames of the GTH dumpster fire are 
still burning strong. It was the Sask Party that ditched the GTH 
footprint, built that drainage for their GTH customers, and 
dumped the water onto Mr. Farley’s land. They also spent who 
knows how many tens of millions of dollars making sure that 
the bypass went by the GTH. And, Mr. Speaker, they spent over 
7 million taxpayer dollars to move the power lines so that they 
could make the GTH site work — again for the GTH customers 
including, if you trust the Sask Party website, the mysterious 
Brad company. But it wasn’t those GTH customers who paid 
for the power line to move. It wasn’t even the GTH. It was 
SaskPower — rather, all Saskatchewan ratepayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how can the Sask Party justify spending $7 
million for SaskPower, and that was passed on to the people of 
Saskatchewan and small businesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment and 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, you’ll have to forgive me. 
There was about five or six different questions in that one 
question. I’ll try to address them all, Mr. Speaker. I doubt in a 
minute I’ll have an opportunity. But I just want to be clear 
because oftentimes that same member will come into the House 
or across the way and be calling on the government to close all 
the drainage projects in the province. And now this is one that 
she wants the government to step in and institute a cleanup of a 
drainage project that isn’t the Global Transportation Hub’s 
project. 
 
Now there is the ability to form a watershed association. That’s 
what the Water Security Agency would like to do, Mr. Speaker. 
And hopefully that will alleviate the drainage problems that Mr. 
Farley has experienced, which I believe he admitted long before 
the Global Transportation Hub was ever created. But we are 
working towards finding a solution that will involve the city of 
Regina, who currently hold the permit on that portion of it, as 
well as the other stakeholders in the area. And I think that is 
certainly reasonable to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 
 

Staff Numbers in the Education System 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I asked the 
Education minister to take some responsibility for the fact that 
there were fewer teachers in our kids’ classrooms than last year. 
It turns out that on the number of teachers, I was wrong. And 
unlike the minister, I’m willing to apologize and take full 
responsibility for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government finally released their numbers 
today, and they show that there are actually 188 fewer teachers 
in kids’ schools this year, even higher than originally thought. 
The minister denied the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] numbers, but her own numbers show that there are 
fewer teachers and fewer support staff in our kids’ classroom 
than even the STF had calculated. So will the minister finally 
take some responsibility and admit that there are fewer teachers 
in the classroom this year because of her government’s deep 
cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
challenging year, and we know it’s been a challenging year, the 
newly posted numbers bear out pretty well: slight decline in 
teachers due almost exclusively to attrition and retirement, but 
an increase since ’13-14, ’14-15, and the same as ’16-17. And 
some divisions, Mr. Speaker, such as Saskatoon Public and 
Regina Catholic, large urbans, have actually seen an increase 
this year. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Since ’07 the number of regular teachers has increased by 9 per 
cent. The number of all school-based educators has increased by 
a thousand full-time employees or 8 per cent. The number of 
counsellors, psychologists, occupational therapists, medical 
facilitators, speech pathologists has all increased: counsellors 
by 68.5 per cent, speech paths by 46 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 
are meeting the challenge. We are building and growing, all for 
the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — That’s interesting that the minister characterizes 
the cuts as slight. But whether it’s her comments calling on 
indigenous education into question that drew equivalencies 
between Western Europeans and indigenous people or 
compared indigenous education to Bolshevism, or her 
non-apology that accused people of misinterpreting her words, 
or her refusal to admit that her government’s cuts to education 
are having serious impacts on our kids’ classrooms, it is clear 
that this minister is in over her head. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister disputed the STF’s numbers that 
showed that there were fewer teachers in classrooms this year, 
but her own numbers show that there are even fewer teachers 
and supports than originally thought. So will this minister do 
the simple math, Mr. Speaker, and admit that her government’s 
cuts have led to fewer teachers and needed supports in our kids’ 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
let the STF speak for the STF in the way STF calculates its 
numbers. It’s different than the way the Ministry of Education 
calculates its numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wish to continually acknowledge the work 
school divisions have done to minimize the impact to the 
classrooms and to educators in the classrooms. Divisions have 
been honourable stewards in that. They have looked at 
administration and cut back in some cases. They’ve 
collaborated in important ways with joint fuel procurement, 
joint busing, which means money goes straight back into 
front-line classrooms. 
 
Bottom line, Mr. Speaker: total education funding has increased 
by over 1 billion, 114 per cent since ’07. We all have to 
remember that. Overall operating has increased from 1.41 
billion to 1.86 billion, an increase of 32 per cent — increase. 
Total per-student funding in ’07 under the NDP, 8,634; total 
per-student funding now, $10,210, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Compensation for Teachers  
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I would submit that it’s not quite as 
rosy as the minister would suggest. And when it comes to her 
own words or the government’s record, that minister refuses to 
take any responsibility. It doesn’t matter what numbers that 
minister is spouting. The reality is, is that there are fewer 
teachers in classrooms but 4,500 more kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Teachers are being asked to get by with fewer and fewer 
supports. And now that minister and that government are asking 
teachers to take a 3.7 per cent pay cut, even higher than the 3.5 
per cent that they’re asking everyone else to take. It could not 
be more clear, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party and that 
minister have zero respect for teachers and the work that they 
do. 
 
Can the minister please explain why she thinks that, on top of 
all of the cuts that her government have applied to education, 
that teachers should take any cuts, let alone one higher than 
they are asking others to take? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is beyond a doubt 
very difficult decisions that have been made in this budget and 
that’s because of a significant shortfall in resource revenues. 
And it’s interesting that the members opposite keep wanting to 
have increased spending, but they don’t want to take any 
measures to address how they’re going to find the money to 
address the spending. 
 
There’s a number of ways in which savings within 
compensation to employees can be accomplished. It does not 
necessarily mean a straight-out wage cut, Mr. Speaker. But we 

need to be very mindful and very respectful that negotiations 
need to be between employers and employees, and those 
negotiations need to take place at the collective bargaining 
tables. I would think the members opposite would respect that 
as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Disposal of Scrap Tires 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire 
Corporation’s Black Gold Rush program served 227 rural 
municipalities. It didn’t just help municipalities clean up piles 
of discarded tires that are a growing problem in our province, it 
also helped local groups and even the municipalities themselves 
raise money for their own projects, from small gatherings to 
rinks and community centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that program was eliminated and 69 communities 
were never given the opportunity to benefit from it. Improperly 
disposed of tires can be a significant fire risk, and can lead to 
other health concerns like West Nile virus. This program 
addressed those serious concerns and helped communities raise 
money. So why won’t this government ensure there’s funding 
to reinstate this program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I would point out that this is not a 
government program. The government doesn’t provide funding 
for these programs. It’s a stewardship-run program. And so 
when people purchase tires, those dollars, a portion of those 
dollars goes into the stewardship program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a change to the organization that is 
running that stewardship program. Certainly they understand 
the value of a program like the Black Gold Rush program, and I 
would expect that the new organization will carry on with a 
program like that.  
 
But we have other concerns as well, for example several large 
piles that need to be dealt with in an effective manner. And so 
the new stewardship program that has begun operating at the 
beginning of September will be looking to address that 
program, as well as ensuring that municipal piles are dealt with, 
as they have in the past. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. Introduction of bills 
. . . Oh, why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — To return to ministerial statements, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

New Naming Policy of Geographic Features and Buildings 
Honours Former Premiers  

 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
number of years ago, the Government of Saskatchewan 
commissioned a review of the naming policy for government 
buildings and structures and geographic features designated 
under The Heritage Property Act. The review was undertaken 
by Dr. Gordon Barnhart, who was of course well qualified to 
carry on the work, Mr. Speaker, as a former lieutenant governor 
for the province, a former Clerk of this Legislative Assembly, 
and a respected historian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Barnhart produced a report with several 
recommendations intended to ensure the naming of buildings 
and geographic features is carried out in a consistent, 
transparent, and fair manner. Important among those 
recommendations was the suggestion that every former premier 
of Saskatchewan be honoured through the naming policy. In his 
report, Dr. Barnhart said: 
 

Every Premier has his detractors and thus naming a 
building or geographic feature after a Premier will always 
stir up some controversy. Yet the service given by each of 
these individuals should be marked and that part of our 
history should be remembered. 

 
Today the government is acting on the recommendations of Dr. 
Barnhart. We have developed a new policy for naming 
buildings and other provincial landmarks after former premiers. 
And acting in accordance with this policy, I am pleased to 
announce the dedication of three provincial landmarks in 
honour of former premiers. 
 
From this day on, the main building at the Moose Jaw campus 
of Saskatchewan Polytechnic will be named the W. Ross 
Thatcher Building in honour of Ross Thatcher, who served as 
premier from 1964 to 1971. The previously unnamed reservoir 
and dam near Alameda will now bear the name of Grant Devine 
Lake and Grant Devine dam in honour of Grant Devine, 
premier from 1982 to 1991. And finally, the Saskatchewan 
Provincial Lab in Regina will henceforth be known as the Roy 
Romanow Provincial Laboratory in honour of Roy Romanow, 
premier from 1991 to 2001. 
 
The naming policy will extend as well, Mr. Speaker, to 
partnerships and co-operation in respect to the naming of 
buildings and geographic features that are within the purview of 
other levels of government. I would therefore like to highlight 
an important dedication that took place last month under the 
auspices of the same policy. The former Wascana School in 
Regina and the temporary location of École Connaught 
Community School was officially renamed the Allan Blakeney 
Adult Campus in honour of the former premier who served 
from 1971 to 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an important proviso in the new policy: 
the stipulation that a current premier shall not name a building 
or landmark after his immediate predecessor. It was felt, Mr. 
Speaker, that some separation would be appropriate. And so the 
government will look for a building or landmark to name after 
former Premier Lorne Calvert in the new year after I leave 
office. 

Mr. Speaker, from the very beginning, Saskatchewan has been 
blessed with political leadership, women and men who would 
come forward to offer servant leadership at the provincial level. 
The premiers we acknowledge today are examples of that 
leadership and service. Their influence was felt within 
Saskatchewan and abroad, and today we honour their legacy. 
We recognize their contributions and accomplishments, and we 
say thank you for their many years of service to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to thank the 
Premier for these dedications. I would also like to repeat the 
words of Dr. Barnhart that were quoted by the Premier. I think 
that they bear repeating: 
 

Every premier has his [and I would like to add “or her”] 
detractors and thus naming a building or geographic 
feature after a premier will always stir up some 
controversy. Yet the service given by each of these 
individuals should be marked and that part of our history 
should be remembered. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are wise words. Even as we stand here 
today, you can still hear the echoes of debates in this place; 
some of them may even be from earlier today, Mr. Speaker. 
And those statements themselves echoed the sentiments of 
Saskatchewan people. But, Mr. Speaker, whatever your political 
stripe, we can all agree that serving this province is a great 
honour. And for those who served as premier, it is an honour 
that also deserves this recognition. 
 
On behalf of all New Democrats, I want to thank them for their 
service and their leadership. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 100, The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 100 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 101, 
The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved first 
reading of Bill 101, be now introduced and read a first time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
moved that Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
be introduced and read for a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 

Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport has moved that Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read 
for a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to 
do it right now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
move to second reading. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave is not granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — With leave to make a motion to regard 
sitting days in the spring. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
asked for leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader may 
proceed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Legislature Sitting Days 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day on December 7, 2017, notwithstanding rule 3(3), it 
shall stand adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday, March 
12, 2018, for a spring period of 40 sitting days as follows: 
 
1. May 28, 2018, shall constitute the completion day of the 

spring period of sittings, provided that there are no fewer 
than 28 sitting days between the proposal of the budget 
motion, moved pursuant to rule 31, or; 

 
2. If the budget motion is moved at any time within the 

interval of 29 sitting days prior to May 28, 2018, the 
completion day shall be postponed to the 29th sitting day 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

after the budget motion is moved; and, 
 

3. The rules of the parliamentary calendar for the 
procedures to dispose of any remaining budgetary 
estimates, budget-related bills, and the final 
appropriation bill shall be applied in accordance with the 
revised completion day established by this order; and, 

 
4. The rules of the parliamentary calendar for the 

procedures to dispose of any remaining government bills 
that are not budget related introduced during the fall 
period in accordance with rule 34, shall be subject to the 
conditions set out in rule 35 and 36 for the disposal in 
accordance with the revised completion day established 
by this order; and further, 

 
That if the Assembly is earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker 
upon the request of the government, the provisions of this 
sessional order shall not apply; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker 
shall give each member seven days clear notice, if 
possible, of such time and date. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved a motion dealing with sitting days. It is my hope that the 
members will take the motion as read. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — By leave to move three motions dealing 
with committee changes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave is granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

Committee Membership 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. 
 

That the name of Kevin Doherty be submitted for the name 
of Herb Cox on the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved: 
 

That the name Kevin Doherty be substituted for the name 
of Herb Cox on the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — 
 

That the name of Warren Kaeding be added to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved: 
 

That the name Warren Kaeding be added to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — 
 

That the name of Lori Carr be added to the Standing 
Committee on House Services. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved: 
 

That the name of Lori Carr be added to the Standing 
Committee on House Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek leave 
for a motion for an address to Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor regarding an appointment under The Expropriation 
Procedure Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for 
leave to move a motion from Her Honour. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
move: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that Murray Walker 
be appointed as a member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board for a term of five years, pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that Murray Walker 
be appointed as a member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board for a term of five years, pursuant to section 6 of the 
expropriation procurement Act.  
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017  
(No. 2)/Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
2017 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has always been of the view that 
our Crown corporations support economic growth and quality 
of life in Saskatchewan. Members of this Assembly will be 
aware that last session, Bill 40 was passed allowing for partial 
minority equity position in a Crown corporation to be sold or 
otherwise dealt with. The term “privatize” was defined in a 
manner that would allow for the sale of up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown corporation. This legislation would have enabled a 
Crown corporation to enter into a partnership beneficial to the 
province, while ensuring the government would remain the 
majority owner of that corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last few months my government has 
heard from many Saskatchewan people concerned about this 
legislation, and a potential sale of even a small stake in a Crown 
corporation. We have listened to the people, and we are now 
acting. Consequently this government will repeal the provisions 
implemented by Bill 40 that allow for the sale of a partial equity 

position of a Crown corporation. With this bill, The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 is being amended to repeal the recently 
added definition of “privatize” and to repeal the ability to add 
additional methods of transfer of control that would constitute 
privatization by regulation. 
 
Instead the term “privatize” will simply be defined to confirm 
that it does not include a winding up or dissolution of a Crown 
corporation. We have said from the beginning that when we 
make a mistake, we will admit the mistake and take action to 
correct it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2) be now been read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to enter into the initial debate on behalf of the official 
opposition on Bill 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 
that it is not more than a year ago, we heard every member of 
the Saskatchewan Party get up and defend and extol the virtues 
of Bill 40, and the fact that they didn’t have . . . The people of 
Saskatchewan ought not to be alarmed as to the contents of Bill 
40 or sorry, the definition as it’s explained in Bill 99, that it 
pertains to Bill 40. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what the bill does, it defines what the word 
“privatize” means. And it repeals the definition of “privatize” 
and it does not include a winding up or dissolution of a Crown 
corporation. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to recap for the people of 
Saskatchewan’s history as to how the Saskatchewan Party have 
governed this province. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, they inherited a booming economy. 
They inherited $2.3 billion in the bank. They inherited a 
growing population and they inherited an optimistic moving 
forward and certainly a positive province in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
A scant eight years later, Mr. Speaker, we’re now looking at 
record debts, saddled in the future with things such as P3s and 
some of the other dubious financial promises that they made 
that would ensure that Saskatchewan’s future is also mortgaged, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as you look at the track record of the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker, whether we have probably one of the shortest 
reigns of a Finance minister in the history of Saskatchewan 
because the former Finance minister could not, could not gain 
the confidence of the caucus . . . Every second day they were 
changing their mind on something. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
previous Finance minister saw that he never enjoyed the 
confidence of that caucus so what he did was he stepped down. 
He went to a different portfolio and they made a shift, a change 
in ministerial responsibility. And this goes to my point on the 
Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 99 as it pertains to Bill 40. 
This government has done a complete about-face on a number 
of important fronts. 
 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

And this is also talking about the finances of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. It talks about the intent behind the Crowns. And this is 
why it goes down to the fundamental issue of trust, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan have seen time and time 
again how this government has lost faith and trust from the 
people of Saskatchewan. They have seen this on numerous 
fronts. And I wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
biggest fronts that we see, you know, from this end, includes 
the finances of our province. It also includes the Crown 
corporations. 
 
So on finances, Mr. Speaker, they had a minister that quit. 
Everybody in this Assembly knows that the minister lost 
confidence of his caucus because every second week he was 
changing his mind on what the budget should look like. And 
clearly he lost confidence from the caucus, so he got removed 
from Finance and now we have the new Minister of Finance 
taking his place. And that’s only probably three or four months 
that he served as minister of Finance and he lost the confidence 
of his caucus. 
 
Now we go back to this Bill 99 as it pertains to Bill 40. Last 
year everyone, every member of the Saskatchewan Party caucus 
was talking about how they thought Bill 40 was the greatest 
thing since sliced bread, and it was not meant to offend the 
people of Saskatchewan. Every single one of them got up and 
said that. And again, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the Finance 
minister quitting on them because they had no confidence in his 
budget, or whether it is changing their mind wholeheartedly, a 
complete flip-flop on Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, this is why the 
people of Saskatchewan simply have no faith and no confidence 
in this government. It is quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that they 
simply feel betrayed and it all comes down to an issue in the 
matter of trust. 
 
And I tell the people of Saskatchewan this, that when we talk 
about the Crown corporations as an opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
we are talking about trusting the government to take care of our 
Crowns. We didn’t ask the Premier or the Sask Party caucus to 
play with the wording associated with Bill 40. Mr. Speaker, all 
this bill does, Bill 99, it simply repeals the definition of 
“privatize” from Bill 40. That’s all it does. It does not include 
winding down or winding up or the dissolution of any Crown 
corporation. So the Sask Party, what they aren’t able to do 
through the front door for the full scrutiny of the people of 
Saskatchewan, they’re trying to do this through the back door, 
Mr. Speaker, by being fancy and pretty with wording that 
doesn’t fool the opposition. And I say to the Sask Party caucus, 
it doesn’t fool the people of Saskatchewan either. 
 
In three separate elections, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
promised they wouldn’t sell off our Crowns. And yet they sold 
off land titles. They scrapped STC. They sold off our liquor 
stores, Mr. Speaker. They brought in Bill 40. And now they’re 
selling all of our Crowns piece by piece. That’s still being 
allowed by Bill 40. But they still say to us, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, it’s different because it was a wind-down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no question. There is no question 
that the Premier got up and he was told by many people within 
a lot of the Sask Party ridings that shutting down libraries, 
shutting down STC, selling off our Crowns is not something 
that the Saskatchewan people want. And I think the Sask Party 

were told and warned that they better not be proceeding down 
this path because the voter, after all, is the boss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the Premier got up and said, “We’ve heard you.” But on 
October 24th he took to Facebook and promised, and I quote, 
“Our government is repealing Bill 40.” And just two days later 
— two days, two sleeps — he said again that he doesn’t think 
that the wind-down of a Crown corporation counts. And I say 
shame on that Premier. Shame on that Sask Party caucus. 
Because they’re keeping that part of Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’ll never let their agenda go of trying to privatize 
and weaken and harm our Crown corporations. As long as 
they’re government they will continue doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So what happens when the Premier gets up and says that they’re 
repealing Bill 40? He wasn’t specific, Mr. Speaker. He was 
very general when he said, we are repealing Bill 40. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, instead of repealing all of Bill 40, they kept the part 
that they want to use or they used in the past, to scrap STC. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I dare say that they’re going to keep that part 
of Bill 40 to ensure that if they do sell off a Crown, they can 
either use it under a wind-down, Mr. Speaker, or a dissolution 
of a Crown. 
 
And again, that’s the backdoor way of trying to sell off our 
Crowns bit by bit. And, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to get up 
and tell the people of Saskatchewan that they’re repealing Bill 
40, he didn’t say, oh, only parts of it. He said that they would 
repeal Bill 40, and the people of Saskatchewan trusted that 
message. And here, Mr. Speaker, we find out once again that 
not only have they changed their mind on selling off our Crown 
corporations like the liquor stores and like, Mr. Speaker, the 
land titles branch, and shutting down STC. They have once 
again betrayed the trust of the people of Saskatchewan around 
Bill 40 and they’re simply saying, we’re not going to cancel all 
of it, just the parts of it that we could use to wind down Crowns 
in the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again we are talking about trust. And the 
people of Saskatchewan, I say to them, trust is an important 
thing when it comes to the Crown corporations and the policies 
of each of the parties. As we have said time and time again, 
when it comes to the Crown corporations the Saskatchewan 
NDP will protect our Crowns and use them as a valuable tool 
for building the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Given the fact that this is a landlocked province, Mr. Speaker, 
we are far from ports in which we can haul the great resources 
that we have. Whether it’s potash or wheat or oil and gas, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got to be able, Mr. Speaker, to have the vehicles 
in which we can move all those resources, and the Crowns help 
us do that as a province. 
 
So not only do they help us diminish reliance on income tax 
payers, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of the province, but they 
also create jobs, they provide service in the province, and, Mr. 
Speaker, they add a huge amount to our provincial economy. 
 
So what part of that picture doesn’t the Saskatchewan Party 
get? Why are they being cute with terminologies in their 
language, and why would the Premier say that they’re repealing 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

Bill 40 when his intent all along was to only repeal certain 
sections of Bill 40? Why didn’t he have the courage to say that 
then, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And this goes back to their past actions and their past activity, 
that they’ll only say things in certain words that allow them to 
continue their agenda while thinking that they have fooled the 
people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, they have not 
fooled the opposition nor the people of Saskatchewan one bit. 
 
They are still on their agenda and it comes down to the issue, 
Mr. Speaker, of who do you trust when it comes to the 
protection of the Crown corporations, a party that has sold three 
or four of them off already, a party that’s using wording to sell 
even more, Mr. Speaker, or simply us saying that we will not, in 
any way, shape, or form, and be very clear in our commitment 
to protect, enhance, and embrace the roles of Crown 
corporations within the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, they’re a valuable tool in moving 
the agenda forward. Whether it is a regional strategy or a 
country-wide strategy, the Crowns can indeed do great things 
for the province of Saskatchewan. And we just can’t understand 
why the Saskatchewan Party can’t get that particular argument. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again they promised they wouldn’t sell off the 
Crowns. They have. They promised that Bill 40 was something 
that was going to be new to protect the Crowns. Well now they 
are repealing Bill 40 because their agenda didn’t get through. 
The people of Saskatchewan caught on very quickly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also know they scrapped STC. We know 
that they put SaskTel on a chopping block, and the list goes on 
and on and on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many more ways we can 
say it, how many more days we can say it. The bottom line is 
the people of Saskatchewan want their Crowns protected. And I 
tell them this: the choice is very clear. You can trust the 
Saskatchewan Party who have so many, on so many occasions 
betrayed your trust. They betrayed your trust. They’ve sold off 
the Crowns. And I don’t think that trust is deserving to the 
Saskatchewan Party anymore. 
 
And I think from our perspective, we’re quite clear. In any way, 
shape, or form that we’re able to protect the Crowns, we shall 
as the official opposition do that. It is part of our province. It is 
part of who we are as a party, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve continued 
to extol the virtues of our Crown corporations and it is clear. In 
the future, the people of Saskatchewan have to make the 
determination that if you want the Crowns protected, you 
cannot trust the Saskatchewan Party anymore. They have 
betrayed that trust. They’ve shown that. 
 
And what’s equally concerning, Mr. Speaker, is you look at Bill 
40, and now we look at Bill 99 where they’re repealing certain 
parts of it. Well, Mr. Speaker, it leads me to the conclusion that 
they don’t know what they are doing over there. It is very clear 
from this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I’ve always 
maintained that the conservatives don’t know how to govern, 
whether it’s in Saskatchewan or whether it’s in Alberta. And, 
Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that we have resource-rich 
economies that actually drive the whole success of our two 

provinces. And we see, Mr. Speaker, the great facade is finally 
being exposed. The conservatives or right wing governments, 
whether it’s in Saskatchewan or Alberta, they simply don’t 
know how to govern. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan and Alberta, I would 
dare say are beginning to understand that this is the course of 
action that the conservatives are guilty of. We see this in spades 
on all occasions. And again, Bill 99 is simply meant to assert to 
people that they have no intention to privatize. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re keeping big parts of Bill 99. 
 
So I would say to the Saskatchewan Party, it is an issue of trust. 
It is an issue of trust and they got caught with their hand in the 
cookie jar, Mr. Speaker, but they’re still keeping that cookie jar 
lid open. And that’s a real shame because the people of 
Saskatchewan have one single message to the Sask Party — we 
don’t want our Crowns sold, period. 
 
So I would say to the Saskatchewan Party, it is an issue of trust. 
It is an issue of trust, and they got caught with their hand in the 
cookie jar, Mr. Speaker, but they’re still keeping that cookie jar 
lid open. And that’s a real shame because the people of 
Saskatchewan have one single message to the Sask Party: we 
don’t want our Crowns sold, period. 
 
So I’m sure my caucus colleagues will have a lot of things that 
you want to add to this particular bill, but I’ll say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, whether it is their finance management of our 
province, whether it’s their past practices of selling off Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s this Bill 40 that they all stood up to 
a year ago and now they’re repealing only certain parts of it 
despite saying they were going to get rid of all of Bill 40, well 
this bill that’s being proposed today only talks about certain 
parts of repealing Bill 40. Well, Mr. Speaker, I rest my case 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party cannot be trusted anymore, any longer, 
not only with our finances, not only with our education, not 
only with our health care but, Mr. Speaker, with our Crowns. It 
is time to get rid of them, and let’s do it sooner than later, Mr. 
Speaker, for the sake of our Crowns. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, all of my caucus colleagues will 
have a lot more to offer on this bill as we begin the process of 
dissecting this bill, attacking the Saskatchewan Party, and 
telling the people to take a very close look at the betrayal of the 
Saskatchewan Party to them when it comes to our Crowns. 
And, Mr. Speaker, our caucus will do a job explaining that — a 
darn good job, I might add — of explaining that to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  
 
So we have a lot more on this bill, so on that note I move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 99, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill will modernize The Land Contracts (Actions) 
Act, and will build on recommendations contained in the 2014 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan report titled 
“Reform of The Land Contracts (Actions) Act.”  
 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act is consumer protection 
legislation in place to protect borrowers by requiring lenders to 
obtain leave of the court before starting a foreclosure 
proceeding. The protection is provided as time: time to bring 
the mortgage up to date; refinance or sell the property before 
foreclosure or judicial sale; or if that is not possible, time to find 
alternative accommodation. The Act does not apply to farm 
land. 
 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act is over 70 years old, having 
been enacted in 1943. The commission’s final report considered 
the steps required by The Land Contracts (Actions) Act for 
non-farm land mortgages and recommended reforms to better 
protect borrowers in current conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act will maintain the time and notice 
provided by the current Act while reducing the cost to those 
involved in the process. Saskatchewan is the only province that 
requires any pre-action process for foreclosure. The current Act 
requires a number of steps before the application for leave to 
commence an action. This does not serve the interests of 
borrowers or lenders. The many steps may confuse borrowers 
and cause unnecessary expense to the lender that may be passed 
on to the borrower. 
 
As recommended in the report, the first step in the new Act for 
foreclosure proceedings will be a plain-language notice of 
application for leave to commence an action. The notice will be 
first in legislated form and secondly served on the borrower and 
the Provincial Mediation Board at least 60 days before the 
hearing date. 
 
The new process will eliminate two steps, which will make it 
much clearer for the borrower. The 60-day time period between 
the notice and the hearing will be retained. It will allow the 
borrower to negotiate a payment plan with the lender and put 
the land up for sale or, alternately, to prepare to appear in court. 
 
The new process will ensure both the borrower and the courts 
have the most up-to-date information before an application for 
leave to commence a foreclosure action is heard. It will require 
their copy of the mortgage or agreement for sale of the land as 
reasonable evidence of the value of the land . . . and reasonable 
evidence of the value of the land be served with the notice. It 
will also require updated arrears information to be served on the 
borrower and filed with the court prior to the hearing date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the court will continue to be limited to eight 
months of adjournments on an application for leave to 
commence a foreclosure action. This provides certainty to the 
process for both parties. The bill will not apply to properties 
used for commercial purposes at the time of default. This is 

consumer protection legislation that is not intended to apply to 
purely commercial transactions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill will repeal The Home Owners’ Protection 
Act. This Act was meant to apply to a specific situation between 
1981 and ’82. Given the time period has passed, this Act is no 
longer necessary. The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Act will 
be repealed, and its requirement for an application to court in all 
cases for a cancellation of an agreement for sale will be moved 
into this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
official opposition to give the Bill No. 103 a first look at, and 
certainly our first response as it pertains to all the different Acts 
that are combining in this particular bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the content of this legislation and bill primarily 
deal with how land purchases and mortgages go through. As we 
know, Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of discussion around 
the Canadian banking system, of how mortgages are generally 
handled throughout the province of course of Saskatchewan, but 
more so throughout the country of Canada. So it’s important to 
pay attention to different legislation as it pertains to mortgages 
and land protection and certainly transactions overall. 
 
I think the fact that the bill, while some of it is housekeeping in 
nature, there are provisions of The Agreements of Sale 
Cancellation Act, The Home Owners’ Protection Act, and The 
Land Contracts (Actions) Act and combines them into one 
particular bill. Then it repeals all of the existing bills. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this bill, really it talks about five or six components of 
homeowners and of course the agreement of sale cancellation, 
as I mentioned. 
 
So there’s quite a bit of information and how it affects the issue 
of home ownership and land ownership overall. So it’s 
important that we pay attention to all those bills and see exactly 
what is being changed, what is being altered in any way, shape, 
or form. I think it’s important that we look at those particular 
bills and make sure that some of the bills — as I mentioned, 
whether it’s The Home Owners’ Protection Act — that certain 
key parts of that particular Act are not ignored as they 
amalgamate all these Acts into one. That’s one of the processes 
that we undertake in the Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again as I mentioned, the bill is housekeeping 
in nature and talks about four or five other components from 
some of the other Acts and combines them into one existing 
bill. And, Mr. Speaker, again this bill deals with how land 
purchases and mortgages go through. So we’re going to pay 
very close attention to this as it deals with the fundamental issue 
of homes and housing for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

So we will take our time to research what changes are made, 
how the transition from all these Acts go into this particular 
Act, then make sure no protection for consumers are lost. That 
is our role as the opposition, and we’ll certainly do so. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn Bill No. 103, The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 

Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I rise today to move second reading of 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is essential legislation that 
promotes and protects individual dignity and equality rights. 
The code prohibits discrimination based on grounds set out in 
the code and also includes a bill of rights, making it illegal for 
someone to violate another person’s fundamental rights and 
freedoms. 
 
This bill will repeal and replace The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code with a new bilingual Act. There are no changes in 
substance to the code, thereby ensuring that the protections 
offered continue to operate. 
 
In 1988 the Supreme Court of Canada released its decision in R. 
v. Mercure, and over the last 30 years the Government of 
Saskatchewan has enacted approximately 58 bilingual Acts. 
The translation program is designed to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan’s francophone community. Mr. Speaker, we 
agree with the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise and 
L’Association des juristes d’expression française who identified 
the code as a priority for translation. 
 
We are pleased to introduce a bilingual code that will provide 
improved access by Saskatchewan’s French-language 
community. A consequential English-only bill accompanies this 
Act to amend one Act that references the current Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
very important bill for the people of Saskatchewan to pay very 
close attention to, the Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code. 
 
As we all know, the human rights Act itself and the intent to 
protect human rights in the province of Saskatchewan, well that 
dream became a real possibility for Saskatchewan when the 
former premier — I think it was ’47 — introduced The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code in the sense of saying that as 
human beings we have a right to live in dignity without any fear 
of a number of threats due to us as human beings. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it was in the early ’70s where another former 
premier, NDP Premier Blakeney, established the Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill that we’re speaking 
about, there’s a lot of changes to the Human Rights Code, and 
these are something that we have to pay attention to. Again 
when it’s the Saskatchewan Party bringing forward any kind of 
changes to human rights, Mr. Speaker, automatically I think 
New Democrats across the province pay extra close attention. 
They’re very defensive of the history, the history behind the 
establishment not only of the Human Rights Code, but the 
Human Rights Commission as well. 
 
There are many changes to the language throughout the bill. 
While we appreciate some of the changes are housekeeping in 
nature, you’ve got to be very careful with the wording, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the Saskatchewan Party because 
some minor changes to the wording could have some negative, 
drastic, long-term effects. We need to figure out what changes 
are . . . what wording has been changed and make sure that the 
intent of whatever they’re changing doesn’t take away from 
some of the earlier work to protect those people that may have 
some concerns as they’re being dealt with under The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the number of complaints 
coming forward to the Human Rights Commission, they have 
been increasing over time under the Sask Party’s watch. We are 
also sharing the concern that many members of . . . or a 
growing number of human rights complaints are being 
dismissed by this commission. And these are very troubling 
trends, Mr. Speaker. So that’s why I think this is a very 
important bill. 
 
I spoke briefly of the history of this particular bill and certainly 
the champions that brought forward the Human Rights 
Commission and the Human Rights Code. These are people that 
I think we over time have all grown to admire. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we must protect the spirit and intent of these architects 
of the Human Rights Code and the architects of the Human 
Rights Commission by ensuring that we stay . . . keep the 
politics out of it. 
 
But it’s obvious that the Saskatchewan Party don’t care about 
that particular process because they have loaded up the Human 
Rights Commission with some of their own membership, their 
own ideas as to what the Human Rights Code should look like. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the end result is today, 2017, we are 
seeing a growing number of human rights that have been 
increasing over time, complaints of infringement on human 
rights that have been growing over time, increasing over time. 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate result is many of those concerns 
are also being dismissed and, Mr. Speaker, we need to make 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

sure that these troubling trends don’t continue. 
 
So there’s a lot more on the history and the practice and the 
policies and certainly the modernization of our Human Rights 
Code. We have to be very careful to watch that, and we intend 
to do so. So on that note, I know my caucus colleagues will 
have much more to say on this particular bill. So I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 104. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. This Act accompanies 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 and makes 
consequential amendments to the Saskatchewan employment 
code. The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is being repealed 
and replaced with a new bilingual statute, and references to the 
name of the old Act in the Saskatchewan employment code will 
be updated to reference in the new Act. There is no change in 
substance to the Saskatchewan employment code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased once again to give the first initial comments on Bill 
105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017. And as the minister alluded to, Mr. 
Speaker, this bill makes consequential amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act as a result of Bill 104, the 
Human Rights Code, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sections of the employment Act that refer to 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code will now say Human 
Rights Code, 2017. So it’s important to note that while this is a 
consequential piece to the earlier bill I spoke about, Mr. 
Speaker, it really . . . Again it just simply makes the 
employment Act or sections of the employment Act now simply 
say the Human Rights Code as opposed to The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code. And there are a few minor other changes 
that we want to pay attention to in the original bill, and I think 
it’s important that we attach the two bills as we have this 
discussion. 
 
So there’s not much to add on this particular bill. The real 

challenge, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure that the human rights of 
the people of Saskatchewan are protected as best we can, and I 
think that’s where we’ll be focusing a lot of our time and 
energy. And since this is a consequential bill to the earlier bill, I 
think we’ll have a lot more comments to say on both bills as 
time proceeds. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill 105. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption  
of Death Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Missing Persons and Presumption 
of Death Amendment Act, 2017. The bill amends The Missing 
Persons and Presumption of Death Act to add new provisions 
that will expand the ability of law enforcement agencies to 
access information and obtain search orders in a missing person 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a person is reported missing and law 
enforcement begins an investigation, there may be no reason to 
suspect a crime has taken place. And as such, law enforcement 
cannot rely on the Criminal Code to obtain a production order 
to compel the release of information about a missing person. 
This can stall a missing persons investigation. 
 
In 2009 Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction to incorporate 
access-to-records provisions into its missing persons legislation. 
The current provision permits both family members and law 
enforcement agencies to apply to the court for an order 
permitting access to information with respect to the missing 
person such as financial information, telephone and 
communication records, health information, and identification 
information, including a photograph. Since 2009 other 
provinces have passed legislation giving law enforcement 
broader access and search powers in the course of a missing 
persons investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has also 
adopted uniform legislation which forms the basis of the 
proposed bill and has been adopted in five jurisdictions. The 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada is an annual meeting of 
delegates representing federal, provincial, and territorial 
governments as well as the Canadian Bar Association and law 
reform agencies from across the country. This bill will expand 
the authority of law enforcement agencies to obtain information 
respecting persons that have been reported missing. The bill 
will also establish an application to the Court of Queen’s Bench 
to obtain an order for access to records from any person with 
respect to a missing person. The bill will also permit access to 
records for a third party who is believed to be in the company of 
a missing minor or a missing vulnerable person. 
 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

The additional types of information that may be accessed with a 
court order include: electronic information, including cellphone 
records and text message; global positioning system tracking 
records; employment information; records from school, 
including attendance; and travel and accommodation records. 
This bill will also permit law enforcement to apply for a search 
order to enter a building or residence where it is believed the 
person who is reported missing and also a minor or vulnerable 
person is inside. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the bill will authorize law enforcement to 
make emergency demands for records without a court order 
where certain criteria are met. Demands made without a court 
order will be limited in time to no earlier than one week before 
the alleged disappearance. Further, officers who make 
emergency demands will be required to comply with reporting 
requirements to ensure that there is transparency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Missing Persons 
and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons and 
Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased again to stand in my place to present initial comments 
as it pertains to Bill No. 106. Now, Mr. Speaker, The Missing 
Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017, the 
bill itself makes a few housekeeping amendments, Mr. Speaker, 
and the rest of the bill really talks about giving the police more 
powers to do more quicker responses to the presumption of 
somebody missing or the presumption of death. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it gives them a bit more powers to be able to search 
records, as the minister spoke about — school records, 
attendance records, telephone records. 
 
Obviously this is something that the people of Saskatchewan in 
general, when you do have somebody that’s missing or 
somebody that’s presumed dead, that the sooner you get 
answers and the quicker, you know, of a relief the person hasn’t 
passed away, or at least you have closure in the event that the 
tragic event happens in which somebody’s life is lost, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to try and find some swift support to get 
answers for many families going through this. 
 
Today I can say that this bill is perhaps a day late and a dollar 
short, Mr. Speaker, because today we’re hearing . . . We 
understand that there’s hearings for the missing and murdered 
indigenous women and that the commission is in Saskatoon 
today. And we obviously are hearing parts of the stories of 
many families that have been ripped apart by people that have 
been murdered or missing for a long time. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s important to note to the people of Saskatchewan that this is 
exactly what we mean when we talk about greater response, 
quicker response, and certainly to tell the people that are going 
to this commission hearing that the pain that you’re feeling we 
can only, we can only guess at how difficult it is. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question from my experience . . . 

We’ve had several members of my family have gone missing at 
times and thank goodness we find them, but there’s other 
people that, as I mentioned, I made reference to a cousin of 
mine who was murdered, and there’s actually a couple of them. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t heard an update from the police 
as to what has occurred in their particular deaths. And it’s very, 
very important that people share these stories. 
 
And it’s also important that we do all we can to give the tools to 
the people that would respond to this crisis, whether it’s the 
police service or whether it’s the courts, that we can do all we 
can to ensure that there’s resolution to finding out if somebody 
is not only missing but murdered, because obviously they have 
the challenge of young people running away from home as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you the panic and the incredible 
distress that people and families have. I’ve had on occasions, 
with my own three daughters when they were much smaller, 
where you lose them in a mall for a few minutes. And the whole 
world kind of spins out of control and you’re just absolutely 
beside yourself. You just don’t know what to do, and then you 
find them in the candy store, and the flood of relief. You know, 
even if it’s only 15, 20 minutes, it is a horrible feeling. And if 
you can for a minute, just to try and imagine how that is for 
families that have to go through that for days and weeks and 
months, if not years. It must be an incredible strain. When you 
lose a child for a few minutes it’s awful, and you lose them for 
a long period of time, that strain and pressure must be 
incredibly tough to bear. And again we can only imagine how 
difficult it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as we look at some of these bills and how we can improve 
the system, it’s important to note a couple of things. First I 
would say yes, the tools are important to provide to police 
services to search orders and access records when you’re 
conducting an investigation into a missing person. There is that 
opportunity with this particular bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should also look at the emergency demand for 
records could come from commanding officers or chief of 
police where they believe a person is at risk of imminent harm. 
Again a good example would be an amber alert when a child 
goes missing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say, the point I would make is that 
yes, it’s important to give the police the tools to do their job. 
But it’s also important to do two other things, Mr. Speaker, is 
give them the resources to use those tools properly. It’s nice to 
have an Act that would give them the access to records that 
could help them in their investigation of whether it’s a 
murdered or a missing person but, Mr. Speaker, they also have 
to have the boots on the ground and the resources to be able to 
do this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there has been progress made, but we also 
must ensure that the people that we employ and we trust to 
protect citizens and to certainly hand out justice where it’s 
appropriate, that all people are considered important, Mr. 
Speaker, that all people are considered important. 
 
And I look at the notion around BC [British Columbia] where 
we had a number of street workers, if you will, Mr. Speaker, 
that were murdered. And there wasn’t the attention garnered 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

because a lot of people viewed them as simple street workers. 
And, Mr. Speaker, these were daughters and sons of families 
from across the country. 
 
So while it’s important to have the proper tools, it’s important 
to make sure that the resources are there. It is equally important 
that every single person, no matter their background, no matter 
what issues they’re facing, and no matter how tough their 
situation may be or how desperate and poor they may be, Mr. 
Speaker, that every single life matters when it comes to making 
sure that our people are protected and that there are some 
serious changes when it comes to the attitudes of many people. 
When it comes to people that may be street workers or people 
of Aboriginal ancestry or people of Chinese ethnicity, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re all equal. 
 
So it’s important that when we have this challenge, the 
resources and the effort go into searching for everyone that 
might be missing or might be murdered. Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
important that we correct that premise that some people have 
that perhaps some of these people are less important than 
others. That is not the case. That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
People have got to get that issue raised to ensure that every 
single person’s life is valued, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you that from my own experience. I’ve had two 
of my cousins that were murdered, Mr. Speaker. They were my 
first cousins. They left Ile-a-la-Crosse at a young age. And for 
the record, their names were Bernadette Ahenakew and Laura 
Ahenakew. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been years since we’ve heard 
any progress on the investigation concerning their deaths. And 
all we can do, Mr. Speaker, is pray for them and understand that 
this has an effect right across the country. There is no 
jurisdiction, there’s no community, there’s no people that are 
immune to this issue. It is right across the board. 
 
And I am thankful that the commission has the focus . . . As an 
Aboriginal person, indigenous person, I’m glad that the 
commission are focusing on the indigenous murdered women 
and men and missing women, in particular. I’m glad they’re 
working on that effort as part of their recourse and part of their 
effort to deal with the indigenous women, Mr. Speaker, who are 
primarily the victims. But our hearts, our hearts and minds and 
prayers go to all families of all backgrounds of all races, that if 
you have a missing or murdered member of your family, it 
doesn’t make it any less important to us. We are all equal in this 
effort. 
 
And that’s why, when you have bills of this sort, it really brings 
home a lot of points. And I would add that’s it’s important to 
note that while giving the police more powers to do emergency 
demand for records, Mr. Speaker, we must give them the right 
resources. We must ensure that they all know everyone is equal, 
and everyone deserves to have as much support and as much of 
the police’s assistance on these matters as possible, Mr. 
Speaker. We must be fair and conscientious of that issue all the 
time. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why I want to pay special 
reference to the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women 
panel that are having hearings today in Saskatoon. And I wish 
them well. And I offer our support and prayers to them, and I 
also offer courage to those families that are speaking out about 

this particular matter, because, Mr. Speaker, it is, like I said, it’s 
a very traumatic experience losing your own child for 15 
minutes. You get quite, quite alarmed and you become very 
panicked, and it is a very, very scary feeling. And I’ve gone 
through it too many times as a parent, Mr. Speaker, and I can 
tell you that it is tough. So as parents we all know how it is to 
lose a child for a few minutes, and can you imagine those that 
have lost a child for life? The pain must be unbearable. Like we 
said, we pray for them, we honour them, and we recognize their 
incredible struggle. 
 
So on that note, I know we have a lot more to say about how we 
can protect our children better, how we can authorize and 
empower the police to do their job better, how we can change 
society’s views of those that may be viewed lesser than others. I 
think that’s a lesson that we all need to learn and continue to 
learn, Mr. Speaker, because that’s not who we are as people. 
 
So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 106, 
The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 106. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 84 — The 
Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As always, it’s an honour to be able to rise in the House and 
speak to these bills. I do want to commend my colleague from 
Athabasca for his sensitive comments just now on the Missing 
and Murdered Indigenous Women hearings that are taking place 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And I, too, have a friend whose granddaughter testified 
yesterday, as did she. I remember when the little girl was three 
and her mother went missing, and it was four years afterwards 
when they found her body. So the tragedy of that experience is 
one that is profound, and again my thoughts and prayers go to 
all the families who go through this and all the families who are 
still waiting to find out where their loved ones are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So moving into the bill in front of me, The Income Tax 
(Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017. This bill is fairly 
straightforward when you look at it. I mean there’s a couple 
things that are happening. We see some changes to taxation 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

rates in section 32 of The Income Tax Act and section 56 of The 
Income Tax Act. And then there are some changes to the ceiling 
for small business tax. And those are definitely the substance of 
the bill, is the changes to the small business income tax rates. 
 
When the minister introduced it, she talked a lot about small 
business and its vitality and how vital it is to the health of our 
economy. Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. I think small 
businesses really need to be celebrated for what they’re doing, 
not only for the economy but for communities, for hiring people 
within their communities, for supporting families within their 
communities and making sure that our communities are healthy 
and vital, that we’re all . . . You know, we should shop local. 
We should make sure these local businesses are supported and 
these small businesses are supported. 
 
So what the announcement is in the introduction of this bill is 
the idea of raising the small business income threshold from 
$500,000 to $600,000. This is of course after-tax, I believe, 
income. And the highest threshold, now this would be the 
highest threshold in Canada. So that’s kind of the main 
comment that she had. 
 
There are some other small changes. I just want to make sure I 
cover those. Personal income tax rates, the legislation will “. . . 
return Saskatchewan’s general corporate income tax rate to 12 
per cent, the same as other Western provinces.” Now you’ll 
recall, Mr. Speaker, when the budget was introduced, that was 
going to be lowered. In fact it was lowered, but now it’s being 
put up again. 
 
And the general corporate income tax rate changes will also be 
changed. She explained it and it’s there in the bill, but basically 
they’re going to raise it: 
 

. . . by half a point . . . January 1st, 2018, from 11.5 to 12 
per cent, and . . . [they’ll] repeal the legislated tax rate 
reduction, from 11.5 to 11 per cent, that was scheduled to 
take effect on July 1st, 2019. Once implemented . . . [the] 
12 per cent general corporate income tax rate will continue 
to be competitive . . . 

 
And we’ve heard much about the competitiveness of those 
rates. 
 
We have a number of questions though in relation to this bill, 
and certainly want to be able to speak with the officials in 
committee about how this is exactly going to work and how 
these decisions are being made. 
 
Of course my first question is, who’s asking for this? Because I 
looked at the comments from the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] at the time that the budget came forward 
and there was no mention of increasing the small business tax 
rate cap by the CFIB when the budget came down. That would 
be a first question of course, is who is asking for these changes 
and what prompted the minister to make these changes at the 
same time that she’s changing what was in the budget in terms 
of the general corporate income tax rate. 
 
Some of the questions we have to ask, Mr. Speaker, when we’re 
in committee is, was this planned when the budget came down? 
What is the analysis that the Finance officials were able to do to 

determine that this was an appropriate vehicle to go forward? 
Was it booked in estimates? Like, where does this show up on 
the balance sheet? Where is this going to affect . . . How much 
money is it going to mean that we’re not taking in in income 
tax, Mr. Speaker? The definition of “small” — how do you 
define what a small business is? How many businesses is this 
going to benefit? Is this a hundred businesses? Is it 10? Is it 
2,000? 
 
I mean those kinds of questions I think are important for the 
public to understand in order to determine whether or not this 
out-of-the-blue change that didn’t come at budget time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . This is typically what a government would 
bring forward as part of a budget, but because there’s been so 
much confusion and back and forth on the budget, this is just 
adding, I think, more to the confusion of what was presented in 
March. So again, why is this being brought forward now? Why 
was it not thought of when the actual budget itself was brought 
in? 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I think what this really highlights is a lot of the confusion 
that this government has caused by its mishandling of the 
budget since March of this year. And you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, 
we weren’t sure when the budget came down whether diapers 
were being taxed the PST or not, and there was some confusion 
there. We didn’t know if the corporate tax was going up or 
down, because when the budget was announced the corporate 
tax rate was being decreased, but now it’s being put back up 
again, so that’s kind of confusing. 
 
We know that they announced cuts to funeral subsidies for 
people that couldn’t afford funerals, but they sort of kind of 
changed that a little bit, and so that’s changed. Cuts to libraries, 
Mr. Speaker, was then reversed. We have things like the 
grants-in-lieu, where they announced cuts to the grants-in-lieu 
and then they gave some communities grants-in-lieu back, but 
not the full amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the confusion that this government has caused 
with changing their mind on all kinds of budget decisions, it’s 
one that the people of, I think, of Saskatchewan must be reeling 
from. So we have to ask those questions. We have to ask why 
the CFIB, when they commented on the budget when it was 
introduced, they said things like . . . Here’s a quote from the 
press release: “While pleased the budget takes one step forward 
on spending restraint, we are disappointed to see taxes increase 
by $908 million, which will further erode business confidence.” 
So this is, that’s a quote from Marilyn Braun-Pollon who is the 
head of the CFIB. 
 
So obviously the government hasn’t taken that into account and 
they haven’t heard the concerns of small businesses when it 
comes to raising the PST by a point. We know that’s affected 
small businesses — not only with their sales, and they’re also 
being now asked to collect that PST without any remuneration 
whatsoever. They’re doing the work of the tax department 
without any kind of recognition. They have to collect more. 
Restaurants are now being asked to collect PST. It’s caused a 
lot of confusion and a problem for people that are now 
responsible for remitting those taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

And there’s been all kinds of problems with things like the tax 
on life insurance or health plans. And the confusion doesn’t 
only come from the budget itself. It’s on the implementation of 
these new PST rules, which I’ve had one company call me with 
some . . . They have a private health plan and it’s a pretty 
straightforward deal, but the way the PST is being applied 
means that they are paying way more, way more tax on their 
health plan than a public health plan would be paying. So it’s 
unfair as well, Mr. Speaker. It’s confusing, but it’s also unfair. 
 
At any rate, someone in the government came up with the big 
idea of increasing this tax rate for small businesses, raising it 
from 500,000 to $600,000 effective January 1st, 2018. If they 
would have had their act together, Mr. Speaker, this should 
have been introduced in March and then the timing of this 
change for January 1st, 2018. They could have passed the bill in 
the spring as is the normal course. But they didn’t have their act 
together. They’re introducing an income tax Act bill in the fall, 
which is highly unusual and out of the ordinary in many ways. 
So I think the CFIB folks figured, oh this is going to cause 
problems, because if it’s going to be in effect January 1st, 2018 
but the bill has to go all the way through the legislative cycle, it 
won’t be passed until after the tax deadline. 
 
So CFIB quickly realized that’s there a serious problem with 
the bill as it’s currently written, if indeed it is to take effect on 
January 1st, 2018. So, Mr. Speaker, the CFIB has requested that 
we move the debate on this bill forward to have committee look 
at it at a sooner time. And, Mr. Speaker, I can see why the CFIB 
would be asking that, because otherwise this bill won’t work. 
And they introduced it too late, so now we have a problem. 
 
So we are going to have a number of questions that we do want 
to go to committee with. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
something that we’ll have lots of questions, and we want to be 
sure that the answers are available. But at this point I think 
we’ll wait and see what committee has to say. So that’s all my 
comments on this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 84, the 
income tax (business taxation) amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read the second time.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 84, The Income 
Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m 
pleased today to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 76, The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll recall when the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport rose to introduce this bill, he had some explanations 
in this Assembly, and we also had a delegation from the 
community, The Key First Nation, including Chief Brass and 
some of the councillors there, Mr. Speaker. And they were here, 
of course, with great interest regarding one part of this bill, 
which was the establishment of a new provincial park, the 
Porcupine Hills Provincial Park, Mr. Speaker. And with some 
reason, of course. 
 
It’s an exciting thing to talk about potentially a new provincial 
park. I know that many members on both sides of this 
Assembly have expressed a love, or at least a propensity for 
camping, if not a love for camping, and some fond memories 
around camping. And that’s certainly something that, as I said, 
members on both sides of this House would share. 
 
There is also however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot that’s in play 
when we are looking at use of Crown lands in this province. 
One of the main things that we should be considering is a duty 
to consult and duty to consult when we’re talking about the use 
of Crown lands, Crown lands that have been traditionally used 
by First Nations going back for centuries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is not something to be entered into lightly. Certainly in 
this era of truth and reconciliation, we understand that this is 
something that has not always been done well, and that would 
be a very, very large understatement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
negotiation of lands with First Nations people. And it’s one of 
the ways that we can move forward and ensure that we are fully 
respecting the duty to consult and fully involving in a respectful 
way, in a good way those First Nations who are impacted 
potentially, by this new provincial park. 
 
And I know that there have been some consultations. The 
minister noted that there have been consultations going back to 
2011 here. There’s also been some admission that this is 
perhaps not universally . . . There are some concerns, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that have been expressed, and certainly we’ve 
seen mixed reviews in some ways around that duty to consult. 
 
I’m just going to read some of the comments. I don’t want to 
speak for people, so I will read some of the comments into the 
record perhaps that have been there. There are comments . . . 
This is from an article from November the 6th of this year and a 
quote attributed to Mr. Vern Friday, a lands manager at Key 
First Nation, who states that he was part of the discussion since 
the beginning. He notes the historical interest, the historical 
value of this particular area to members of his First Nation. He 
said people have historically met in the area for traditional 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

ceremonies and other activities and notes that some have not 
been happy about the park because of the potential influx of 
tourists, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think that that’s something that we ought to listen to. And 
I think in the second reading comments, the minister noted that 
there was a unique nine-step consultation plan that the 
government was confident would surpass the duty to consult. 
And I think when we get to committee, we’ll just have some 
conversations about what that unique . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be quite a few 
conversations happening, private conversations. I would ask the 
members to either do them more quietly or perhaps take them 
outside of the House. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, I have some interest and I know members of our caucus, 
the critic as well, will have questions just around what exactly 
that nine-point consultation plan involved and how the 
government feels that this will surpass the duty to consult. And 
I think those are questions that we should enter into with earnest 
and a real desire to get a process better than what we have 
traditionally been able to do historically in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I state, I think that there will be other questions with regard 
to that and there are other elements of this bill that I haven’t 
even touched on here, but I think I will leave those questions 
and those comments to my colleagues. And with that I will 
conclude my remarks and move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Good to join debate today on Bill No. 77, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, this is first in a series of housekeeping measures 
around pension legislation and in terms of both updating 
practice and updating language around what is gender specific, 
not gender specific, where the different entities have changed 
their proper title, or in the case of this bill in particular, where 
they’ve now got the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming as the, as I understand it, the sole member 
of the commission managing the superannuation plan for the 
Liquor Board employees. Previously the commission had been 
composed of three members appointed by an order in council, 
one of which needed to be an employee of the Liquor Board. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, excluding the employees from the 
administration or the governance of the pension plan, we don’t 
think is a great way to go. We think, you know, in terms of 
involving the employees in their pension plan, that’s something 
that should be a given. But in the case of this, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
perhaps diminished, where the numbers in the old plan, over 
which this body has oversight, lessens the severity of that 
dynamic. 
 
Anyway this deals with the old plan, Mr. Speaker, which of 
course for fans of public pensions in Saskatchewan, they’ll 
know that the old plan’s been closed to new members since 
October 1st, 1977, where there are, as we understand it in the 
explanatory notes, there are two active members still in the 
employ of government, subject to the plan, but that as of 
December 31, 2016, there were 177 retirees in the plan overall. 
 
So the other amendments in the plan or in the legislation 
contained in Bill No. 77 where amendments are allowing for the 
restricted retirement option, i.e. early retirement, to continue 
without needing an order in council each year to renew it. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly improvements to be 
made to the functioning of government, and this would 
certainly seem to be one, not earth shaking, but certainly not 
requiring an order in council every time someone applies for 
early retirement would seem to be an improvement on the 
functioning of the plan. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that others of my colleagues will 
have, I’m sure, much wiser and more insightful things to say on 
this particular piece of legislation than I. And in aid of bringing 
that moment forward, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Hello again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again good 
to join debate on Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2017 of course moved by the Minister 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

of Finance on November 6th, 2017. 
 
Now there are a number of changes in this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of improving the 
governance of the legislation . . . But also, as I discussed earlier 
with the miscellaneous statutes legislation, updates the 
language, ensuring that it’s gender neutral, that there’s modern 
language being utilized. It also points out that the existing board 
requirements, that those be sustained and modernized and that 
there also be a provision allowing for an employee to transfer 
their existing pension plan from another employer to the 
municipal plan, providing it does not cause undue hardship on 
the solvency of the previous plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again that would seem to be a fair measure to be 
taking, and again this is something where we have seen some 
concern in the recent past around the solvency and the adequacy 
of the municipal pension plans going forward. We know that 
there’s been a fair amount of work done between the 
representatives of the employees, management, the province 
working alongside that. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 
examining this closely to ensure that this does in fact build upon 
the reviews and the reports that have been conducted in the 
recent past, again which we understand arrived at a fair position 
of consensus. 
 
But we’ll be interested to see how the contentions made in the 
minister’s second reading speech line up with the parties 
affected out in the sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But in aid of 
doing that work . . . And certainly again, I’m sure that there will 
be other of my colleagues that have some wise things to say on 
this piece of legislation. But again to enable that work going 
forward, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Hello again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again good 
to be joining the debate on Bill No. 79, The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. Again in terms of, you 
know, usually there’s a lot of spring cleaning goes on, but given 
our legislative schedule, Mr. Speaker, the housekeeping often 
comes in the fall. 
 
And this would certainly be part of that dynamic, the measures 
in Bill No. 79 again ensuring that the public employees pension 

plan are up to date with the membership of the committee. So 
for example, previously there had been a reference to the 
members of the Communications, Energy, and Paperworkers 
Union. That entity of course had amalgamated with the 
Canadian Auto Workers to become Unifor. So language has 
changed to reflect that development. 
 
There are changes made allowing board members to reside 
outside of Saskatchewan after their employment. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not an uncommon feature of other governance 
entities to allow that out-of-province representation, and 
certainly is reflective of the fact that folks often as not retire 
outside of the province. And that doesn’t mean that they haven’t 
got something to bring to the boards that may be worth the 
while. So in terms of that, not terribly shocking. And in terms of 
allowing changes that have been in the legislation allowing 
spouses to stay opted-in should their partner leave, again, Mr. 
Speaker, these changes are fairly straightforward. And again 
there are others that I could go further into, but where would the 
fun be in that for other of my colleagues to get more deep into 
those details, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But again this is important legislation in terms of the 
livelihoods of pensioners that have been, you know, good 
public servants, and it’s important that we make sure that the 
terms of that pension plan are as up to date and as current with 
best practice as possible. But on that score, Mr. Speaker, I know 
other of my colleagues will have more to say on this score and, 
in aid of that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 79. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you very much. 
You’ll be thinking that my colleagues must be hazing me to 
have me up this much in the debate, or perhaps everybody else, 
but not so. Just the way the cookie crumbles. And it’s, as ever, 
good to take my place, stand in this Assembly, and join debate 
on Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there are two main changes that this Act 
represents. One is moving from a 30-year borrowing limit, and 
again in the minister’s second reading speech references the fact 
that that dates back to the 1970s, again . . . And I’ll have more 
to say about that presently, but moving from that 30-year limit 
and up to a 40-year limit, bringing it in line with changes in 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

most of the other Crown corporations in The Crown 
Corporations Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the second change is the increase of the MFC [Municipal 
Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan] debt limit from $350 
million to $500 million. And again this is one that bears some 
caution, some watching, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the fact that 
again, you know, the debt limit, imagine the timeline. The debt 
limit was set at $250 million for the Municipal Financing 
Corporation, which I might add is a hugely useful entity when it 
comes to providing capital to the municipal sector and all of 
their various and sundry projects eligible under the Act. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a useful tool on the part of government. It’s a 
fairly cost-effective tool. It’s not on the operating side of the 
debt accrual on the part of government, but it is certainly part of 
the net debt position of government. 
 
But in terms of having been $250 million that was the limit set 
in the 1970s, that was raised to $350 million in 2010. So again, 
Mr. Speaker, 1970s, 250 million; 2010, going up to 350; and 
now here, seven years later, we’re going up another pretty 
significant leap, Mr. Speaker, to $500 million is what is 
anticipated in this legislation. 
 
And in terms of the overall finances of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s part of a picture that gives many cause for concern 
in terms of how a number of reasonable instruments, entities 
associated with the government have been taken and stretched 
in terms of their capacity, Mr. Speaker, by this government and 
the way that other entities are made to pay the price for bad 
decisions that have been made on the part of this government. 
 
And so in terms of what’s brought forward and represented as a 
matter of course, as a modernization exercise, gives us cause for 
concern when again we note that it’s gone from a debt limit of 
250 million set in the ’70s to 350 million in 2010 to 500 million 
anticipated in this legislation, and what that does to the overall 
fiscal capacity of the province, Mr. Speaker, and who pays the 
shot for that. And then you add into the fact that you’re moving 
from a 30-year limit to a 40-year limit and the kind of 
responsibility that we bear as the current generation to 
generations yet to come, Mr. Speaker. It bears, it certainly bears 
watching. It bears caution. 
 
So this, combined with other of the decisions on the part of this 
government where we see the net debt of Saskatchewan going 
up north of 21 billion I think it is, by 2020, there’s cause for 
concern here. 
 
So again, in and of itself, the Municipal Financing Corporation, 
a valuable tool for the provincial government and for the 
municipal sector, but there’s a lot of responsibility that goes 
with the stewardship of that tool, Mr. Speaker. And if you’re 
going to damage or ruin a tool when you’ve borrowed it from 
the generations to come, it’s not a great way to operate, to say 
the least. 
 
Anyway, as far as the context for this and the way that this 
comes forward as part of a Throne Speech, we’ll be interested 
to see what sort of stresses are placed on this measure come the 
budget, you know, anticipating that this will ultimately be 
passed. But again, Mr. Speaker, it’s part of a broader, bigger 
picture in terms of the way that this government approaches the 

finances of the people of Saskatchewan that gives the official 
opposition cause for concern. 
 
I know that other of my colleagues will have more to say on this 
debate, and certainly we’ll be reaching out to the involved 
partners in the sector for further insight. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
think the cautions, the concerns that I’ve noted stand and we’ll 
certainly . . . This is part of a broader work of watching, 
guarding against the, in some cases, the disastrous decisions of 
this government in the way that the cost for that is being passed 
on to the people of Saskatchewan, and indeed to future 
generations. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 80. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to join 
debate again, in this case on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. As has been pointed out 
in different ways and different, you know, in different 
measures, Mr. Speaker, some of them horrible to behold, 
Saskatchewan’s got a significant number of problems when it 
comes to safety on our roads and on our highways. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there have been different efforts on the part 
of government, and certainly I know that we as the official 
opposition have co-operated with different of those efforts 
through committees. I think of the Traffic Safety Committee 
that was chaired by the then member from Prince Albert 
Northcote, and for which the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale was Deputy Chair, and did a tremendous amount of 
good work with that committee, alongside the member from 
Cumberland. Again two individuals that are not strangers to 
some of the worst aspects of what can and does too often go 
wrong on the highways and roads of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There was certainly some good work put in by those members, 
and I’d submit by the entire committee, and some of that did not 
ultimately make it into the legislative agenda of the government 
at the time. But there’s some of that that we certainly see 
reflected here today in aspects of this legislation. 
 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

So in terms of moving to a regime where a driver with a blood 
alcohol content of .04 or higher who transports children under 
the age of 16 facing longer licence suspensions and longer 
vehicle seizures, that’s as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the looking-back period being extended from 5 
years to 10 years, allowing for tougher penalties for repeat 
offenders, again that is as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where law enforcement can offer an indefinite administration 
suspension, making roadside consequences for those charged 
with impaired driving under the Criminal Code consistent with 
those charged with exceeding .08 blood alcohol content or 
refusing to comply with a demand for a test, again, Mr. 
Speaker, these are changes that, you know, given the situation 
in Saskatchewan, are certainly warranted. 
 
Again different changes have been made over the years, and 
you can see them. I was driving with some colleagues down the 
highway last week, seeing the blue lights on the snowplow 
coming along. You know, we were all here as part of making 
that change happen. And again that was brought about in 
response to a terrible tragedy. And I compliment the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats for his part in that and certainly the 
Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote . . . or the minister for 
making that happen. And certainly we as the official opposition 
were proud to do our part. 
 
And I’ve been here long enough, Mr. Speaker, to recall the 
deaths with highway workers that, you know, dangerous 
workplaces being what they are, it shouldn’t mean that . . . We 
as a society have got to figure out how we can put the 
safeguards in place where the likelihood of you getting home at 
the end of the day isn’t a give-and-take thing. It should be a . . . 
You know, you should look forward to seeing that loved one 
come home at night. 
 
There are some horrible tragedies that have taken place over the 
years. And again one of the hopeful things about that is that 
there has been co-operation on both sides of the House to make 
a better response to those situations. And certainly the slowing 
to 60 kilometres an hour when snowplows are stopped on the 
side of the road, when passing other vehicles providing 
assistance, or in the orange zone, those are changes that hold a 
lot of merit and we are glad to see coming forward. 
 
Now as good as some of the measures are in the legislation, we 
have certainly some questions that attach to other measures in 
the legislation, and we’ll certainly be looking to gain better 
understanding of those measures both in the research that we do 
as an official opposition and certainly at the committee stage, 
Mr. Speaker. But where the bill is repealing the requirements 
for operation authority certificates, meaning that those 
operating a vehicle on the highway for the purpose of 
transporting passengers no longer need an operating certificate, 
it begs a number of questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen changes made on the part of this government, 
drastic changes, unanticipated changes where of course the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company has existed as a service 
for the people of Saskatchewan since the ’40s, Mr. Speaker. 

And in terms of the different elections that this government has 
been party to, I cannot recall them coming forward and saying, 
you know what we’re going to do? We’re going to scrap STC. 
This is a problem that needs to be addressed and we’re going to 
wrap that corporation up. 
 
They never said that, Mr. Speaker. They never said that. And 
what they did say instead was . . . I think of the now departed, 
then member for Saskatoon Fairview, Jennifer Campeau, who, 
as minister responsible for STC, presided over the last of the 
annual reports before the move was made to scrap STC where 
she said it was an essential public service, Mr. Speaker, and 
where she, as a young mother, had special insight and 
appreciation for the safe, reliable, affordable transportation that 
that provided. And in a province where one of the biggest 
barriers we have to different services and different situations, 
Mr. Speaker, is geography — and it’s often said we have no 
shortage of geography in the province of Saskatchewan — 
again her comments made entirely good sense. 
 
So it was with some shock that of course we go through another 
election where it’s not referenced in terms of the plan of that 
government, but they come forward to wholesale shut down 
STC, and go through any number of panegyrics to try and get 
that, to establish their legal authority by which to do it. And 
we’ve seen some more of that here today, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of the ongoing gymnastics on the part of this government. 
 
We’ve also seen the members opposite where they’ll talk about 
different lines that have been closed over the years under NDP 
governments where the passenger load didn’t warrant going 
forward. I would submit that that has been a hugely different 
circumstance, Mr. Speaker. That’s always been subject to 
oversight by the highway traffic safety board, and it’s also not 
been the entire shutdown of STC altogether. And you know, 
sometimes you see some funny arguments deployed in service 
of trying to distract or to misdirect people’s attention when it 
comes to some very serious matters. And there’s a huge public 
safety component to this government’s decision to close STC. 
 
And as I believe it was my colleague, the member from 
Riversdale, had made the argument around even with the health 
care system alone, the way that they had no plan. It was, you 
know, shoot first and ask questions later, Mr. Speaker, or cut 
first and measure after. And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t work. 
That’s not responsible government. That’s hugely reckless. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s in some cases a terrible way that 
this government is making other people pay the price for their 
mistakes, for their bad choices, and again for which they have 
no mandate, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what they went to the 
people of Saskatchewan with in terms of their plans. 
 
So when it comes to the provision in this particular legislation, 
Bill No. 81, around repealing the requirement for operation 
authority certificates, is this a case where they’re lessening the 
safety, lessening the appropriate regulatory oversight of 
transportation on our highways and roads, Mr. Speaker, to make 
up for the fact that they’ve gone ahead with this reckless 
decision that they don’t have a mandate for? It will be a 
interesting discussion I’m sure in committee with that minister. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know . . . We’ll see how that 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

discussion holds up because I was there for the discussion in 
committee around Bill No. 40, where we tried to get out of the 
then Justice minister what the point was for Bill 40. And you 
know, the way that this government flip-flops from one day to 
the next, it’s sometimes kind of hard to keep track of the floor 
show over there, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll see if this measure 
survives to a committee stage or hopefully this government 
comes to its senses, realizes that it doesn’t have a mandate for 
something like scrapping STC, and gets with the program that 
. . . you know, realizes they’ve got responsibilities to the people 
of Saskatchewan to do much better than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s more that I could say about Bill No. 
81, but for the time being, I know that other of my colleagues 
will have insightful and wise comments to bring to bear on this 
particular piece of legislation. We know that the consultation 
that we’re undertaking on this is ongoing, and I’m picking up 
some pretty interesting things in terms of the practices of this 
government. But, Mr. Speaker, so that other of my colleagues 
might soon — and very soon — join debate, I would move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 81. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Hi. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister is 
very distracting here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He’s such 
a troublemaker, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway it’s my pleasure here to wade into the debate on Bill 
82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. And there 
are many different provisions in this bill, but I’d like to focus on 
one actually that was raised today here in question period. 
 
But I want to point first to the minister’s remarks. Often in 
second reading it gives us and gives the people a sense of what 
a bill is going to be about, and in the minister’s second reading 
speech, he actually kept his remarks remarkably short, 
explaining the changes. In fact the bill barely includes five 
paragraphs. And as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre had 
mentioned, it’s often not what is said but what isn’t said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But the minister actually did in his second reading comments 
make this statement. He said, “These updates will allow the 

corporation to better serve private sector business opportunities 
to support growth and competitiveness.”  
 
That statement unto itself, Mr. Speaker, nothing wrong with 
supporting growth opportunities and competitiveness, but 
ultimately our Crown corporations exist for the benefit of 
people here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They provide 
services. They can provide services at a lower rate and create 
competitiveness, as we see with SaskTel, to ensure rates are 
down a little bit from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. They 
provide dividends to the General Revenue Fund to provide 
things like health care, education, highways, social services, all 
those kinds of things, and they create mortgage-paying jobs. 
There’s all kinds of things that Crown corporations do. They 
provide top-notch services to people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the one part of the bill that — this is striking — is the piece 
around the distribution of natural gas being moved into the 
regulations, Mr. Speaker. So there’s many different levels of 
oversight here in this legislature. Legislation, having something 
in legislation provides the highest level of oversight because it 
has to come before the legislature for change. We see this 
actually with Bill 40. So this was the government’s bill that was 
going to see the ability to privatize a Crown up to 49 per cent, 
and that bill is actually being repealed in part here today. We 
saw that bill, second reading of that bill here today, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
So the highest level of oversight is in fact in legislation, and 
then you can move things into regulation where government has 
the opportunity at the stroke of a pen to change things. And at 
this moment in time, before this bill passes, distribution of 
natural gas is in fact in the exclusive domain of SaskEnergy, 
Mr. Speaker, but this will allow the minister and the ministry to 
do things differently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We heard with Bill 40 over the last year that people do not want 
to see our Crown corporations privatized. People said this loud 
and clear, and still this government plowed ahead with Bill 40. 
It was interesting, initially when Bill 40 was introduced, the 
members on the opposite side basically said, nothing to see 
here. This is a simple amendment. This is just about clarifying a 
definition. But in fact people in Saskatchewan saw through that, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is a government that was doing 
something through the back door through which they could not 
do through the front because of the Crown protection Act.  
 
But I would argue much as the Leader of the Opposition said 
today. This seems to be an effort to . . . This government has 
seen that they can’t do things through the front door. They 
can’t. People in Saskatchewan are wise enough to see that 
they’re trying to go through the back door, so this particular 
change appears to be the government now trying to slide 
something through a basement door or a basement window, 
pardon me, Mr. Speaker, which is a huge issue. 
 
When we think about our Crown corporations, we think about 
the minister’s comments where he says, again the updates in 
this bill “. . . will allow the corporation to better serve private 
sector business opportunities to support growth and 
competitiveness.”  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that would have been their argument 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

about shuttering STC, Mr. Speaker. They’re creating business 
opportunities, but they certainly aren’t creating better service 
for people in Saskatchewan. There was some great outrage 
when we asked questions about this around routes being closed 
in previous administrations. But the fact of the matter is this 
government hasn’t just closed routes. They’ve shuttered the 
entire company, which means that people in Saskatchewan 
don’t have services to get to medical appointments, services to 
get between communities to visit loved ones, to get to and from 
school in the larger centres, to transport goods and services in a 
timely fashion. 
 
I know that I was surprised. I had spoken with a lot of people 
about STC, but there were some communities in my 
constituency where people I didn’t expect to be quite as upset 
about STC, but they were, because we all have connections in 
rural Saskatchewan or people who use that service. 
 
So again, having better private-sector business opportunities to 
support growth and competitiveness are good, but ultimately 
our Crown corporations are here to serve the good of people. 
It’s making a profit. And generating that profit, and putting it 
back into the GRF [General Revenue Fund] is really important, 
into the General Revenue Fund, but ultimately it’s also about 
public service. 
 
So there is some huge concern around what appears to be this 
government’s privatizing the distribution, or creating the ability 
for the government to privatize the distribution of natural gas, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do know I have many colleagues who will be wading into 
this debate, the critic responsible and many others. But with 
that, I think I’d like to leave my comments there, and I move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 82. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 82. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon to enter into this debate on Bill 
No. 83, An Act to amend The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2010. This kind of legislation is interesting. As 
all legislation, it’s hugely, hugely important. But this one is 
particularly important when we talk about protecting our lands, 
our waters, our air.  
 
The responsibility of the Ministry of Environment is huge when 

it comes to our province, particularly when so much of what we 
do in this province which has had a significant land base . . . We 
often talk about the 100,000 lakes that we have. The impact of 
what we do as humans cannot be underestimated, cannot be 
dismissed. And so we constantly have to have vigilance that we 
are in fact stewards of our environment, that we are in fact 
leaving it better for the next generation than we had found it 
ourselves. 
 
This is something that really is one of the cornerstones of what 
we expect from our government and we expect from the 
Minister of Environment. And I can talk a bit about this, even 
though it’s been several years now since I was the minister of 
Environment, but we keep having that brought up, that there’s 
two former ministers of Environment. And I look back at those 
years with a source of pride because it’s one that when you are 
asked to take a role in protecting our environment, it’s one that 
cannot be taken lightly. It’s a huge responsibility. 
 
And I think about, particularly as we’re instructed and I assume 
it’s still the same case, that sometimes you have to step outside 
the role of Executive Council and hold the rest of the members 
of Executive Council to a standard that you will be enforcing as 
Minister of Environment, and that they don’t get a bye just 
because he’s happened to be sitting beside you, that whether 
you’re the Minister of the Economy, Minister of Agriculture, all 
of those and all of the ministries — Parks, Culture, Recreation 
particularly — all of them have a huge responsibility in making 
sure our province and its air, its water, its land, its forestry, all 
of the natural elements are in better condition than we had 
found it. And that is a good rule of thumb to live by because if 
we do that, I think that we can expect good things for our 
children and our grandchildren. 
 
And quite often we say that in a cliché way, but it’s not at all a 
cliché that we do want to leave this planet, the planet Earth in a 
better condition. Because we just simply have to. We simply 
have to, and it’s not one that can be taken lightly. And I reflect 
on my colleague from Athabasca, also a former minister of 
Environment, and he was saying he could instruct the current 
minister who has come back for his second tour of duty on this, 
about the ABC’s of environmental protection. And of course 
the issue that he talked about was the balance between 
economic growth and protection and how that’s so, so very 
critical to our province, you know. 
 
And we see that right across Canada, right across the world. As 
we experience in this world . . . In many ways people are saying 
the world’s getting smaller because whether it’s the ability to 
travel more or see more or we’re getting to know more. And it’s 
interesting. As we have people who come to our country, 
they’re bringing with them a world view that we can all 
appreciate. It makes us want to actually travel the world even 
more when we see people who have come here to become new 
Canadians. 
 
And I just think about the people in the gallery here as well and 
welcome them to our legislature. And I just want to take a 
moment to recognize there are visitors in our gallery, and we 
welcome them as we are into second debate, second round 
speeches on legislation that we’re talking about today. And 
today we talk about environmental protection and the plans that 
the minister has brought forward to us. So welcome to your 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

legislature. We appreciate that you’re here. 
 
But as I was saying, the world is getting smaller, and it seems 
much more precious because of that. And so it’s a big deal 
when we have a piece of legislation like this in front of us 
today, and so, Mr. Speaker, this is something that . . . When this 
government took power in 2007, they brought in a new 
approach. They brought forward an Environmental Code that 
had a lot of promise. And this will be interesting now that we 
have a piece of legislation before us that will cast a bit of light 
and refocus us back on that code. 
 
There was some real challenges with that code, and I know I’ll 
have to go back and take a look and see how well that code is 
doing and if it’s filled out the chapters that were missing. There 
were several chapters that were missing when it was first 
brought in and the promise was that those chapters would be 
soon coming and they needed to get on with that. I’m not sure 
where the state of affairs are with the code. You know, it’s an 
important document.  
 
We shifted away from a previous approach. It was called 
demand and control. And that was where the government of the 
day would set expectations, certain expectations of the 
population and of business and economic growth, about what 
the expectations were along the way and what the impact it 
would have on the environment. People felt that it was too 
onerous, that it was missing the point. In fact that we really 
should be facing . . . focusing on the outcomes not the 
processes. And there’s always been and there will be an 
ongoing debate on that because . . .  
 
And I guess the biggest example of this is the Husky oil spill 
that we had just two short summers ago in the summer of 2016, 
in July, where we had a major oil spill. And we had a conflict of 
interest in the sense of we had the Minister of Economy, who 
happens now to be Minister of Environment, at the time really 
overseeing a lot of the environmental questions of the day, and 
it didn’t seem to be as arm’s-length as it might have been. And 
so there were questions about credibility because here was 
really in many ways the first major test of the new approach, of 
the new approach of having an environmental code. And of 
course we are still . . . I’m not sure if the report or the final 
reports are all delivered on that, if we’re all fully aware of that 
spill and the impact it had on Prince Albert and Melfort. And 
we know the First Nations along the way had major, major 
concerns. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And so this is an issue of confidence in many ways because 
people right away think that it should be the Ministry of 
Environment who should be in charge of this. They are the ones 
who should be making sure it’s happening. And in many ways 
that’s not the case, that in fact the Economy had to play a major 
role, and sometimes it’s as simple and . . . You know, people 
would often use the metaphor or the old cliché of the fox 
guarding the henhouse. But we have been convinced that in fact 
the fox has the credibility, the honesty, the wherewithal to do 
the work needed to make sure the hens in the house are actually 
safe. Sometimes we really have some questions about that, and 
the Husky oil spill was a question that we would have about it. 
 

In fact we had a situation where the auditor really stepped in, 
particularly around pipelines, and had written extensively about 
the lack of oversight regarding the pipelines within the province 
and the lack of progress of taking care that the state of affairs of 
those pipelines were sufficient. 
 
So this is an interesting piece before us, and I think that there 
will be lots of people who have a lot of interest in this piece of 
legislation because of what happened in the past 10 years and 
where we have the questions about environmental protection. 
 
Another example would be the pasture lands that have been 
sold and the wildlife habitat protection lands, the WHPA [The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] lands that they were often 
referred to. It’s a bit of a passive environmental protection thing 
because there is no calamity, no disaster, no point in time that 
you can point at and said things changed after this particular 
day. Like when we can talk about that day in July of 2016 when 
we had in many ways our first major oil spill in Saskatchewan, 
and it really woke us up to what happens then. What happens 
then? 
 
And clearly these kind of things can happen to any government, 
but I think it’s critical that when we look back over the past 10 
years about some of the challenges this government has had in 
terms of environmental protection and the credibility gap that 
they do suffer from is one that we have a lot of questions too. 
And I know the public has a lot of questions. So it takes a lot of 
work. It takes a lot of work to develop that reputation, that 
confidence in the public that in fact you set a high value for our 
lands and our waters. And this government has set that back, 
has set that back in terms of the work it’s done around the two 
particular issues that I’ve raised. 
 
And I’m sure that there has been others that we can find out 
about, but I know that this is an issue that is one that will have a 
lot of questions. And I think as we prepare for this one in 
committee that this is the kind of thing when we’ve talked about 
okay, let’s not focus this on demand and control. We don’t want 
to focus on the processes. We want a new type of process, a 
new type of way of doing things, and focus on outcomes. And 
here we have two particular outcomes. 
 
And I’m not even talking about . . . And what’ll be very 
interesting, the minister yesterday talked about, we are waiting 
to see their climate change plan that deals with CO2 emissions. I 
am very interested in seeing that. I don’t know whether we’ll 
see it before or we’ll have a chance to debate it in the House. 
But regardless, we will have a chance to debate it at some point. 
And we hope that we will be able to have a full and thorough 
discussion about that and that the different groups and the 
public have a chance to have some input into that. 
 
Now when I talk about inputting, consultation will be 
interesting. And I think this is an important consideration the 
government should have around consultation, that they should 
be willing to go out and meet with people face to face. They 
should be willing to meet with groups. I mean, there are groups 
who have specialization who have a strong interest in this. And 
of course they’re the stakeholders who really have thought a lot 
about what does it mean in terms of the climate challenges that 
we have before us, and some would call it, and I think rightfully 
so, the climate crisis that we have before us. 



3058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

I would say from my own experience, this government, when 
they were looking for changes on the labour legislation, they 
only took mail-in responses. They only took in mail-in 
responses and thought that was quite sufficient, even though we 
know that there was one stakeholder who really lobbied hard 
and, in fact, in many ways could have skewed the results. Could 
have skewed the results. 
 
Now with the marijuana legislation legalization process and the 
survey they had with that and asked for mail-in feedback for 
that, they were complaining because some groups actually were 
able to send in significant numbers of responses. And they 
really didn’t like what they were hearing, and so they 
questioned that kind of response. 
 
So this government hasn’t really stepped out of the safety zone 
and have not been willing to talk to people in their own places. 
And I remember this used to be a real hallmark of the public 
service. You know, I would go along to some of the 
consultations. But the public service were very good at doing 
their job and saying, I really want, we really want to hear from 
the people of the province and so we’re going to go to the 
places where people work and live and hear them, about their 
concerns. And this government has not been able to, as I say, 
get out of that safety zone. They’ve been doing more mail-in 
consultations. And so this has been a real challenge for this 
government to do that, and so when we’re talking about 
environmental management and protection they really do need 
to get out of their safety zone for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s several parts to this bill that deserve 
some discussion and I want to go through that. And one of them 
is that . . . I’ll reflect a bit on what the minister has said in his 
speech. And he introduced this . . . The second reading was in 
November 6th, 2017, but he talked about, you know, how this is 
a results-based approach to environmental regulation and how 
they want to expand the definition of “person” to allow the 
ministry to issue permits to certain associations or 
organizations, that are carried out. 
 
And that’s really, I mean, it’s been interesting in our discussion 
around how over the course of years, the definition of “person” 
and what that means. We’ve kind of allowed the . . . And I’m 
not a lawyer or a legal expert in the idea of person, but it is 
interesting that we’ve come to expand that definition from just 
what we would think as human to in fact a legal body in 
allowing a corporation to have certain rights that a human 
would have or an individual would have. 
 
One of the things that he talked about was, in addition, 
members of the Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory 
committee, and he was concerned that they change frequently 
due to changes within the organizations and associations. The 
amendments will transfer powers from the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council to the minister, allowing for more timely 
appointments of new and replacement members of the 
committee. 
 
I would say that’s an interesting issue that the minister’s putting 
before us, one that allows a real shift in control here from 
cabinet and what we see in the orders in council — which are 
publicly made — to a simple choice of the minister. And this is 
one I think my member from Fairview really flagged this in her 

points when she was discussing this, that there’s some real 
concerns about such a shift in power when you have an 
advisory committee. 
 
And you know, it’s a bit of a groupthink where you have an 
advisory committee but you get to have, you get to choose 
who’s on your advisory committee and you don’t have to 
answer to anybody. People may not know who it is. Will it be 
public? Will these people . . . In some ways it will be public 
because they’ll meet and they’ll have discussions and they’ll 
find out who’s on it. But will it be on a website? Will we be 
able to search and find out who’s actually on the advisory 
committee, who’s being appointed, why they’re being 
appointed, that type of thing? Is this something that’s going to 
be quietly done? 
 
We have seen this government . . . And I think about the fact 
this came up with a constituent just yesterday about the 
landlords’ association and how that group, and this government 
actually in their legislation, that the list of names is not public. 
You cannot find out who is on that public group, even though 
they have a member from the public. Many of these groups or 
advisory committees will have members from the public 
serving and their names are published, whether on the website 
or whatever. But that group, we do not know who’s on the 
landlords’ group. 
 
So will this be another type of thing where you have such 
responsibility in Saskatchewan and you will not, as an 
individual citizen, be able to access that? Now I don’t know 
whether that’s the case or not. They’re not being very clear 
about that. But they’re bringing this in towards the realm of the 
minister, and I think this is really, really something 
questionable. 
 
And I hear the members over there saying, trust me. Trust me; 
there would be no problem. Well I think that we talk to the 
environment . . . We need to have a much more rigorous 
approach to all of this. And just to simply say, trust the Minister 
of Environment, which particularly, which I find interesting 
over there now that I . . . I don’t know how many Environment 
ministers they’ve gone through in the 10 years. They’re now 
recycling them. There are three Rs: reuse, recycle, and 
ridiculous. 
 
And so here we have a real issue. I don’t think it’s quite as 
much as the members on the advisory committee that are 
changing so much as the ministers are changing, you know. So 
this is really an issue for this government to consider, the length 
of time that the ministers change, and they might like a certain 
crowd around them in their advisory group, you know, and they 
get their six people. And then somebody else comes in six 
months later and don’t quite belong to the same groupthink and 
say, you guys are all out of here; I want another six. And so it 
might be a real problem with turnover, but not the turnover of 
the advisory members but in fact the minister who seems to be 
in a revolving door or chair or ejector seat or whatever you 
might say. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shark tank. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Shark tank. You know, it’s a hard seat to keep 
for more than just a bit. I think that, you know, whether they get 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

the . . . Maybe they have term contracts, I don’t know, or what 
they have. This is part of . . . But at any rate, it’s a situation 
where this government has a real credibility issue in terms of 
environmental protection and what they’re going to do about 
that. 
 
So this kind of thing when they say, well they want to have 
people be allowed to be picked by the minister and not go 
through even a somewhat public process of order in council, 
this is a real, real challenge. And so the . . . You know, and it is 
interesting. The minister talks about the code is already . . . 
talking about the environmental protection code. And he talks 
about how it was the first in its kind in Canada and, as I said, 
talked about results-based approach. But really, as I said, that 
there’s some real concerns about really what has happened. 
 
He goes on, talks about “The code reduces government red tape 
by replacing some permits with notifications and allows timely 
authorization . . .” and that type of thing, and spill reporting. Of 
course, I’m not sure . . . I think he’s talking about the oil spills. 
But whether that was a recommendation that came out of the 
Husky Oil spill, that there was too much red tape and that was 
the cause that they were dealing with and the reasons why that 
we had such confusion particularly in the first week or two. 
And I think overnight it was a bit of an issue, whether or not 
there was an oil spill. And we had the member from Wood 
River just a few weeks prior to that, talking about how, you 
know, the technology of pipelines was such that you could 
know right away whether there was an oil spill. And clearly 
there were some real questions that was happening with the 
Husky Oil spill. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So he talks about the code and it’s improving red tape. And I’m 
not sure . . . You know, we always want to make sure things are 
as straightforward as possible, and I do understand the red tape 
philosophy, cutting red tape, that particularly CFIB is keen on. 
But there are points in time where you say, listen, we really, 
truly do need to keep track of what is happening, what truly is 
happening. 
 
And I can just think of the red tape around the email situation 
right now that we have. We have a situation where the Premier 
has his emails go out for two weeks, two weeks, and there is no 
trail. There’s no trail of what actually happened over in Central 
Services. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, that in their zest to cut red 
tape, they actually don’t know whether the government emails 
were out for two weeks in September. The Premier says that 
was the case. The Minister for Central Services said — and she 
said twice in the House — that she didn’t care. She didn’t care. 
There was no trail. 
 
And here we have a situation like that. Is that carrying over into 
the world of environmental management and protection? And 
that’s a question that many people ask. It’s about credibility. 
And what you do in one part of your house, you probably do in 
another part of your house. That’s the way you approach 
housekeeping. And so when they don’t know what’s happening 
with the left hand or the right hand . . . the far-right hand, the 
far-left hand. I don’t know. And we have some real issues about 
this. 
 

So the minister is talking about that they’re moving forward 
with new code chapters and committees to develop the technical 
content. So it’ll be interesting to see what those chapters are. I 
do want to see and I should have . . . And I hope that the 
minister will bring this forward in terms of whether or not they 
actually did get their assignments all done in the first go-round, 
whether all the chapters are now complete, and what the outline 
are for the new chapters. Don’t believe the minister talked about 
that, and whether it’s just the issue of environmental 
management and protection. 
 
We have some real questions about the work ahead and how 
long that will take. I mean this government has been in place for 
now 10 long years and we’re not seeing the kind of results, 
particularly in the environmental world, around what should 
have been, what could have been, and particularly during those 
boom years where we were having record revenues. Record 
revenues, and we could have really invested into environmental 
protection and could have been world leaders. 
 
And when they talk about being the first in Canada to have this 
code . . . But it didn’t feel really like being first in Canada. 
People were wondering, so what’s there to show? And of course 
the black mark, of course, was the Husky oil spill. 
 
And so we have some real concerns about this bill before us, 
and what does it really, really mean. And the member, you 
know, it is interesting when he talks about housekeeping, pieces 
of housekeeping amendments. And that to us is a flag. That’s a 
flag that something’s bigger than that; when they talk about 
housekeeping legislation, that really something, something must 
be up. 
 
And so not only is the revolving door of the minister a reality 
over there, but it’s also the issue around the advisory committee 
members. And it would be really important for us to make sure 
that we have some sense of who these people are and their 
contributions. 
 
Now I do want to take a minute to talk about the issues around 
the product stewardship programs. And in fact actually we had 
a question in the House today about recycling tires and what’s 
happening with the black gold program. And the minister seems 
to be pretty familiar with that. So clearly there is something 
happening inside the House environment around the 
environmental stewardship programs. 
 
This is something that we are pretty proud of here in 
Saskatchewan and the good work, the very good work that 
Sarcan over the course of years has done. And I would say that, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have accomplished a lot in this province 
around environmental stewardship and the leadership that we 
have seen from the different groups who’ve really led the way 
with that. And you know, I think about the tires or whether it 
was the electronic works, that we have really stepped it up. And 
I’ve been very proud of the good work that we were able to 
initiate and continue on, and of course the good work that these 
companies have really been able to do. 
 
And I do think about Sarcan who, not only has this produced 
meaningful work and good work, but this is really one that has 
developed a real sense of expertise. And I hope the department, 
the ministry is turning to the folks there because there is a lot of 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2017 

expertise out in the NGO [non-governmental organization] 
world or the CBO world, the community-based organizations 
who really have, over the course of time, really developed a 
strong ethic of environmental stewardship, and whether it’s 
Sarcan or some of the others that have really understood the 
need for sound stewardship. And so we will really want to talk 
to those folks about what does this bill mean for them. Are there 
any concerns? And I haven’t even talked, I haven’t really 
stopped to talk about the unintended consequence is if we 
haven’t done this appropriately, if we haven’t done this in a 
well-thought-out way, what are the outcomes. 
 
We have a situation today where we raised questions in 
question period about the tire recycling initiatives and some of 
those initiatives, and what are the futures for that, and how 
some of the communities in the province are really looking 
forward to their opportunity to participate, but that’s been 
changed. And so what is the future for that? 
 
And I’m sure, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that those folks on the 
other side have heard from their people about this issue that in 
fact. And you know, I remember this very well. It’s been a few 
years since I was in a leadership role in this, but the people in 
rural Saskatchewan were so proud of their recycling facilities 
and their . . . And I particularly . . . And I’ll give a shout out to 
the mayor of Outlook. I just happened to run into him at an 
event about a few months ago and I was saying, well Outlook 
was doing so good. 
 
And I think, even in the city of Lloydminster, I remember 
touring the city of Lloydminster, who had, one of the first 
communities to have a recycling program, a pick-up recycling 
program which was very sustainable, and they had a system that 
worked. And they had thought it through. And other 
communities now, we see the city of Saskatoon picking up on it 
and now Regina. But we saw just a few short years ago, 
thinking that it was an impossibility, couldn’t be done, but 
actually very much can be done. Very much can be done. 
 
And so we have a lot of questions. And the other one that I 
know we will have questions about, and the minister will be 
well aware of, is the Great Sand Hills, Great Sand Hills. And so 
when we talk about that, it’s near and dear to my heart because 
we’ve done, I think, some good work. Hopefully that has 
continued on. And whereabouts is that? Whereabouts is that 
issue at now? 
 
I try every year to go out there and to see how things are out 
there. And of course it’s a beautiful part of our province and 
one that we can take a lot of pride in. You know, Mr. Speaker, I 
was out there this fall and I saw licence plates from six different 
places. There was four or five different provinces and a couple 
of states. There is a parking lot out there, and we were just 
amazed that the people were coming out on a Sunday afternoon, 
a Sunday afternoon. 
 
And we ran into somebody out on the hills. He was a councillor 
from, I think from The Battlefords. And we had a little political 
conversation on top of a great sand hill, which was really very 
interesting. We actually didn’t have a lot of time, but he really 
had some things to say to us about the shifting sands of 
Saskatchewan and the concerns they had about the situation 
here in this province. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you know we can go through the long list 
of areas that have their challenges, but I think about the Great 
Sand Hills and how the local RMs through their planning 
processes and the Great Sand Hills commission really work 
together to say, hey we can have economic development, but 
we can also have the environmental protection that we need in 
this area. 
 
Now interestingly, the Great Sand Hills isn’t quite having the 
pressures that they did 10, 15 years ago. The price of natural 
gas is not quite as high as it once was, so there’s not those 
pressures. And it was just a few weeks after we were out there, 
of course the great fires burned through that area. And they’re 
facing a whole new different issue, environmental issue, about 
what they are going to be doing about keeping a very fragile 
ecosystem with the grasses being burned and not much there to 
keep the grasses happening, and what the cover will be next 
spring and whether there’s snow. What will happen? And so 
this will be a real challenge for us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this piece of legislation before us is one that deserves a lot of 
attention, deserves a lot of attention. And as we start thinking 
about this over the past 10 years and, you know, it’s sort of the 
situation when you kick the dog and it barks. And all of a 
sudden you realize you got something happening here. 
 
So we’re really looking forward to the conversation around the 
Environmental Code, what it means and what the minister on 
his second tour is going to be saying, you know. I think this is 
going to be a real interesting time in committee because we will 
have lots of questions. And of course those questions, when we 
get to that point, will be post-plan, when he will have presented 
his plan. He talks about in a couple of weeks. And so all of that 
will be part of this discussion, and is that part of the code that 
he is talking about? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this will be more than housekeeping. This 
will be very much more than housekeeping. We’ve had a couple 
of real, real experiences. The Husky Oil spill will be very much 
a lens through which we’ll be talking about this issue, very 
much a lens; the wildlife, the Crown pastures, the community 
pasture sales, how that all played out with protecting our 
environment, those types of things.  
 
The issue around water drainage will also be a lens of which 
we’ll be talking about because I mean we’ve even had questions 
about that continue. You know, we think about the big, you 
know, when we have . . . And it’s not necessarily the size of . . . 
You know, we have something just outside the city here where 
we have an issue, and passing the buck about who’s really in 
charge of the licence to drain, and all of that, and who is and 
who isn’t. And passing the buck, it’s just not solving the issue. 
The water will just accumulate, and we see that in rural 
Saskatchewan. We see that in rural Saskatchewan. Many of us 
will have, know of particular circumstances where it is very 
much, very much changed circumstance from before. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there will be lots to say on this issue, lots to 
say. And I know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, I don’t 
want to. I want to just talk next time. And so, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 



November 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3061 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3030 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3030 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3030 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Walk to Raise Awareness of Suicide 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3031 
 Partnership Receives Premier’s Board of Education Award 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 
 Regina Teachers Receive Governor General’s History Award 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 
 Knights of Columbus Dinner Benefits Children’s Hospital 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 
 Queen City Marathon Raises Funds for Charity 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 
 Caroncrest Farms Celebrates 50 Years 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 
 Joint-Use School Opens in Saskatoon 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3033 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Acquisitions 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3033 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3033 
 Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3033 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3034 
 Access to Bus Services 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3035 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3035 
 Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues in the Regina Area 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3035 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3036 
 Staff Numbers in the Education System 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3036 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3036 
 Compensation for Teachers  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3037 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3037 
 Disposal of Scrap Tires 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3037 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3037 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Naming Policy of Geographic Features and Buildings Honours Former Premiers  
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3038 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3038 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3038 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3039 
 Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3039 
  



 

 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3039 
MOTIONS 
 Legislature Sitting Days 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3039 
 Committee Membership 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3040 
 Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3041 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3041 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3041 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3044 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3044 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3047 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3048 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3050 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3050 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3051 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3051 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3053 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3055 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3056 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


