


















































December 7, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 25A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3319 
 December 7, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
colleagues. I’m going to, I guess, make a number of 
introductions from people that I can see in the gallery. And I 
know that I will miss some that are here and I apologize to them 
in advance. This is my sheet, so we’re going to go by visual 
identification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In no particular order, I note that Doug Moen is in the gallery 
today. Doug of course is a long-time professional public servant 
in the province of Saskatchewan — maybe Doug would give us 
a wave — who served different governments, three different 
parties in power, and was my deputy minister for most of my 
time as Premier. He is from the great community of Cabri, 
Saskatchewan and wonderful things come from that 
community, Mr. Moen included. I am very grateful for the 
advice and counsel and service he gave. And so I want to note 
that he’s here, and I’m grateful he is, and I thank him publicly 
here in the Chamber and welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
There’s some folks from Swift Current that are here as well. 
Everett Hindley, who’s been working with me since I started in 
1999, first as a constituency assistant and then helping me in 
my job that I have now and where he’s more like a younger 
brother. He’s a gentleman. He’s got a great sense of humour. 
He’s a very hard worker, and now he’s on to other pursuits that 
I wish him well in as well. But I just want to welcome Everett 
to his Assembly. 
 
Seated beside him, Reg Howard from Regina. Reg was helpful 
to me early on when I decided to run for the leadership, one of 
the first folks to encourage me to do so and to help. And so I 
note Reg is here; we welcome him. 
 
And then some Swift Current people as well beside him, Nola 
and Dave Smith. Dave is the worship pastor at our church as 
well as a local business person, together with his wife Nola. 
And Nola is also my constituency assistant. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
if members opposite want, you know, if they’re interested in a 
real scandal, here’s one: Dave cheers for the Hamilton 
Tiger-Cats and Nola, the constituency assistant to the Premier, 
cheers for the Edmonton Eskimos. I have been wanting to get 
that off of my conscience for a very, very long time. She even 

has a little Edmonton Eskimos flag that I’ve tried to hide and 
destroy in various ways, but it is a resilient thing. And Nola 
does a great job as a constituency assistant and I’m very 
grateful for all the work she does with the constituents of Swift 
Current. 
 
There’s so many staff in the building I think that I can see up 
there. I want to single out a couple. James Parker, who has 
helped me with my remarks and as well as general 
communications in the Premier’s office and become a good 
friend. And my long-time chief of staff, Joe Donlevy, who was 
chief of staff for all but the last few months really, the 
longest-serving one in the country. And left business, and there 
was certainly some personal sacrifice for him to serve in a 
public way. And I’m very grateful to him for his friendship and 
for his help and counsel over the years. Joe is here in his 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
I see the mayor of Regina is here, Michael Fougere; Gay 
Patrick, former head of the potash producers. I’m just going to 
list . . . I won’t list everybody. I see Lee Elliott, also originally 
from Swift Current. There’s Gord Dobrowolsky. And I would 
be remiss if I didn’t introduce my friend Patrick Bundrock, 
who’s the general manager, the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Party and also a good friend that has just done a 
great service to all of us on this side, to our party, but to me 
personally. 
 
And so I know that I will have missed some, and I apologize to 
those that I have, and welcome all the members that are here in 
the gallery that are visiting today on this particular last day of 
the session. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask members of the House to 
please join with me in welcoming all of those who have been 
introduced today in the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming all of the individuals he had just 
mentioned to their Legislative Assembly. I won’t go through all 
of them, but in particular I do want to welcome Doug Moen. 
Thank you so much for being here today. Also Gay Patrick, 
who I had the opportunity to see be deservedly recognized at 
the Sask Mining Association reception last night. Also His 
Worship the mayor of Regina, Mayor Michael Fougere, is here. 
And seated next to him is his chief of staff, Kyle Addison, who 
I would call a friend but I would worry that he would think that 
I was cramping his style if I told everybody that. Also in that 
row, John Hopkins, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce is here. It’s always a pleasure to 
see you in your Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
I would also like to recognize — I’m sure he’ll be welcomed 
later on, but while I’m on my feet I might as well do it now — 
the former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
Regina Douglas Park is here seated as well, Russ Marchuk. It’s 
always a pleasure to see him. Welcome again to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I do want to recognize two other 
individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very 
special day for the Premier, his last day in the House, but less 



3320 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

importantly, but still it’s my last day in this seat as interim 
leader in the House. And so, seated in your gallery are my 
parents, Owen and Donna Sarauer, who have come here from 
time to time. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — I’m assuming they are being applauded for 
raising such a wonderful daughter, Mr. Speaker. That’s very 
well-deserved. I’d like to ask all members join me in 
welcoming all of them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in your gallery are two individuals that I 
would love to introduce. Shantel Lipp is the president of 
Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. And seated 
with her is Sean Wilson, who is past Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Heavy Construction Association — a good friend of mine, but 
is also the mayor of Buchanan. So I’d like all members . . .  
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce someone in the west gallery who was my summer 
student. We’ve become very good friends. Tye Hapke is sitting 
up there, who is also now the president of the Saskatchewan 
youth party, and is a student at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], going into law. So I’d like all members to 
welcome my guests here to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
number of people I would like to introduce as well. The Premier 
has indicated to me that he wanted to specifically recognize and 
introduce John Hopkins from the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce. And also seated in the west gallery is Tye Hapke, 
the reasonably newly elected president of the Saskatchewan 
Party Youth wing. Great people. And also seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Shantel Lipp from the Heavy 
Construction Association; former deputy premier Doug Moen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of spouses that are in the 
gallery today, as well: Valerie Doke and Debbie Michelson. 
And I apologize if there are more of which I wasn’t aware. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize today especially my own 
spouse, Sandy, who’s here. The last time Sandy was here, Frank 
Quennell was the Justice minister. He saw her coming into the 
building, beat me to the punch, and introduced her before I had 
a chance to. They used to work in the same law office, and 
Frank was always trying to outsmart me all the time and 
sometimes he was successful. So in any event, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to be able to be the one that’s introducing Sandy today and 
thank her for her long-suffering life as my spouse. 
 
And I note as well the Leader of the Opposition’s parents are 
here. I want to welcome them to the legislature as well. It’s a 
day where we recognize and thank families and friends. And the 
two leadership hopefuls on that side, they should be very glad 
that these people’s daughter is not one of the candidates 
because they would be very, very sorry. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Very quickly I’d like to also give a shout-out to Mayor Fougere 
and also to the Chair of the Regina Chamber, John Hopkins, 
from the better city in Saskatchewan. I just had . . . Also to my 
friend, Rod Donison who is here, a constituent of mine. 
 
But most importantly today, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome 
my husband to the Legislative Assembly. We all spend a lot of 
time in this place, and my husband actually had to come here to 
the Legislative Assembly to remember what I look like. And so 
I just want to say, welcome to the Legislative Assembly and 
thank you for all you do to keep our household going while I’ve 
been out busy here. So thank you very much for that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave for 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to all the members of this House, I would like to 
introduce a few guests sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to request everyone to raise hand 
when I call your name. 
 
We have Samir Patel and we have Vishna Kansara, and both are 
the small-business owners in Regina and representing the Hindu 
Samaj Regina and very good community workers. 
 
Also we have Baldeep Singh Dhindhsa with his father, Gurdeep 
Singh Dhindhsa. Mr. Speaker, Baldeep is very busy in 
community work and doing a great work and advocate for 
organ donations and have set up many swab camps and blood 
donation camps as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have ICNA — I-C-N-A — that is Islamic 
Circle of North America, all those sisters are here — Naila Asif 
Butt, Shumaila Khalid, Jahasid Jahmeed, Farzana Anwar, 
Gulnaz Khan, Shumala Siddiqi are here. They have a big social 
centre and very busy in many activities such as organizing 
charitable events and fundraising for needy people in Regina 
and all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have Surender Grewal. He is ex-president of 
Sikh Society of Regina. Now he is general secretary of Sikh 
Society of Regina. On December 16, he will be president of 
India Canada, and we all know about India Canada’s supper. I 
believe in the last supper they raised about $70,000 for 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation. 
 
We have Tajinder Hayar. He is from Punjabi Media as well. 
And we have Shahid Pervaiz. He is a long-time friend of mine. 
And I have a few of my other constituents. We have Waqar 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3321 

Bokhari. He is a best friend of mine and he is known in my 
colleagues as Bokhari. He’s been with me since my nomination 
meeting until these days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also my family is here. Attia is here, my wife, with two sons. 
One is in Campbell; two are here. Kashif and Arsalan are here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all these delegates are here to say thank you 
to the Premier of Saskatchewan for his extraordinary service for 
the people of Saskatchewan, his sacrifice for a consecutive 18 
years — 8 years MLA and 10 years as a Premier. I ask all the 
members to join me in welcoming all these valuable members 
of society in their legislative. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to welcome and to join with members to welcome some of the 
guests that are here today, or all of the guests that are here 
today. We have within this Assembly many leaders within our 
community and across our province, and I say welcome to you 
all. 
 
It’s great to have His Worship here today and to have John 
Hopkins here today as well. To have Gay Patrick, somebody 
who’s served our province and the potash producers so well 
within Saskatchewan. Great to have the Sarauers here today, 
and I concur with the Deputy Premier on his statement on that 
front as well. And thank you for being here. 
 
But I would like to join in welcoming as well in the west 
gallery, some of the leaders that have joined us here today, 
leaders from the Gujarati Samaj of Saskatchewan, who are 
leaders in business, leaders within our community. They come 
from a state in India that’s not unlike Saskatchewan, with 
agriculture and a resource base that’s quite similar, and that 
proudly build our multicultural province. It’s an honour to join 
them for the garba during Navratri. It’s a pleasure to join them 
for Diwali. It’s a pleasure to build those friendships that build 
our province. 
 
It’s also an honour to join leaders within the Sikh community 
here, leaders from the Sikh temple, from the Gurudwara that are 
here today; Surender “Gary” Grewal that’s here today. Thank 
you so much for your leadership in our community, a business 
person as well, and taking on the post with the India Canada 
Association, a very important post. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And it’s important for me to mention at this time, as we have 
the leaders that are here from the temple, from the Gurudwara, 
that are here today to say that we stand in prayer and thought 
and care for Sahil at this time, a young leader within our 
community, someone that I’ve gotten to know, who’s in critical 
condition right now, Mr. Speaker, but has a province that’s 
praying in many faiths for that young man. And those that are 
here today are raising dollars and coordinating blood drives and 
supporting parents that have come all the way from India to 
support Sahil, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say thank you to the leaders that are here today that are 

wrapping their support around Sahil at this critical time. 
They’re putting on full display the values of our province and 
extending love and care in a very meaningful way to these 
families. I welcome all that are here today, on this I guess the 
final day for the Premier here today, and I thank them for their 
attendance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of this Assembly, I want to make a couple 
of short introductions, but I do want to join with others in 
welcoming everyone to this House here today. 
 
But I do see that Al Brigden has wandered in and he’s brought 
with him the previous MLA from Estevan, our previous caucus 
Chair, Doreen Eagles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge in your gallery, Mr. 
Gord Dobrowolsky, Mr. Speaker, otherwise known, as I’ve 
been informed, as Dobber. Mr. Speaker, he is the Chair of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But I got to know Gord as he was Chair of the 
Prince Albert Parkland Health Region a number of years ago. 
And he had a business in Prince Albert where a young guy from 
Shellbrook used to wander in and talk to him about hospitals 
and such things. And I want to thank him for his time, as I 
know I was taking him away from time in his business at that 
point in time. Mr. Speaker, he also has an affinity for the 
Rosthern-Shellbrook constituencies. He likes to walk through 
the bush and scare the moose and the deer with his firearm, Mr. 
Speaker, every now and again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do ask, in all seriousness, that all members 
of this Assembly welcome Al Brigden, Doreen Eagles, and 
Gord Dobrowolsky to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook in welcoming 
a former member of this legislature, Doreen Eagles, who’s 
sitting in the west gallery. 
 
Doreen was part of the class of ’99, which I am, and the 
Premier is the class of ’99. So today is a special day, and we’re 
certainly pleased to see her here. She was our caucus Chair for 
many years. She ruled with an iron gavel, but she was very fair 
and gave each one of us an opportunity to express our opinions. 
And so I would ask all members to welcome her to her 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seating behind 
the bar in the government side here, I would like to welcome 
Russ Marchuk here today — a good friend, long-time educator 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and former MLA for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery there are two ladies up there that I 



3322 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

would like to introduce, first being Karen Marchuk, wife of 
Russ, and a long-time educator also in the province. And 
seating beside Karen is my wife Valerie. And as we all know, 
our spouses, our partners, we could not do this job without the 
strong support of our wives and spouses, so I’d like to welcome 
my wife Valerie to the Assembly. Also, I know that Black 
Friday is a major sales event in the city of Regina and across the 
world, but it doesn’t touch when my wife and Karen Marchuk 
get together and go shopping. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all 
members to welcome Russ and Karen Marchuk and my wife 
Valerie. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Doherty: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to join with members on both sides of the House in welcoming 
all these guests here today, in particular the mayor from Regina. 
As a Regina MLA, welcome, Your Worship, Kyle, and Lee, 
who are very good friends of mine that the Leader of the 
Opposition identified as well. 
 
But in particular, Mr. Speaker, there’s two gentlemen seated in 
your gallery I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly. They can’t see me and I can’t see 
them, but I know that they’re up there. And I met with them 
earlier this morning down in the cafeteria, who are here today to 
honour their friend, the Premier of Saskatchewan on his last day 
here in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and on a very bittersweet 
day for us here in the Saskatchewan Party, and that’s Cory 
Furman and Iain Harry, who go all the way back to university 
days with not only myself but with the Premier and others here 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve been extraordinarily instrumental in the development 
of this party and this Premier’s career, his political career, and 
certainly mine as well, Mr. Speaker, as well as other members 
on this side of the House, so I want to welcome Cory and Iain to 
their Legislative Assembly on this last day for the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
wondering if I could get a show of hands from anyone that 
hasn’t been introduced just yet. But anyway, in seriousness, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to very quickly introduce and to say a word of 
congratulations and thanks to an individual named Clare Isman. 
She’s now one of the senior advisers to the deputy minister to 
the Premier, but she’d recently last month finished up a stint as 
the deputy minister of Finance. 
 
And certainly in terms of the service that she has provided to 
the people of Saskatchewan — I got to see her in action as the 
Chair of the Public Service Commission a few years back — 
but certainly there’s someone that has given a lot of her life and 
talent, her abundant talent, in service of the people of 
Saskatchewan. So I’d just like to take this moment to again 
welcome everybody else, but certainly to say, Clare Isman, 
thank you very much for your service to the people of 
Saskatchewan and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Well I saw my wife, Candace, put up her 
hand when the last member made the statement, so I’d like to 
take this chance to thank her for all the good work she does 
behind the scenes to help support me in my job here in the 
legislature. And I am nervous because she’s sitting awful close 
to Mrs. Doke and Mrs. Marchuk, so I hope we can get her out 
of there very soon. But I’d like everyone to help me welcome 
her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition calling on the Sask Party government 
to support mental health emergency units. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that Saskatchewan’s mental health funding 
is among the lowest in Canada. I know in conversations with 
many of the petitioners, they’re appreciative that the 
government did come to the table around funding the mental 
health assessment unit, temporary unit, at RUH [Royal 
University Hospital], but they hope to see something more 
permanent in place once the adult emergency moves into the 
children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, in a couple of years. 
 
And I’ve spoken to people who want to see these mental health 
assessment units and beyond that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t just 
want assessment units, they want short-stay units. They want us 
to reimagine how acute mental health is treated here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to support mental health 
emergency units across the province and commit to 
supporting the otherwise funded mental health emergency 
unit in Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Regina, Saskatoon, Shellbrook, Asquith, Martensville, LeRoy, 
Dalmeny, Montmartre, and Yorkton, to just name a few. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. I do like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and 
Fillmore. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3323 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
relates to Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi was approved by Health 
Canada for use in cystic fibrosis patients with two copies of the 
F508del-CFTR mutation, aged 12 years and older; whereas 
Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic defect in the largest 
population of Canadians with cystic fibrosis, it can slow down 
the progression, allowing patients to live longer, healthier lives; 
whereas CF [cystic fibrosis] specialists have established clinical 
criteria for Orkambi, including start-and-stop criteria, these 
specialists are best suited to manage access to medication in the 
treatment of CF patients. 

 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price for 
Orkambi and make it available through the Saskatchewan 
drug plan for those who meet the conditions set by Health 
Canada and the clinical criteria established by the 
Canadian CF clinicians. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, we have a great number of 
pages. I think the petitions are signed by thousands of people, 
Mr. Speaker. And the pages that I have before the Assembly 
today, the great number of pages, the people that have signed 
this petition are from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I want 
to name a few of the communities: Yellow Grass, St. Walburg, 
Meadow Lake, Beauval, Prince Albert, Lumsden, Carrot River, 
Nipawin, Melfort, Invermay, Tisdale, Maple Creek, Rapid 
View, Flying Dust, Green Lake, Buffalo Narrows, Loon Lake, 
Lloydminster, Dorintosh, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Cole Bay, Marcelin, 
Kelvington, Melville. And the list goes on and on as the names 
are signed from all throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
and beyond. And I’m so proud to present this petition today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to present 
a petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. The people who have 
signed this petition want to bring to your attention the 
following: the Sask Party has hiked taxes on Saskatchewan 
families and businesses by one billion dollars per year, and at 
the same time the Sask Party’s handed over 100 million in tax 
breaks to corporations and the wealthy and well connected. 
 
The Sask Party’s new tax on crop insurance is a devastating hit 
on producers. Many small and medium-sized businesses, 
including those in the restaurant, tourism, and construction 
industries, will be hit hard by the Sask Party tax hikes. These 
businesses will be forced to pass these rising costs on to their 
customers. This is hurting job-creating businesses and 
producers and will only cause more damage to the economy and 
do nothing to the 40,000 people in Saskatchewan that are 
looking for work. I’d like to read the prayer. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Sask Party to immediately stop 
their unfair tax hikes on Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who’ve signed the petition here 
today are from Regina and Coronach. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The individuals who signed this petition want to draw these 
following points to your attention: that the Diefenbaker bridge 
in Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the southern 
part of the province to the North, and that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. That the local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
critical infrastructure issue. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition come from the 
community of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to restore funding to 
post-secondary institutions. Some of the items these citizens 
wish to bring to your attention: that the Sask Party is making 
students and their families pay for Sask Party financial 
mismanagement; that Saskatchewan students already pay the 
second-highest tuition fees in Canada; and that the Sask Party 
has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling their first 
home plan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Estevan, 
Saskatoon, and Regina. I do so present. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 



3324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

petition calling on the Sask Party to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across this 
province; and they hiked education property tax by 67 million 
but cut total government funding for education by $121 million. 
Even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids 
are getting less. And the Sask Party cuts mean that students will 
lose much needed supports in their classroom, including busing 
for kindergartners and programs to help children with special 
needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education system pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to reopen 
the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. The closure of this 
facility represents a step backwards for those who have been 
incarcerated, a step backwards for their opportunity to be 
rehabilitated; a step backwards for their families to be close to 
them; a step backwards for the community, with fewer 
employment opportunities; a step backwards for our province as 
a whole in terms of decreasing crime, increasing safety, 
increasing well-being. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
The individuals signing this petition hail from the community of 
Buffalo Narrows. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions to re-establish emergency access to Balgonie, a 
community that’s been shut out with the design of the bypass, 
and community and emergency service providers are incredibly 
concerned about what this means for the safety of those within 
the community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and actions to leave the west-in, west-out driving 
access for vehicles into and out of Balgonie at the 
intersection of Highway 1 and Main Street. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 

the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway 1 
and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection 
but would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of White City, 
Avonhurst, Balgonie, Pilot Butte, and Edgeley. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Couple Recognized as  
Outstanding Young Farmers 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every 
year Canada’s Outstanding Young Farmers national event 
brings recognition to outstanding farm couples in Canada 
between the ages of 18 and 39. These couples have exemplified 
excellence in their profession, while fostering better urban-rural 
relations. Couples are nominated from multiple provinces 
before national co-winners are selected at the annual 
conference, this year held in Penticton, BC [British Columbia]. 
 
This year Tannis and Derek Axten from Minton, Saskatchewan 
were selected as Saskatchewan’s Outstanding Young Farmers 
nominees. Tannis and Derek operate Axten Farms with their 
children, Kate and Brock. They are the third generation of 
farmers in their family, still farming the land their grandfather 
homesteaded in 1916. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Axten farm is a 5,500 acre no-till farm, and 
Tannis and Derek have worked on innovative ideas to improve 
their farming operations through soil advancements. Tannis has 
a Bachelor of Education, majoring in biology, which has helped 
them determine the best practices in their mission towards 
improving the soil health and regenerating their farmland. They 
have implemented intercrops, companion crops, and cover 
crops, as well as controlled traffic farming and composting to 
improve their soil productivity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that Tannis and Derek, along 
with the nominees from Quebec, were named this year’s 
Canada’s Outstanding Young Farmers. On behalf of this entire 
Assembly, I’d like to congratulate Tannis and Derek on this 
prestigious honour and wish them the best as they continue to 
discover and implement creative farming practices. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Saskatoon Resident Wins Multicultural 
Youth Leadership Award 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 
recognize a constituent of mine, Bwe Doh Soe, who recently 
received the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan’s 
Multicultural Youth Leadership Award. Bwe is a leader in his 
own community of Karen refugees but also in the broader 
Saskatoon community. As a child, Bwe came to Canada with 
his family, fleeing ethnic cleansing in his home country of 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3325 

Burma in 2007. He was grateful to be safe with his family here 
but saw early on that it was important to preserve the Karen 
language and culture. Over time, Bwe also understood the 
importance of providing opportunities for Karen people to 
integrate into the community. 
 
I first met Bwe this summer in the lead-up to the Karen 
community culture and language camp, where he has worked 
with Karen leaders to facilitate a youth camp every summer for 
the past five years to help maintain the Karen language and 
culture here. 
 
Bwe has also developed a Karen youth leadership group that is 
learning about the history of indigenous peoples in Canada, as 
well as the cultural practices and protocols of local indigenous 
groups in Saskatoon. He has promoted learning about 
reconciliation and what it means in practical ways, such as 
arranging an elders’ gathering of indigenous and Karen elders 
in order to share their experiences and to learn from one other. 
 
I ask that all members join me in congratulating Bwe on his 
leadership award and wish him all the best in his own journey 
of reconciliation and his work with others on theirs. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Team Saskatchewan Places Fourth at National 
Women’s Championship 

 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
highlight and congratulate Hannah Pennell, a talented hockey 
player from Kamsack. Hannah is a member of Team Sask 
under-18 female hockey who took fourth place this year at the 
national tournament in Quebec City. This tournament was a 
major landmark as the under-18 team placed higher in national 
competition this past month than ever before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Hannah is following very closely in the footsteps 
of her siblings; her two brothers and sister had very 
distinguished and impressive careers themselves. Hannah began 
playing hockey at the age of four, playing with Kamsack teams 
until recently when she became a member of the Parkland Lions 
AA team based out of Springside. Mr. Speaker, though Team 
Sask fell short in the overtime loss against BC in the bronze 
medal game, they made history and represented our province 
well on the national stage. Hannah is very grateful for the 
opportunity to represent her community and is looking forward 
to continuing her career with Team Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask the members to join me in 
congratulating Hannah and the under-18 team of Saskatchewan 
girls’ hockey on a successful and historic fourth-place finish at 
the nationals in 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Sports Club Provides Access to Community Sports 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
acknowledge the work of Mr. Shakeel Ahmed, founder and 
president of the Envision Sports Club in Saskatoon. Shakeel is a 
constituent of Saskatoon Fairview, and I had the chance to meet 

him this past summer at Eid celebrations. 
 
When I met Shakeel, I could immediately tell that he was 
passionate and an advocate for sports and he saw sports as a 
way to teach children about responsibility and discipline. I had 
the opportunity to attend Envision Sports Club’s first soccer 
camp, a free activity they ran on Saturdays this summer, where 
kids from all over Saskatoon were welcomed to come and learn 
soccer skills. 
 
They even had a special coach, Jawad Hassan, sharing his 
expertise with the kids. Jawad is a very talented FIFA 
[Fédération Internationale de Football Association] certified 
coach and international soccer player who represented the 
Pakistan junior team in various international tours. 
 
I understand that Envision Sports Club is now expanding and 
taking registration for field hockey, cricket, volleyball, 
badminton, and athletics, in addition to soccer. They are a 
non-profit organization, so they are charging small registration 
and insurance fees but are not charging any coaching fees. They 
are working to make sure that the community sports are 
available and affordable and serving the community in a 
positive way. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Envision Sports 
Club on a successful start-up, and to thank Shakeel Ahmed, and 
all the team members of their club for their volunteer efforts. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Government Principles 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
principles for members on this side of the House is efficient 
government. That’s why we introduced lean into our health care 
system which has achieved 154 million in savings since 2008. 
We have allowed for private MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging] for patients who wish to purchase them, which also 
provides for those on the public waiting list to access MRIs at 
no cost to the taxpayer.  
 
We have reduced the CVA [central vehicle agency] fleet and 
utilized the private sector, reducing CVA spending by an 
estimated 7 million. We have reduced travel and 
communication costs across the government compared to the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a record and a plan going 
forward to keep improving our province because one of the 
other principles is constant economic and social improvement. 
That is why we introduced a tax plan to help small businesses, 
which the NDP voted against. That’s why we introduced a 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change strategy which fights the 
effects of climate change, but not noise, without the burden of a 
carbon tax, which the NDP voted against. That is why we 
introduced ride sharing as another tool against drunk driving, 
which NDP members don’t support, although we did this 
without getting Trudeau Liberal permission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session we have listened and waited for new 
ideas from the members opposite, especially the leadership 
candidates, but all we have seen is the same old, noisy NDP. 



3326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Couples Celebrate Their 70th Wedding Anniversary 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
highlight two very special couples who live in my constituency 
and are both celebrating their 70th wedding anniversary. 
 
Ruth and Neil Crosby were married in 1947 in Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan. Neil worked for the sodium sulphate plant in 
this area. They were blessed with one son. They moved to 
Medicine Hat, where Neil worked for the city for 38 years, but 
then they returned to live in Saskatoon to enjoy their retirement. 
Ruth wrote me a letter at my request recently saying that 
“Seventy years have passed quickly and happily, and we feel 
fortunate we are still able to live on our own and enjoy life.” 
 
Roland and Therese Dupuis were also married in 1947 in 
Domremy, Saskatchewan. They lived in the Shellbrook area, 
where they operated a grain farm. Together they raised five 
children and now have seven grandchildren and eight 
great-grandchildren. They are a very active and social couple 
spending time with family during the summer at Chitek Lake 
and relaxing in the winter in Arizona. They still enjoy playing 
cards and visiting with family and friends. 
 
It is so encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to see both couples celebrate 
their later years in life together in Saskatchewan, where their 
love stories began. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please 
join me in congratulating Ruth and Neil Crosby, and Roland 
and Therese Dupuis on 70 years of marriage. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Merry Christmas 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as we came into 
the building we saw the lights adorning the building. We hear 
the songs filling the hallways. We notice that magnificent tree 
that is displayed in the rotunda. The Christmas season is upon 
us. This is truly a special time of the year, a season filled with 
joy and laughter and sharing and giving. What is most 
important is the time we spend with our loved ones. Members 
of this House can attest to the joy spending this time at home, 
especially after spending the last few weeks here in Regina 
looking forward to that home-cooked Christmas meal. 
 
But as we enjoy the beauty of the season, let us not forget the 
less fortunate that are among us. Two thousand years ago, the 
birth of our Saviour, Jesus Christ, delivered an eternal message 
of love, compassion, and hope that we are our brother’s and 
sister’s keepers and we should do unto others as we would have 
them do unto us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the values that guide our citizens of all 
faiths and all backgrounds and have helped keep the people of 
our province then and earned a reputation of kindness and 
character. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish a Merry Christmas and happy holiday and a 
blessed new year to all. Merry Christmas. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] thought there was enough reason to have the 
Premier answer some questions during their investigation. So 
should a judicial inquiry or legislative committee also want to 
ask him some questions after he has resigned his seat, will the 
Premier commit today to return and testify? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in the past, I’ll 
rule nothing out. But while we’re asking hypothetical questions 
on this day, I would invite the members opposite and the Leader 
of the Opposition to answer a hypothetical question. Should, for 
example, the RCMP investigation bear out no further concerns, 
no charges, and should any other review of the government that 
we decide to do demonstrate the fact that the Global 
Transportation Hub is not a scandal — it might be a number of 
things but is not that — will she and her colleagues be prepared 
to admit that, and even apologize to those characters they’ve 
smeared? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this is the last day we get to ask 
the Premier questions in QP [question period], so this is the last 
chance to make good on his promise to be the most open and 
transparent government in the history of the province. Mr. 
Speaker, as the Premier knows well, since taking a leave to run 
for premier, the deputy minister to the Premier has said that the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal would not have 
happened under her leadership because she would raise the 
ethical bar. Does the Premier agree with the person he hired to 
be his deputy minister? Could better leadership have prevented 
the Sask Party’s GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
GTH, and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as we have done on this side of the House, we have 
worked with the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor 
identified that there were a number of changes that government 
needed to make to ensure that the types of problems aren’t 
repeated by government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of those recommendations have been implemented by 
Global Transportation Hub as well as Highways, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s in stark contrast . . . As I’ve said before to the fact 
that we worked openly with the Provincial Auditor, gave the 
Provincial Auditor access to all information that she required to 
do her work, in contrast to the members opposite, who did not 
go that far when it came to questions of concerns in terms of 
operations of their government, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue to operate that way on this side of the House under this 
Premier and under the next premier. 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3327 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, no clear answer, same tired 
lines. So let’s try another one. Even though the Premier has 
repeatedly said that Bill Boyd got an opinion from the Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner before pushing ahead with the land 
deals at the heart of the Sask Party’s GTH scandal, the Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner has made it clear that that never 
happened. Why did the Premier make that claim and why did 
the government not seek an opinion after the commission 
publicly clarified that he had not ruled on these deals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member is talking about in terms of what the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner actually ruled on, I believe that letter 
was made public. It was on a news website, Mr. Speaker, on the 
CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] website for all to 
see. So in terms of what the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
actually ruled upon, it’s not for us to say what he did or didn’t 
rule upon. That was made public. The record of the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner and the ruling stands on its own. And it 
was made public, Mr. Speaker, as were the recommendations of 
the Provincial Auditor in terms of the work that her office 
conducted with respect to reviewing this matter. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have worked with the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner. We have worked with the Provincial Auditor. 
We have worked with all authorities that are reviewing this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the way that this government 
operates and will continue to operate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, more spin and still no answers. 
In 2015, trying to claim that there was no conflict of interest, 
Bill Boyd said, “I have never met Robert Tappauf.” But by now 
anyone who is following this story knows that Bill Boyd has all 
kinds of dealings with the Tappauf family. Some of their land is 
even involved with Mr. Boyd’s Chinese irrigation system. So 
after the Conflict of Interest Commissioner made it clear that he 
had not been asked to investigate a conflict of interest, why did 
no one in the Sask Party ask him to look into it? Were they 
afraid of what they might find? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, these questions have been asked and answered, Mr. 
Speaker, by the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, by the 
Provincial Auditor’s office. Obviously there are further reviews 
that are taking place, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and as the 
Premier has indicated in the past, this government’s not going 
to rule out taking further action once those reviews are done. 
 
And I would repeat the question that he asked earlier. Should 
those reviews come back and determine, as the Provincial 
Auditor had indicated, that there was no wrongdoing in any of 
these matters, will the members opposite apologize? And will 
they apologize to the House and to people, private citizens, and 
former member of this House in which . . . who they have 
smeared? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has also let the 
GTH get embroiled in an immigration scheme. There are 
accusations of false claims about the Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program and huge amounts of money not being 
returned to people who believed their claims. 
 
Will the minister finally condemn these actions, and commit to 
investigating them and ending all relationships with any 
companies that are breaking the rules and taking advantage of 
innocent people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program does not give 
preferential treatment to any individual or company — does 
not, has not, will not. Further to that, Mr. Speaker, companies 
cannot apply for SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program]. Applications are made by individuals only. 
 
During this decade of growth unmatched in the last 80 years, 
our population has grown by over 161,000 people compared to 
the NDP’s last decade in power, where the population actually 
dropped 15,000, Mr. Speaker. In 2002 the NDP processed 25 
SINP claims. We’re doing over 500 a month now, Mr. Speaker, 
a clear demonstration of confidence in our system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, there have been multiple 
allegations of fraud and criminal charges have been laid. Still 
earlier this year the government welcomed one of the key 
players in these accusations, someone whose business partner is 
on the Interpol watch list. Mr. Speaker. What will it take for the 
Ministry of Economy to put an end to all of this and protect the 
victims of this scandal and the integrity of the immigrant 
program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, so much of the preamble of the hon. member’s 
question, a new member, is just fundamentally wrong. The 
minister has just answered very directly the allegations that she 
has made. Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the record of this 
government with respect to the immigration program that we’ve 
implemented, a marked change from when members opposite 
had the chance to be in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it is true 
actually. The member for Nutana is saying it’s not. We’ve made 
fundamental changes wherein the previous years, the previous 
10-year period of their time in power, I think there was about 
26,000 people under the nominee program that came, 
newcomers; since then, 92,000 people. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, when she was asking similar 



3328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

questions not long ago on this particular issue, said this: “Mr. 
Speaker, why is the Premier letting a government website host a 
misleading advertisement to help create jobs for other people 
while Saskatchewan people need his help so much more?” 
What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? If anybody becomes a 
citizen of this province through the nominee program, they’re 
not other people. They are our people, Mr. Speaker. They are 
our people — 167,000 more people living in the province today 
than when members opposite were the government, Mr. 
Speaker. They are not other people, these newcomers. They are 
welcomed here, Mr. Speaker, and we stand behind our 
immigration policy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project 
and Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government has paid out 
millions in lawsuit settlements stemming from their land 
expropriation practices. Can the minister finally provide the 
total amount that was paid out in lawsuits — not the total 
amount of the purchase — over land sales at the GTH and the 
bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make it perfectly clear. 
There were no lawsuits. There are no lawsuits. There are 
pending cases where landowners are dealing with the ministry 
on settlement on cost of land. 
 
They are not lawsuits, Mr. Speaker. We have settled . . . 
There’s, I think, 19 claims left to go. We had a budget. We had 
a budget for land acquisitions, Mr. Speaker. And we are well 
under that budget right now, Mr. Speaker, and what it’s cost us 
to acquisition that land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it seems we’re amending The 
Interpretation Act for a new definition of “lawsuit,” Mr. 
Speaker. These are lawsuits. Now also, Mr. Speaker, the last 
time I asked, the minister was unable to explain why Highways 
paid such a high price for land they bought from Loblaw when 
at the same time, on the same day, the GTH sold a similar 
parcel of land to a private company for far less. After looking 
into it, can the minister now explain what happened and why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, in 2009 Loblaw acquired 160 
acres under trust conditions, Mr. Speaker. And at this time the 
land was neither serviced or neither subdivided and had no 
roads or access to it, Mr. Speaker. Also Loblaw at that time did 
not know exactly how much land they were going to require at 
that time or even where they were going to locate their building, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Eventually Loblaw determined that they needed about just over 
80 acres, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of that, they returned that 
land back to the ministry and there was a value put on it at that 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s land flips go 
on. In 2011 the government sold a parcel of land near the 
Regina bypass for just $20,000 per acre, but in 2015 they 
bought it back for over $400,000 per acre, Mr. Speaker. Why 
did they buy land for 20 times more than what they sold it for 
just four years earlier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, there are so many issues that 
could have come in to that land being repurchased, Mr. 
Speaker. It could have been rezoned. It could have been 
reclassed. It could have been serviced, Mr. Speaker. There 
could have been a lot of different things that have changed the 
value of that land from the time it was purchased till the time 
that it was bought back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I think that minister needs to be 
briefed a lot better than he has been. Now while the Premier 
was off boasting about Boundary dam 3 at his last meeting, was 
he clear with the governors that the province’s own power 
company doesn’t think that expanding CCS [carbon capture and 
storage] makes sense? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to be able to say that over 1.8 million 
tonnes have been captured since the operations have started up. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a technology that has garnered a lot of 
interest. Earlier this year in Regina we had a symposium where 
there were over a dozen countries that were represented, 
knowing the fact that there are 1,600 coal-fired power plants 
that are on the books to be built or under construction around 
the world, Mr. Speaker. And so this is technology that we need 
to further development. 
 
Certainly in discussions with any number of stakeholders, Mr. 
Speaker, the government has been very clear about the 
operational challenges, particularly in the start-up period, Mr. 
Speaker. We are sharing all of that knowledge with individuals. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Environment 
was just in China and witnessed an MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] between the knowledge centre and agencies in 
China, Mr. Speaker. So there is a great deal of attention and a 
great deal of interest in this technology. And if we want to be 
serious about reducing emissions, this technology needs to be a 
part of that. 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3329 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, their so-called plan to address 
carbon emissions says they need to “determine the viability of 
extending carbon capture use.” Now, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower 
says the business case for CCS is weak, and the CEO of 
SaskPower says that expansion is highly unlikely and time is 
up. Will the minister finally tell Saskatchewan people if he 
agrees with the experts at SaskPower and confirm that they will 
not expand CCS? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite knows that a decision hasn’t 
been made, a recommendation hasn’t been brought forward in 
terms of what SaskPower’s next steps are for the most 
immediate decisions that need to be made around coal-fired 
generation. She will also know, or should know, that there are a 
number of units over a number of, frankly, decades, in terms of 
when those decisions need to be made. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, this is technology that the 
world’s going to need. That’s why the federal Environment 
minister was just in China to witness the signing of an MOU 
between the knowledge centre and agencies in China, Mr. 
Speaker. This is why individuals such as Katherine Romanak 
were just in Regina from the University of Texas and spoke to 
the need for developing, further develop this technology, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re a part of that. We need to be a part of that going forward. 
We have technology. We have knowledge here in 
Saskatchewan, and we need to partner all around the world if 
we truly want to see emissions being reduced going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[11:00] 
 

Licensing of Vehicles on Job Sites 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
the Sask Party threw a fit over the Alberta licence plates, they 
didn’t consider trade deals. They didn’t think about 
Saskatchewan contractors and workers in other provinces, and 
they didn’t even first engage with Alberta, Mr. Speaker. They 
also didn’t cancel their $2 billion contract with a foreign 
company that is hiring out-of-province workers. So how can the 
Saskatchewan Party justify spending money in court battles 
while they’re handing out taxpayers’ money and Saskatchewan 
jobs to an out-of-country company? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very 
interesting. The people of the province of Saskatchewan have 
an expectation of all of us I think that we would represent their 
interests in this Legislative Assembly to the best of our ability, 
but also that they would stand for our interests against, for 
example, a federal government if a federal government were to 
do something like impose a carbon tax. 

Earlier in this week — and she’s talking from her chair now — 
the critic that was up just a while ago wanted to know if the 
Minister of the Environment, if the Government of 
Saskatchewan had checked with the feds before we announced 
our plan to reduce emissions and to continue to oppose a carbon 
tax. We made it pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. No, the federal 
government that unilaterally imposed a carbon tax, no, we 
didn’t check with them. The federal government that changed 
the rules on Energy East and wrecked that pipeline, no, we 
didn’t check with them. We don’t check with the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. We will check with the people of this 
province and defend their interests. 
 
Now, interesting. Now the Deputy Leader stands up and says, 
well did you check with Alberta first before you undertook this 
measure to protect Saskatchewan companies? The construction 
association has joined us today. They’re the ones that are 
saying, Mr. Speaker, that there are some practices in Alberta 
that need to be addressed. That’s exactly what the minister 
announced yesterday. No, we didn’t check with Alberta; we 
defended the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. And may 
I say thank you to the member for Rosemont who’s running for 
the NDP leadership, because just a few years ago here’s what he 
said: 
 

It’s also a matter of acting in the interests of Saskatchewan 
people and companies and not selling out, not acting like 
Boy Scouts when it comes to trade, Mr. Speaker, but acting 
in a way that puts the interests of Saskatchewan people and 
businesses first. 

 
If only, Mr. Speaker, their words matched their actions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
demanding out-of-province trucks be disguised, and they’re 
bragging about handing the contract for and control of the 
largest infrastructure project in Saskatchewan’s history to a 
foreign company who cut off Main Street access to Balgonie 
and designed traffic circles that don’t work for transport trucks, 
for farm equipment, and emergency personnel. With their 
newly found courage, Mr. Speaker, will the Saskatchewan Party 
step up and get Vinci to fix the bypass problems and get 
Balgonie’s access back? Will he do that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of the 
Regina bypass project. Over 80 per cent of that project is 
Saskatchewan contractors doing work, Mr. Speaker, and if you 
notice . . . [inaudible] . . . the Regina bypass vehicles are all 
purchased here from dealers in the city of Regina. They’re 
plated here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have no problems standing in this House any day, Mr. 
Speaker, and defending Saskatchewan companies and 
Saskatchewan contractors to do work in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. I will stand here all day if I have to, to defend 
Saskatchewan companies, Saskatchewan contractors to do the 



3330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

work. The Regina bypass is a good project. 
 
We have an MOU signed with the town of Balgonie. We have 
addressed their concerns. And the bypass is going well, and 
those bypasses are open and working very fluently, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Truth and Reconciliation Issues 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was first 
elected, he spoke a lot about reconciliation, and he, as well as 
we all, acknowledged that we’re all treaty people. 
 
It’s 10 years later, and he has a Minister of Education who 
didn’t understand treaty education. First Nations employment is 
close to 20 per cent. Stand-your-ground laws are being called 
for. Communities are being cut off. Programs are being cut. 
And there’s still no apology for the Sixties Scoop. Mr. Speaker, 
why does the Premier think he wasn’t able to do more on 
reconciliation? Is this his biggest failure? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the comments made by me, again we have repeatedly 
committed to fulsome and continued treaty education in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier this week, Mr. O’Soup filed his report, and certainly the 
important issues that he references take cross-ministry efforts to 
address. And the same goes of course for addressing TRC 
[Truth and Reconciliation Commission] and truth and 
reconciliation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. O’Soup referenced bullying initiatives in education. He 
referenced La Loche of course and communities in the North, 
Mr. Speaker. The tragedy of almost two years ago stays with us 
all. We recently announced we were moving ahead with the 
renovation project at the Dene High School in La Loche to help 
to heal that community, to address all the issues there that we 
can. 
 
We have engaged with those communities, Mr. Speaker. 
Ministers have been to La Loche, have been to La Ronge to 
listen multiple times — not just in times of crisis, Mr. Speaker, 
but all the time — to heal and build on what we can, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that is certainly not the answer that 
that question deserves, but I’ll move on. Mr. Speaker, first the 
Sask Party said that they could do nothing. Then they 
announced that they’d match some aid. Now some limited relief 
is being forwarded in the form of PDAP [provincial disaster 
assistance program]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers, APAS [Agricultural Producers 

Association of Saskatchewan], and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] have all been clear that 
these dollars are welcome, but they are inadequate and they 
won’t help many who are struggling right now. And I know that 
the Minister of Agriculture knows this. So why won’t they just 
deliver the disaster relief that is so desperately needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have done 
a number of things. We’ve helped municipalities to assist 
producers in disposal of stock that perished in the fires. We’ve 
provided veterinary services, dispatched veterinarians to check 
and treat animals that were injured in the fire. We’ve given the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association $100,000 to dispense 
to the victims of this fire as they see fit, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
on the ground in the area, and I think they know best where the 
money should go. And more recently, PDAP has agreed that 
they will cover losses of winter grazing grass that’s been burnt 
off in these fires. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the mother of a child 
living with autism was here, and we asked on her behalf if the 
Sask Party would reverse the cuts that are damaging our kids’ 
classrooms across this province. And instead of looking Katie 
in the eye and answering her questions, the minister read from 
prepared notes that covered an entire decade but ignored the 
current context. And then she thanked Katie for her fundraising 
success to make up for the Sask Party’s failures. My question is 
simple: would the minister like to try that answer again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will repeat again, 
Mr. Speaker, that it was lovely to have Ms. Emde here 
yesterday, and again commend her on her amazing fundraising 
and awareness-raising efforts. Her Inside Out campaign, Mr. 
Speaker, is both poignant and very effective. 
 
Our commitment to autism and autism funding as a 
government, Mr. Speaker, was outlined yesterday. The way 
funding works, from an education perspective of course, is that 
supports for learning is distributed to each school division, 
which is what I outlined yesterday, Mr. Speaker — a quarter of 
a billion this year, 1.5 billion since 2012, Mr. Speaker. Supports 
for learning may be used for both the salary costs or non-salary 
costs in divisions, related to those supports for learning. 
 
But it is up to each division, Mr. Speaker, to determine how 
those funds are best used. Supports for speech-language 
pathologists and occupational therapists, both of which Ms. 
Emde was calling for yesterday, are included in services 
provided by supports for learning funding. These have gone up 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. Some divisions have faced 
some challenges, but overall, in terms of those FTEs [full-time 
equivalent] and staffing and teachers, Mr. Speaker, the message 
and the view is good. 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3331 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, from not acknowledging that they 
are failing students, to showing a complete lack of 
understanding about curriculum and diversity to claiming that 
Connaught School was a P3 success when it was a traditional 
build, Mr. Speaker, every day that minister shows just how 
ill-prepared she is to deal with her file. Will the minister please 
offer Saskatchewan parents some comfort and commit today to 
resigning from cabinet before we return here in March? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, on this side it is all about 
passion for education and the students of this province. Not to 
pick overly on one leadership candidate on that side, Mr. 
Speaker, but really, the member for Regina Rosemont has said 
repeatedly that “Under the Sask Party government, we went 
through a resource boom and the government has underfunded 
education.” Not that old classic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know where the member has been for the last decade, 
but let’s take a short walk down memory lane. The Education 
budget is now $2 billion, Mr. Speaker; the last year of the NDP, 
under 1. We’ve opened 40 brand new and replacement schools, 
21 this year including nine joint-use schools in new and 
growing communities, a model that’s setting the trend for other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker; 176 schools closed under them. We’ve 
undertaken 25 major renovations. Emergent fund under the 
NDP, zero; we created one. Preventative maintenance and 
renewal under them, zero; we created that too. Over 1.5 billion 
in supports for learning funding since 2005. 
 
Early years plan created under this government, close to 6,000 
more child care spaces — double what they were under the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. Increases in graduation rates, the highest in 
20 years. Reading rates up 10 per cent since 2013. And now 
we’re joining the world in introducing coding to classrooms. 
Broader, deeper, common sense supports in math. Finding ways 
to attract more French teachers to the province. And invoking 
the notwithstanding clause to protect school choice. A lot can 
change in 10 years, Mr. Speaker, and boy, has it ever. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Question period is over. We’ll get to do this 
all again in March. 
 
I’m advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here 
for Royal Assent. All please rise. 
 
[11:15] 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

[At 11:15 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 84 - The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment 

Act, 2017 
Bill No. 100 - The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 116 - The Saskatchewan Employment (Interpersonal 

Violence Leave) Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 117 - The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:17.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask for leave to have permission of the Assembly to use 
the member from Swift Current’s proper name. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTION 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Farewell to Brad Wall 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I 
will be moving: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly give thanks and pay tribute 
to Premier Brad Wall for his 18 years of service to the 
people of Saskatchewan, as the member for Swift Current, 
as Leader of the Opposition, and as Premier, and for his 
many contributions to the people and province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I stand today . . . Well actually, I stand a lot of things in this 
House, usually because I’ve forgotten my speaking notes. Some 
of the members on both sides of the House have actually had a 
bit of a laugh at my expense, but only one of them actually had 
the courage to call me Standy McStandface. He said he was 
getting me back for referring to him as a lame-duck premier, 



3332 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

which I did the morning after he announced his retirement. 
 
With the upcoming retirement of Brad Wall — and I have a 
hard time saying that, but I’ll work at it — we have heard many 
thank yous, many tributes, many testimonials. We’ve heard 
what a remarkable communicator Brad Wall is, how he has the 
ability to make Saskatchewan feel proud, and that 
Saskatchewan now takes its rightful place in Confederation. We 
have heard how he is a tireless advocate for our province. He’s 
not afraid to take on the federal government, the Prime 
Minister, other trading nations, even the former mayor of 
Montreal. We’ve also heard about his commitment to the 
Riders, and how he’s the type of a guy you’d want for a next 
door neighbour. 
 
But what I’d like to do instead of droning on with more of the 
same, I want to relate a little bit about him as a co-worker and a 
friend. Some of you will know that over the years I have played 
the occasional prank. But you should know that no matter what 
I would do, he would have to top it. 
 
On one occasion I’d gone myself to a CPA [Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association] dinner at the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
For those of you that don’t know about CPA events, they’re 
long, stuffy events where they seat you with people that you 
don’t know. On my way home, I get a call from Everett 
Hindley, Brad Wall’s assistant, who said, “The Premier wants 
to see you tomorrow right after caucus. Something about what 
you said at the CPA dinner.” He gave me no details. 
 
I went home and I started agonizing about what it could’ve been 
that I had said. I didn’t have a speaking role at the event, so it 
had to have been something that I said at the table with these 
people that I didn’t know. I don’t drink, but I’ve been known to 
make the odd comment that later requires an apology. So in my 
mind, I relived the evening in excruciating detail, even as to 
who was at the adjacent urinal in the washroom. 
 
I narrowed it down to five or six possibilities — nothing 
definite, but a handful of potential mistakes. No one I knew, so 
I decided that I would make the best of it. I would just fall on 
my sword, start apologizing, and hoping that the ensuing 
conversation would provide me with some identity of who it 
might have been or what I had done. 
 
So after caucus, I trudged down the hall for yet another visit. 
When I get there, Brad and Everett were laughing. They knew 
the agony that I had gone through. The answer was that they 
had conspired with and joined forces with each other to get me 
back at something that I had done to Everett months before. He 
never, ever forgets. 
 
A year or so ago, I was cleaning up from the campaign and I 
was throwing out an old banner that had a picture of my face 
about three feet high. I couldn’t bring myself to throw out 
something that I regarded as, well, quite beautiful, even though 
Sandy instructed me that I should. So I carefully cut out the 
picture. I waited until Brad was out of town. I go to see Ruth in 
his office and with a small bit of trepidation, I stuck it on the 
wall in his washroom. After he returned, I waited for the 
expected laughter or ribbing. It never came. 
 
After several days he takes me aside and he says, “I don’t know 

what you were planning when I was away but whatever it is, 
Ruth is furious with you. You better go down and make it 
right.” So I go down to see Ruth, who deadpanned it absolutely. 
She said and I quote, “This is not at all funny. You might not 
have respect for the individual but you should have respect for 
that office.” I said, “Ruth, you were in on it. You let me in.” 
She said, “I had no idea what you were doing in there.” I carried 
in a three-foot-high picture of my face. I was dumbfounded and 
I thought, what next? I agonized for a while. I spent some time 
considering alternate careers. 
 
Well the reality is this: I had done something to Ruth earlier so 
he and Ruth schemed to get back at me for what I had done to 
Ruth. So they let me stew for several weeks. Then they went 
out to the parking lot and they stuck the picture on the 
passenger side of my car. 
 
So I go and I get in the driver’s side, drive down Albert, stop at 
Tim’s, go inside for coffee. I come out, there’s a half a dozen of 
the usual Tim guys standing around and looking at the car. One 
of them shouts, there he is. Another one says, who are you? 
Why do you have a picture of your face on your car? An elderly 
lady looked at the picture and said, why don’t you get your real 
face airbrushed like that picture? Anyway I later learned that the 
Minister of Health had a hand in it as well so I want him to 
know, publicly, that he is on my list now as well. 
 
Recently a number of us attended the opening of the medical 
isotopes facility at the U of S campus. The area is highly 
radioactive so we were required to wear these blue slip-on 
booties over our shoes. We were instructed to be very careful 
where we went, where we stood, and what we touched. So on 
the way out we go through a testing area where they have a 
wand. So I’m at the back of the line and when I get up to the 
front, the technician checks my one bootie and she says, you’re 
contaminated. Let me see your other foot. So I hold up the other 
foot and she says, that one’s contaminated as well. Let me see 
your hands. I hold out my hands and she says, those are 
contaminated. What were you touching in there? 
 
So I don’t know. I’ve got this fear. I look at her and she’s got 
this, maybe a smirk, but I didn’t know. I don’t know the person. 
So I’m having this fear factor that maybe I’m going to turn 
green, glow in the dark, grow gills. Then I look up and there’s 
the Premier and the Minister of Health standing in the doorway 
killing themselves laughing at my discomfort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Brad, you will be missed. Every one of us regards Brad as a 
friend. To him I say, thank you; don’t be a stranger. To all of 
us, he has been not just a colleague, but also a friend. He knows 
who has health issues, who is dealing with aging parents, who is 
dealing with children. He cares and shows it. The incredible 
kindness and amazing statements following the deaths of MLAs 
Parent and Phillips demonstrate his humanity and how much he 
cares. His humour and kindness are special. 
 
So from all of us, Mr. Premier — I can’t say Brad in here; I just 
can’t do it — we thank you. We wish you, Tami, and your 
family all the best. We hope that your remaining weeks as a 
lame-duck premier go well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the motion: 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3333 

That the Legislative Assembly pay thanks and pay tribute 
to Brad Wall for his 18 years of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan as the member for Swift Current, as leader 
of the opposition, and as Premier, and for his many 
contributions to the people and province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan has 
moved the following motion: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly thanks and pay tribute to 
the Premier, Brad Wall, for his 18 years of service to the 
people of Saskatchewan as the member for Swift Current, 
as leader of the opposition, and as Premier for his many 
contributions to the people and province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first of 
all, I can’t top that speech from the Deputy Premier. I’m not 
even going to try, but I do want to give some words today. Mr. 
Speaker, as it is every single time I have the opportunity to rise 
in this place, whether it’s as the representative of the good 
people of Regina Douglas Park or as Leader of the Official 
Opposition and on behalf of all Saskatchewan New Democrats, 
it is an honour for me to join in this debate and second the 
motion of the Deputy Premier and say a few words about the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. But I’m happy to add on behalf of the 
members on this side of the House some thoughts and pay 
tribute to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no matter what one thinks about his politics and 
no matter how one feels about some of the decisions he’s made 
along the way, I think we can all agree that the personal 
commitment and dedication the Premier has shown and the 
sacrifices he has made for our province are worthy of respect 
and gratitude. Mr. Speaker, regardless of where you stand on 
the political spectrum — and if I can continue, with leave, to 
use proper names as the Deputy Premier has — Brad Wall is 
without question the most successful conservative Premier in 
our province’s history. After a decade in office and even with 
the economy coming down from the boom years, he is still the 
most popular Premier in our country. So I think he’ll 
understand, and it’s fair to say that for a number of reasons, 
there are many in our party who are not too sad to see the 
Premier go on to other things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anyone would be surprised to hear 
that I often disagree with the premise of what the Premier may 
have to say, but the style with which he makes his arguments is 
hard to critique. Mr. Speaker, the first time I saw the Premier 
speak, it was seven or eight years ago and I was voluntold by 
the law firm that I was working at at the time to attend the 
Premier’s gala. Yes, I’ve attended a Premier’s gala. Yes. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to lie: I completely disagreed with 
pretty much everything the Premier said in his speech, but his 
skill as an orator, the way he captivated the room, Mr. Speaker, 
it was undeniable. 
 
[11:30] 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is an intimidating skill. But while reading the 
new book, Risk and Reward — shout-out to Gail Krawetz — I 
had to smile when I read a section in which he is quoted telling 
a story about a speech he gave while serving in the opposition. 
He was on fire, attacking the minister who was calmly trying to 
tell him something by mouthing some words. Finally Mr. Wall 
realized that he was ripping into the minister on the completely 
wrong bill. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the mistake that he shared, 
but it’s that he offers stories like that without hesitation. It 
shows the sense of humour and self-deprecation that he uses 
with such great effect. 
 
Well there are many reasons that I am honoured to serve as the 
interim Leader of our party and as the Leader of Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. Most of that is for another time but there is 
one honour that I would like to share today. It is that I’ve had 
the chance to go head to head in debates with Brad Wall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I thought about what I would say today, how I 
would honour Mr. Wall, the Premier — the leader of a party of 
some ideals and beliefs against which I have worked so hard 
against, Mr. Speaker — I was looking for inspiration and I dug 
into Hansard and looked to see what he himself had said to 
honour the premiers who had come and gone before him. On 
Lorne Calvert’s last day in this place he was leader of the 
official opposition. The former member for Saskatoon Nutana 
moved a motion to honour his service, and not only did Mr. 
Wall stand to speak to that motion, he also seconded it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that day he ended his remarks by speaking 
briefly of his son whose music career had not quite taken off 
yet; he was a little younger then. He spoke about Looney Tunes. 
He said one of his favourite cartoons was of Ralph the sheepdog 
and Sam the coyote. As you probably remember, Ralph and 
Sam would punch the clock in the morning, Sam would 
relentlessly to try to get a lamb, and Ralph would consistently 
stop him. This would go on until their workday would end and 
they would punch out together. At that point they would say, 
good night Ralph, good night Sam, and leave essentially as 
friends. Mr. Speaker, if I may, I will quote Mr. Wall’s own 
words in describing the relevance: 
 

When this place is working right — and it doesn’t work 
right every day — when it’s working right, we go at it 
hammer and tong and we have debates and we disagree. 
But when it’s working right, we acknowledge the fact that 
we are all here for the same reason. We think maybe we 
ought to get to places a different way and maybe at a 
different speed. But we’re here for the same reason. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if every person who’s ever sat in 
these seats in this place have done so with nothing but the 
purest of intentions but I can tell you that whatever you want to 
say about Mr. Wall, he came here to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to look at the office he has now, to look 
at all that he has built the Sask Party to be, and perhaps say that 
he’s in it for the glory — but that would be wrong. Mr. Speaker, 
that would be to forget how his elected political life began. He 
was elected in 1999. The newly amalgamated Sask Party was 
built to defeat New Democrats and they did better than many 
thought, but they fell short of their goal. And I just want to 
digress for a moment. I should note that I wasn’t paying super 



3334 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

close attention at this time. I was 13. I was a little bit more 
interested in what the Backstreet Boys were up to than what 
was happening in this House. But then came the 2003 election 
and hopes were high for his party. But the Saskatchewan people 
made it clear that they had no interest in any privatization of our 
Crowns, and in the end the seat count didn’t really turn out the 
way they were hoping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to give you some perspective, as the Premier likes 
to mock the number of people running to lead our party, in 2004 
he was the only person who put his name forward to run for his. 
Mr. Speaker, though he waited until the next election before he 
would say it, that’s when he could have first proclaimed, “And 
now for something completely different.” Because things really 
changed for the Sask Party then. Mr. Wall helped give them the 
new-car smell they’d been wanting from the beginning. People 
wanted to hear what he had to say. People liked him. People 
trusted him, and by extension they trusted the Sask Party. Mr. 
Speaker, in 2007 he led their party to that side of the House. 
 
The former government left a lot of money on the table, and the 
Premier went to work spending it in ways that people on the left 
were not necessarily expecting. It was a charm offensive to help 
the Sask Party look good and caring, but it also genuinely 
helped Saskatchewan people in many ways. These investments 
should not be forgotten, and for them I thank the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, riding on rising resource prices and Mr. Wall’s 
coattails, the Sask Party grew. And as many have said before, 
Brad was the brand. In fact, while honouring the Premier at 
their recent convention, the Minister of Education said that 
when knocking on doors during a campaign, she could tell 
someone would vote for her because they would say, I like 
Brad. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anyone can argue with that. It’s 
hard to imagine a Sask Party without Brad Wall. He is not only 
the face but the embodiment of who they are, and to be fair, for 
many across the country he is the first thing people think of 
when they think of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that is no 
small feat. Some premiers come and go. They don’t necessarily 
work any less hard nor are their intentions necessarily any less 
noble. They just lack a certain something of note. 
 
All of us in politics stand on the shoulders of giants who came 
before us. In our party, even when you consider progressive 
politics across this country, some of the most notable of our 
giants come from right here at home. But Saskatchewan 
conservatives have not had that same history. Now I don’t want 
to presume, nor do I imagine the Premier would want me to be 
the one to proclaim what his place in history should or shall be, 
and I don’t know. But I do know that Mr. Wall will not soon be 
forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I joked earlier about age but in all seriousness, 
when Mr. Wall took over the reins of the Sask Party, Ralph 
Klein was still the premier of Alberta. Twitter didn’t exist, and 
neither did Facebook. Now, almost two decades later, the 
Premier uses Facebook to make major policy announcements or 
occasionally take some shots at us. No matter what he uses it 
for, he uses it masterfully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has the ability to adapt, evolve, and 

always connect in formidable ways. He is one of the guys while 
still maintaining gravitas. He buys fancy cars but still comes 
across as a man of the people. People trust him and, no matter 
what happens, they don’t want to stop trusting him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an intangible skill that is vital to his political 
success but it’s also clear in other ways. His inner circle is 
incredibly loyal. They have stuck by him through it all, and that 
is a very rare and special thing. It says a great deal about the 
man that we’re honouring today. And, Mr. Speaker, so does the 
caucus he is leaving behind. He has been their leader for nearly 
a decade and a half. They are a party with some very diverse 
opinions and they’ve had some very challenging times. In 2004 
they snatched defeat from the jaws of victory, and too many 
times they’ve lost members of their caucus. Mr. Speaker, 
through it all he has managed to leverage his leadership skills 
and his popularity to hold his cabinet, caucus, and in fact his 
party together. That accomplishment is as remarkable as it is 
commendable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I wrap up, I want to finish a little bit 
where I started and that is with acknowledging and honouring 
the great sacrifices that have been made over the years that he 
has served our province as Premier. This time I want to 
acknowledge his family. I’m lucky to live in and represent 
people here in Regina, so I can only imagine the challenges, the 
daily drive to and from Swift Current, the events, the travel, the 
public scrutiny. All of this weighs heavily on a family and so I 
want to take a moment and ask all members to join me in 
honouring Tami and their three children for their years of 
sacrifice. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to use my last comments on my last day in 
this House as Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to 
thank Mr. Wall on his last day in this House as Saskatchewan’s 
Premier. I wish him well in his future endeavours as long as 
they have nothing to do with electoral politics. And again, 
stealing from a speech he gave to honour Lorne Calvert, let us 
all remember to say, good night, Ralph, and good night, Sam. 
And we can say, thank you, Mr. Wall, and good night, Brad. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I am 
standing, I think, to give the perspective of the class of ’99. I 
too ran in the fall election, September 16th, 1999, the election 
that surprised the province. It shocked the NDP, and it resulted 
in a very rapidly put together coalition government. And among 
the founding members of the Sask Party there were 17 fresh, 
new, energetic, possibly very idealistic, new faces that came to 
the Assembly and among them was Brad Wall. 
 
I was not the norm to be elected to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
I wasn’t politically connected. I had no experience. I followed 
politics, but I never followed politicians. I was intrigued by the 
Sask Party, but I was not involved with its founding. And I ran, 
thinking I was going to lose. It was an experience that I thought 
I would, you know, just try but I didn’t expect to win. And 
when I did, I knew I was in over my head. And I was extremely 
intimidated, and that’s when I met Brad Wall. 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3335 

Brad Wall was, well he was young and he was witty and he was 
politically wise and he loved history and he had a great sense of 
humour. And he was just a really nice guy, or so I thought at the 
time. 
 
An emergency session was called that fall, right away, soon 
after we were elected, because of the unrest in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. And session at that time was five days a week, it 
wasn’t four. And first and foremost, I was a mom of three 
young girls. So I was in a career that was over my head, was out 
of my comfort zone. Christmas is huge to me, and I’m in 
Regina, and I bought a tree. It was a little 4-inch Christmas tree. 
It sat on my desk. It was my Christmas pity tree. And I looked 
at it and I just felt sad and overwhelmed. And one time I went 
to my office, Mr. Speaker, and my pity tree was gone. And 
there was a little sticky note that said, crime scene. See, there 
was crime back then too. 
 
And so I went looking for my little Christmas pity tree, and I 
found out where it was. Who does that? I mean who steals 
Christmas other than Scrooge? And so I just waited, bought 
some supplies, waited until Brad Wall was in the Assembly 
speaking to adjourned debates. And I completely took 
everything out of his office. I taped an outline for every book, 
every pen, for his TV, for all of his crazy Elvis paraphernalia. I 
removed everything. All that was left was a desk and a chair. 
 
I outlined a dead body on the floor just like you do in crime 
movies. I had the crime tape, the yellow tape you put across — 
crime scene; do not enter. And I went back in the Assembly and 
just waited. And he never said a word. He never said a word. 
And a couple days later I heard him talking to some of the gang 
and he said, do not take on that woman unless you have a tag 
team because you will lose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so much is going to be said about our Premier in 
the days . . . today and was at our convention and will be going 
ahead. And all of those are true and far more. He’s an amazing 
man. 
 
There was a businessman in BC who’s connected to my family, 
and he wants to meet Brad Wall. He wants to talk to him. He’s 
a rags-to-riches success story. And so I asked Brad. I said, you 
know, would you mind meeting this guy? He just wants . . . 
He’ll fly here on his own expense just to meet with you. Brad 
said, why would he do that? And I said, I don’t know either. I 
don’t know either. 
 
Because we’re going to hear about the 95 per cent Brad. But 
working with him as a colleague over these years, I’ve also seen 
the 5 per cent Brad. I just want to slap him. He does have an 
anger from time to time and he can be stubborn from time to 
time. But the 95 per cent Brad is why he remains the most 
popular premier across our country year over year over year. 
The 95 per cent Brad is why he has the loyalty that the Leader 
of the Opposition so eloquently spoke about, why he has the 
dedication and the commitment and the love of this province. 
 
Brad Wall told us he was leaving when we had a caucus retreat 
outside of Regina. It was really hard. And everybody lined up to 
say goodbye. I did not. I walked out. I just walked out and 
thought, I’m not saying goodbye. So I need to ground myself. 
So I did what I do to ground myself. I went to Toys“R”Us and 

spent a boatload of money on my grandkids. I felt marginally 
better. My grandkids wished he would have resigned earlier. 
 
So you know, he will be missed. This province is better because 
of Brad Wall. Our party, our caucus is better because of Brad 
Wall. But I am better because of Brad Wall. And I wish I had 
my little 4-inch pity tree; I threw it out or I’d gift it to him 
today. Merry Christmas, Brad, and I wish you all the best. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So often we stand 
in this House after a budget speech or a Speech from the Throne 
and it’s a pleasure to enter into debate. When I was thinking 
how do I start this, it isn’t necessarily a pleasure to enter into 
this motion. 
 
You know, I stand here with certainly sadness, thinking over 
the 18 years. As the Minister of Finance had mentioned, there 
was a lot of us that were elected in 1999 — 17 of us. I think 
there’s seven of us left, down to six and dropping, Mr. Speaker. 
But blessed, absolutely blessed to have spent 18 years in this 
House watching Brad perform, from eight years on the 
opposition benches of course until the past 10 years sitting in 
the front row centre. Most of his career he’s been in the front 
row centre, thank heavens for our party. But blessed to be able 
to have that opportunity, and certainly blessed to be able to 
stand here today. 
 
There isn’t a person on this side of the aisle that wouldn’t want 
to stand and show their gratitude and their appreciation because 
we all know that, yes we may be popular in our constituencies 
or not so popular in our constituencies; it’s the party and it’s the 
leadership that put us all here. And so we’re deeply gratified 
and appreciative. And I know my remarks will be woefully 
inadequate to represent all of these members, 51 — can you 
believe it? — 51 members after the last election to be standing 
on this side of the House. 
 
I remember the first day I met the Premier, Brad, and there was 
a bunch of us in orientation. It was bizarre because we went into 
orientation, orientation of all new MLAs, and it was a two-day 
event. And we went in there and the Speaker was Glenn Hagel 
at the time. He was there one day and gone the next. He didn’t 
show up the next day because the coalition had been formed, 
where the Liberals formed . . . And they were offered certain 
things which put Glenn Hagel out of the Speaker’s chair, and so 
the next day he wasn’t there. And I just thought, wow what an 
interesting place. It changes that fast. 
 
But you know, it didn’t take long because, as again the Minister 
of Finance mentioned, we went into the House early that year, 
shortly after the election because of ag issues. And a lot of 
people were able to speak on different subjects, and I remember 
very distinctly the Premier’s maiden speech at that time. And I 
thought at that time, oh wow, my God, am I over my head. I am 
nowhere close to that. 
 
But you knew right away. And with certain athletes when they 
step on the ice, you can tell right away. Artists when they go on 



3336 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

the stage, they demand respect. And you could tell as soon as he 
stood in this House that very first time that he was something 
special, that this province was going to be blessed because of 
the work that the Premier did, or the leader of the opposition did 
on that side. 
 
And I remember sitting in committees different times. The CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] committee, 
he was CIC critic a little while after we were elected and going 
up against, you know, people that had been in charge of these 
Crowns for many, many years and just going after them. I was 
amazed that he had such a communication skill and such a 
debating skill that he’d go after Don Ching on SaskTel: what 
are we doing investing outside of this province. And John 
Wright on different issues with SaskPower. And then I 
remember him going after Ron Clark at SaskEnergy about a gas 
variance account, and I think maybe that one time he might 
have overstepped his . . . I do remember an editorial that talked 
. . . But I won’t go any further into that. This is to be a tribute. 
Sorry. 
 
I also remember, and it’s interesting that the Leader of the 
Opposition mentioned it because that was one of my stories 
about him standing in the House one day. And I was the Whip 
and he was just going after . . . He was the Justice critic. We 
were blessed without any lawyers at that time, so Brad was the 
Justice critic at that time. And you know, in legislative sessions 
because it’s legislation, there’s a lot of bills that come from the 
Attorney General, if he can remember to stand, Mr. Speaker. So 
there are a lot of bills. 
 
And one day we came into the House when we were in 
opposition and the Clerk stands up and said, adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 75. And the Premier stands up and he starts going after 
it, and he’s giving it to the government at that time. And at that 
time, the minister of Justice was Eric Cline. Eric didn’t say a 
lot, but when he said something you could hear it. And he said, 
“You don’t have a clue what you’re talking about.” And it was 
quiet and everybody could kind of hear it, but that didn’t faze 
Brad. And he keeps going on and he’s given them the what for. 
He finally says, “Do you have a clue what you’re talking 
about?” And I just happened to look down on his desk and I 
saw Bill 74, and in his hand was Bill 73. And he just stopped 
and he just kind of took a glass of water: “If the government 
ever introduces something like Bill 73, that’s what I’d have to 
say. Now to Bill No. 75.” 
 
As was mentioned also, I want to thank his family: Tami and 
Megan and Colter and Faith. I was the Whip early on when we 
were in opposition days, and of course we had a young family. 
The boys were young. Can you believe that you were the 
youngest in the House, and I was the second youngest in the 
House back then? That’s hard to believe. 
 
But anyway, he made that trip back and forth to Swift Current. 
Didn’t have the blessing of Everett driving them each and every 
day. It was back and forth to Swift Current because spending 
time at home with the kids as they were growing were 
paramount. It’s just an amazing effort to get home. But I just 
want to thank the kids and Tami because it’s not always about 
the person being there; it’s about the sacrifice that they give. 
You know, there’s lots of positive in the job, but it’s not very 
easy when you’re a loved one and they’re being criticized. 

And so I, at the convention, had the opportunity to run into your 
dad and mom, John and Alice Wall. I said to your dad, who’s 
very direct of course, I said, “How do you feel that Brad is 
quitting?” I just out and out asked. “Good.” And I was surprised 
because his son is the most popular Premier in Canada. You 
know, his son has led this party to three consecutive majority 
governments, each time increasing in seats. And I said, “What 
do you think of him retiring?” “Good. That’s great.” And I 
couldn’t quite figure it out. And he said, “You know, there’s a 
lot of positives, but when somebody takes a run at your family 
member, it hurts.” And so thanks to Tami and the kids, and 
thanks to your mom and dad for sacrificing. 
 
Just one quick note on that. I know I shouldn’t take too long, 
but one other quick story. We came back to the House after a 
weekend. We were sitting and, as we did, we talked about what 
went on through that weekend and, you know, talked about the 
boys. And Brad was saying, “Well I spent the weekend at the 
gym.” And I go, oh that’s kind of interesting. 
 
And Colter was into wrestling at that time, and it was funny 
because he said, “You know, Colter was doing quite well. He’d 
gone through the first couple of matches or bouts or — I don’t 
even know what you call it for wrestling — and then he ended 
up battling against or wrestling against a kid that was quite a bit 
bigger, and it was really tough.” And he said, “It was 
impossible to stand beside that mat and not go out and help. I 
mean it was just . . . You see your kid being kind of pushed 
around and you just want to get out there.” And I said, “What 
did you do, Brad?” And he said, “Well I stayed back because I 
thought he’d pin me too.” 
 
Anyway just in closing, you know, we all . . . and I truly believe 
that every person that puts their name on a ballot does for the 
right reasons. And if you’re so lucky to get elected, you come in 
this place and you want to leave the place better than when you 
came. But it’s a daunting task when you come into this 
building. As the Minister of Finance said, it’s intimidating as all 
get-out. It’s a daunting task. You know, how do you ever? You 
come in with these ideals and you’ve heard from your 
constituents and you want to make a difference. And it almost 
looks impossible. 
 
And I heard one person say to me early on, and some of you 
may have heard this analogy before, but this place and 
government as a big “G” government is a little bit like an 
iceberg. When it breaks off the polar cap it’s set in a direction, 
and to change that direction is virtually impossible. And we can 
push and we can tug and we can pull and we can chip away at 
it, and if you’re very lucky you change that direction of that 
iceberg just a millimetre. There’s very few that can change the 
direction of the iceberg. And I would say, Mr. Premier, through 
your passion and compassion, through your humour and wit, for 
your absolute love of this province and the people of this 
province, you have changed this province’s attitude. 
 
You’ve changed the way we look at ourselves. You’ve changed 
the way we have confidence in ourselves. We are no longer the 
poor cousin to Ontario and Quebec. We are the leader in the 
country and a leader in the world in job security, in food 
security, in energy security. You have put us on the map. You 
have moved the iceberg. Thank you very much. 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3337 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was trying 
to think of what to say today. And I have these tiny moments 
where I have a sense of humour and I thought maybe I could tap 
some of that, but every time I sat down none of that came out. 
So I appreciate the fact that others have been able to inject some 
humour into the discussion today. But I’m going to speak from 
the heart and hope I get through it. 
 
I don’t actually remember the first time I met Brad — I can’t 
look at you when I do this — but I remember my first day in 
this Chamber. I was elected in a by-election in March of 2007 
and was sworn in. And within, I don’t know, minutes, I was 
asked to be up in question period. And the file that was given 
me was to defend and be a voice for the victims of Murdoch 
Carriere, which was a daunting task. And additionally daunting 
is the minister that I had to ask questions of was Pat Atkinson, 
who we all know was formidable in this Chamber. 
 
And to have that kind of confidence instilled in me . . . And 
Brad didn’t really know me. He obviously knew my dad. He 
didn’t really know me. To be able to take on that file — and it 
was more than a file — and to be the voice for those women 
who had no voice was humbling. I recently was going through 
some boxes in my office and came across cards and notes that I 
had received from them afterwards, thanking me, thanking me 
for being that voice. But I was only able to do that because of 
the tenacity that you had and the leadership that you provided 
on that file. 
 
It was the right thing for the right reason. It wasn’t about 
politics. We’ve had this discussion since then just to make sure 
that we were doing it correctly. And then after winning in 2007 
and moving into government, we carried on because it was the 
right thing for the right reasons and offered a formal apology to 
those women and additional compensation, not that any of that 
could make up for what they had been through. But it was such 
an amazing lesson for me as a new MLA. 
 
Well I love politics. I love question period and the 
give-and-take in this place, and hopefully you give more than 
you take. That was such an amazing moment for me to start my 
career off with that, so I want to thank you for your confidence 
in me in letting me be that voice and being an example of doing 
the right things for the right reasons. 
 
I also want to thank you for having a family-first policy. As a 
lot of the members here will know, my little family has 
probably faced more than their fair . . . of challenges in the last 
few years. I had asked to be out of cabinet a few years ago so I 
could spend more time with my girls and that request was met 
with such amazing grace from you, and a genuine care and 
understanding of what we were going through and that my girls 
needed me at home. And there was never any judgment. This 
job always comes second, always comes second. And as 
important as it is, it is not the most important thing. 
 
This is going to be the tough part. In the last ten and a half years 
here, I have never once professed to be able to speak on behalf 
of my dad. I’m going to try. And just to make sure that I wasn’t 
offside on this, I phoned Mother Heppner earlier this week to 

ask her permission and to run past her the things that I wanted 
to say just to make sure because I figured if anybody has the 
right to be offended, it would be my mom. And mom said, you 
go get ’em; that’s exactly what dad would want. And she passes 
on her love for you and you know that if she were here, she’d 
give you a great, big, squishy Mother Heppner hug and hold 
you up. And so on behalf of Mother Heppner, I wanted to pass 
that on to you. 
 
[12:00] 
 
I know what my dad would say if he were here, knowing the 
man that he was. First of all he would commend you on being a 
man of integrity. Integrity in the job that we do here doesn’t 
mean that you always get it right. It doesn’t mean that you’re 
blameless. It means that you enter into the actions that you take 
with sincerity and honesty and that when you make mistakes, 
you apologize. And we know that you have done that. And so 
he would commend you for that. 
 
He would commend you for your humility. My dad was a very 
proud man, but he was not an arrogant man. And I see the same 
qualities in you. I see you cringe when people call you Premier 
Wall because you just want to be Brad to all of us. Whether 
inside this Chamber or outside this Chamber, that is the most 
important thing that you have surrounded yourself by is this 
humility, and people see it. They know that. That’s why they 
want to be your friend. That’s why they want to go for coffee 
with you. That’s why they want to fly out from BC and see you. 
They want to know just Brad the way that we do. We know that 
our time in this place is fleeting. The names on our doors, 
they’re removable for a reason because they are not 
long-lasting. And you know that. 
 
Thirdly and maybe most importantly, he would commend you 
for your continued . . . to be continued to be offended by the use 
of bad grammar, propositions at the end of sentences, and the 
use of “irregardless” which we know is not a word, and we 
don’t know why people keep using it. So him being a former 
English teacher, he would certainly appreciate that. 
 
The last visit I had with dad at RUH in Saskatoon before he 
moved into palliative care, Brad and I actually showed up at the 
same time. And it was, I think, one of the first times I’d actually 
had a conversation with you because I had been out in Ottawa. 
And so I let you have time with dad and I’m sure you talked 
about politics because dad was still looking forward to the 2007 
election and he actually wanted to be Speaker. That was his 
plan. And so I let you have your time, and then I went in 
afterwards and had a chat with dad and again talking about 
politics. And at the very end of our conversations, one of the 
last things he ever said to me, with that smile on his face, he 
said, “That man will be premier next year and he will do a good 
job.” 
 
So on behalf of my dad who never doubted your ability, if he 
were here today he would say, I’m proud of you. Job well done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with all due respect to the leadership candidates that are running 



3338 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

on this side of the House, I have to admit that my first 
inclination on this motion is just to run the clock out and not let 
it come to . . . [inaudible] . . . then maybe that way the Premier 
won’t be able to leave us. But I know that this motion isn’t 
granting permission. He has earned that in his own accord. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, to say that I’m honoured to say a few words 
merely scratches the surface of what I feel. 
 
So in about 2001, I was a student at the U of R [University of 
Regina]. I had an interest in politics for a long time and got 
together with a couple of other people that I met on campus. 
And we wanted to get a youth wing of the party going. These 
were heady days, Mr. Speaker. The memories of the 1999 
election were still pretty fresh. Premier Romanow’s resignation 
was in the offing. And we had a lot of youthful enthusiasm. 
You know, we’d set up tables at the campus at the U of R, even 
had some chocolate milk thrown on us at one time. Those were 
good days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of those guys, Bill Cooper, who a lot of 
members will remember from his time working in this building, 
Bill Cooper and I decided that we’re going to organize a policy 
convention — nerds — not just a convention, a policy 
convention. In fact that’s where we met the member from 
Meadow Lake for the first time. He was one of our delegates. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, Bill and I, we got ourselves an invitation 
to address caucus and to urge their support for our endeavours. 
And we sent a letter . . . I believe we sent a letter to Elwin 
Hermanson asking him to be our keynote speaker. Mr. 
Hermanson declined, but in his stead the caucus sent to be our 
keynote speaker a first-term MLA from Swift Current. And 
that’s how I met Brad Wall. 
 
So he spoke to us that afternoon in Saskatoon. And honestly, I 
don’t remember what he had to say, but Bill and I both agreed 
that this was our guy. And so in fact we wrote a letter to Brad 
and in that letter we offered to help him. We put in writing that 
we would help him if the day ever came that he decided that he 
was going to run to be the leader and to be the premier of 
Saskatchewan. We drafted that letter, and then with sober 
second thought, we destroyed this seditious dispatch. After all, 
the Saskatchewan Party already had a leader, and if our act of 
treason was ever discovered, that we would be done for in 
Saskatchewan politics before we ever began. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, from that convention, I still have in my office 
a photograph of the three of us. I have a similar photograph of 
the three of us from the day I was sworn in as a member of this 
House. I have a photograph in my office of the three of us on 
the night of the 2007 victory celebration in Regina. And we’re 
putting you on notice; we want to add a fourth photo to that 
collection before the 27th of January. 
 
You know, it’s quite something to see those photographs. I 
haven’t . . . They used to hang in my office. I haven’t hung 
them in a few years but I pulled them out in the last week. 
We’re so young in that original photo. I mean, not you, but we 
were so young. You know, I compare myself now to then. I 
have significantly less hair. You have more. I don’t know how 
that happens. 
 
I apologize for my voice, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, there 

were on occasions we would come down and just watch 
proceedings, sit in the Speaker’s gallery. And on a couple of 
occasions we caught Brad’s eye as he was sitting on the 
opposition benches. And he’d invite us back to his office, this 
small, little office that members, all members are familiar with, 
for opposition members. And he would just spend time with us 
and talk to us about our interests. And this place really isn’t 
going to be the same without you. 
 
Here I grabbed a sticky note and was talking to the Minister of 
Education. I’ve kind of lost my place because I wasn’t supposed 
to move it until I got to that part. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes telling you 
about some of my thoughts. And I’ve been thinking about this a 
lot, especially in the last week. And I will apologize right from 
the beginning because my thoughts will be like that of a Coke 
Zero that you left unopened in your truck in 50-degree 
temperature. It’s going to be all over the place. 
 
Some people get elected to be something and others to do 
something. And it has always been clear which camp you are in. 
It’s been incredible to watch how people have rallied around 
you, not just how you have communicated with them, but what 
you have communicated with our province. 
 
This past summer I was at a family reunion in Medicine Hat, 
and I introduced myself to a great-aunt who I hadn’t seen in 
years. She knew that I was in politics back here in 
Saskatchewan, and her first question to me, with a big smile on 
her face, was, do you know Brad? And I think we all have a 
story like that on this side of the House. 
 
That connection with people hasn’t just been because of who 
you are but because people could see that you knew where you 
wanted to go and where you wanted to take us. So even now, 
and I know he’s referenced it before, even now, despite the 
Deputy Premier’s jokes, many jokes about being a lame duck, 
you’re still thinking about the long term even with months 
remaining, Mr. Speaker. Just recently the Premier asked me 
about some initiative in one of my files, you know, something 
that’s not going to be decided while he’s still the Premier, if 
ever, Mr. Speaker. And so I took his request seriously, but in 
the back of my mind I thought, really dude? Really? You’re 
asking that? 
 
People ask what it’s like to work for Brad Wall. And a lot of 
people have already mentioned that he’s a great speech maker. 
He’s got vision and compassion and compassion. He’s smart, 
s-m-r-t, I mean s-m-a-r-t, for those that are Simpsons fans. 
 
But as my colleague, the Minister of Energy . . . He’s just been 
so supportive. In the lead-up to the by-election in 2006, I 
remember I was in Yorkton with the member from Cannington 
and the Finance minister and the former member from Estevan. 
I was staffing. I was a staffer in this building. And Premier Brad 
was at a meeting in Weyburn, and he phoned me and he said, 
you know, I was at a meeting and we’re planning a nomination 
and your name came up. And I just want you to know if you 
decide to not run for the nomination, I’ll support your decision, 
if you want to stay on staff. If you decide to run for the 
nomination, I’ll support that decision. Whatever you decide to 
do. And that has been the way it has always been. When you 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3339 

need to take time from this place, it’s no questions asked. 
Family comes first. Absolute support. 
 
One of the other things that I was thinking about, and you 
already have seen a little bit of it today, is just how much fun 
we have around here. And we take our lead from you in that. 
Even on the most difficult days, there’s just always something 
that we can find to share and to laugh in. This is a joy within 
you that has really just infused us as a family. 
 
Not to say that there isn’t the odd row. In her speech at the 
convention, the Minister of Education so perfectly summed it 
up — the taking off of the glasses and the rubbing of the eyes. 
I’ve been on the wrong end of that look, Mr. Speaker, on more 
than a couple of occasions. But before long, and in my case 
usually with a timely Simpsons reference or the odd 
impersonation of a political columnist that resides here . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — No. Well the Deputy Premier’s urging 
me to do it. He’s retiring; I’m not. It’s not going to help me out 
any. But, Mr. Speaker, before long it was just right again. Don’t 
let the sun set on your wrath. 
 
So I can’t thank you enough, Brad. I have been so blessed. To 
start as a university student, to be elected with you, to be a 
member of your caucus in opposition, to work for you in 
opposition, to be in your cabinet, I am very blessed. You have 
been very generous to me, and you have taught me an important 
lesson: your candle loses nothing when it lights another. 
 
So I’m looking forward to what’s next for you, and I’m going to 
be watching. We all will be watching. I’m going to be looking 
forward to the next successes of all of your family, all of your 
children. And I’m looking forward to the day where I will bring 
my two boys to this building and see your portrait unveiled. It’s 
going to be a special day. 
 
So to you and to Tami from Psalm 20:4: “May he grant you 
your heart’s desire and fulfill all your plans.” Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 
going to be difficult, I think. Just before I begin, I notice that 
two very special people have joined us in your gallery that I 
have, I think, introduced on one occasion, but they should be 
introduced each and every time they’re in this Chamber. And 
that’s Ruth Gaura and Rhonda Romanuk who have been in the 
Premier’s office now, in the case of Ruth, since I started, and 
Rhonda for many, many years. They’re like family. They’re 
absolutely wonderful and thank goodness they’ve been running 
the government for all these years. I just want to, I just want to 
acknowledge them and thank them now that they’ve joined us 
in the House. 
 
[12:15] 
 
So a couple of days ago there was a school group from, I think 
it was White City. Was it White City? 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, it was Hawrylak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s right, in the Minister of Central 
Services’ constituency and she introduced them. And shortly 
thereafter the minister came to the office and dropped off a card 
that one of the students had . . . I think they were grade 4 
students. And so I just want to begin with this. Here’s the card 
now. And I know it’s a prop, Mr. Speaker, but it’s wonderful. 
And it was given to me, sent to me through the minister by 
Emily Simpson and it says: 
 

To Brad Wall from Emily Simpson. 
 
Dear Brad Wall, 
 
You are a great Premier. It’s okay that you are stressed out. 

 
I have a feeling that Emily was here for question period. I have 
a feeling that the Leader of the Opposition may have played 
some role in what Emily observed that day, effective as she has 
been. She went on to say, “Just so you know, my mom once 
stayed at your house.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will miss many, many things about this, first and 
foremost the people. But Emily, I will miss this. I will miss 
things like this. 
 
I want to begin with a thank you to those who have said very 
kind things to me, both here on the record but also to all my 
colleagues and others who have said well wishes beyond the 
formality of Hansard. I want to thank the Deputy Premier and 
not just for what he had to say, but for his lasting friendship and 
also for being the kind of person that brings joy, as the Minister 
of the Environment alluded to, to our team, and frustration from 
time to time. 
 
What the Leader of the Opposition had to say, I just truly 
appreciate it. Thank you that you would’ve looked back into 
those remarks from the day that Mr. Calvert had a similar 
moment. But I really appreciate what you’ve had to say. And I 
agree with the Deputy Premier by the way. As someone who 
will long support the Saskatchewan Party as long as it’s around, 
I’m kind of glad that you’re the interim leader and the deadline 
for running has passed. But I wish the other two well. 
 
I want to thank the Minister of Finance for what she had to say. 
And I had forgotten about the Christmas tree until just moments 
ago, but it sounded exactly like something that myself or the 
Deputy Premier would do. Don McMorris and Donna, we were 
all three in that class of ’99 that you referenced. I’ll just touch 
on that briefly here in a moment. 
 
But, Don, the member for Indian Head-Milestone, the former 
deputy premier, we became very close friends almost 
immediately upon meeting each other and had spent a lot of 
time together at our very first caucus retreat which was at Good 
Spirit, I think. And we have been friends ever since, cheering 
on each other and our respective families. So thank you for 
what you had to say, to both of you. 
 
And to the Minister of Energy and Resources, what you said at 
the end was wonderful to hear, but it was hard to get through it 
because, as I am of you, I am a great admirer, was a great 



3340 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

admirer of your dad and love Mother Heppner. I am grateful 
that I got to serve with you and I am very grateful that I got to 
serve with and learn from your dad, who did not suffer 
especially the word “irregardless” or other grammatic mistakes. 
And he was one of my only allies, may I say, Mr. Speaker, in 
my 18-year and failed campaign to prevent this House, on a 
regular basis, from ending formal sentences in prepositions. We 
did it yesterday. We just did it yesterday when all the 
committee Chairs read their reports and moved that they “be 
now concurred in.” To quote Winston Churchill, “That is the 
kind of grammar up with which we should not put.” 
 
I want to also thank my friend, the Minister of the Environment. 
I didn’t know if he would win that nomination when he decided 
to run. There was some very formidable and quality candidates 
that he faced. And he had been in Regina for a time and away 
from his home of Weyburn, and was, I don’t know, 17 or 
something at the time. But he prevailed and thank goodness that 
he did because he has become a very dear friend and an 
outstanding addition to this government, a good minister. 
 
I remember when I first was talking to him about potentially 
serving in cabinet. He knows that I’m an enthusiast of Abraham 
Lincoln, so he threw back at me a Lincoln quote, when Lincoln 
referred to someone else very young being asked to consider 
service at a senior level. And that young person had said, I 
think, to the President, I think this fruit might not be ripe 
enough to yet be plucked. And that’s a paraphrase, obviously, 
of a Lincoln quote. And he gave that to me, and I remember 
shortly after he had spent some time in cabinet, I remember 
saying to him, and it’s true today, “I think the fruit was quite 
ripe.” He has been a friend and a great fellow public servant. 
 
So I’ve got a few remarks. I’ll try to move along quickly. It’s 
been a long morning already; now afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not lost on me that what you did moments ago 
is not going to happen very often, maybe one more time in my 
life. And you will be the last person who will call me 
exclusively by my office, referencing the job that I have, at least 
as it regards this place, this Chamber. The first time I heard that, 
the first time I was identified only by an office was when 
Speaker Osika recognized the member for Swift Current 18 
years ago tomorrow. And I was seated somewhere over there. I 
stood and gave verbal notice of three written questions because 
that was the style at the time, to use another Simpsons 
reference. Strange though that we would use verbal notice to 
give a written question, but we’ve leaned that out of the system. 
 
But colleagues, if you think about it, and I have, this is really 
the only line of work, this is the only vocational pursuit where 
we work hard to get to this workplace. We toil. We desire to be 
here for the reasons that members have already canvassed. We 
desire to join a workplace, this Chamber, where we lose our 
given names, where we want, I guess, to lose our own personal 
identity, something probably that we’re all proud of, identity 
that we have prized all of our lives. We trade our names. We 
trade them for the honour to serve and to be the voice, not of 
ourselves hopefully when we get it right, but to be the voice of 
others, individual citizens, and the collective, those who sent us. 
 
We lay down our identities because we are so very temporary as 
other members have discussed. As the Minister of Energy and 

Resources has eloquently said, those signs on the doors, they do 
come off readily. We’re just here for a short time. But this 
institution where we lose our personal identity, this democracy, 
unlike any other organization to which we might aspire to be a 
part of or to work at, this workplace is and must be forever, 
regardless of who sits in these chairs. Women and men have 
died for that bargain, Mr. Speaker, for that trade that happens 
when we enter this place, this place that is the permanent and 
grand keep of every freedom that we value. 
 
In and for this transaction, that trade, 18 years ago less a day, in 
and for it I have been humbled and blessed with the honour of 
my working life, the best jobs that I will ever have no matter 
what’s next. The first job, the first part of the transaction, to 
become the MLA for Swift Current, and then, and then as 
Premier of the province that I love. The bargain, the deal, the 
transaction is more than fair. It was more than fair 18 years ago. 
I wanted that trade, and I will always treasure it. 
 
So let me first say thank you to the electors of Swift Current 
constituency. It’s my hometown. When I played Poleconomy as 
a kid with my generation of political nerds — so often it was 
maybe just me and one other person — I wanted to be the 
member for Swift Current. Federally or provincially, it didn’t 
really matter. I just have long thought that that would be a great 
honour and so I was excited to run in that first election. 
 
And I will share this with colleagues. You know, the best 
electoral, election night memory I have, the best one is the 7th 
of November, 2007, when we all worked together and we were 
able to achieve a major team objective and form a new 
government and give ourselves the chance to make a change 
where we thought it necessary. But right behind it, maybe even 
tied, is September 16th, 1999. I could not believe it when the 
television screen showed my picture and a check by my name 
— elected in Swift Current constituency. I mean we had that 
sense by looking at the numbers but I couldn’t believe it. 
 
And that campaign I enjoyed very much. I couldn’t do anything 
but door knock. I’d come home for supper; I wouldn’t eat. All I 
could think about was all the doors that I had yet to see for the 
first or maybe even the second or third time. I was running on 
that occasion against my grade 8 principal, a good man named 
— he’s now passed away — named John Wall. And that 
created its own confusion. There was a woman that asked me, 
how could you run against your own father? I said, he’s not my 
dad. A third of the phone book is Walls in Swift Current and 
I’m only related to about a third of that. 
 
August and September of 1999, it was hot. It was a warm, warm 
summer and it was an amazing time in my life and I’d say in the 
life of our campaign team. I’m not sure . . . I understood that 
my campaign Chair at the time, Bryon Campbell, might be here 
today. I’m not sure if he is, but he was the campaign Chair and I 
owe him and the team a lot for that particular campaign. A 
couple of quick stories from it. 
 
At that time, the Swift Current constituency wasn’t just the city. 
It was rural area, a bit north and a bit west and a little bit south. 
And the south part was precious to me because both my mom 
and my dad traced their roots to just south of Swift Current 
where there is a significant Mennonite settlement. My mom’s 
family, her mom and dad, Jake and Tina Schmidt, well they 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3341 

were from McMahon, Saskatchewan, south of town in a very 
Low German Mennonite community. And my dad was raised in 
a house in Rhineland, Saskatchewan, which is also south of 
town. And Rhineland is also a Mennonite community, and my 
Grandpa and Grandma Peter and Elizabeth Wall raised their six 
kids there. 
 
So that part of that rural area is now in Wood River, but it was 
then in my constituency and I campaigned there. And I 
remember campaigning in Rhineland. There was only a handful 
of houses to knock. And I was at one; I had gone around to the 
backyard and knocked on the door and there was nobody there. 
And so I wrote, sorry I missed you. There was no mailbox so I 
tried to find a place to put the brochure, and turned to take my 
leave of that house. 
 
And then a voice from the other side of the caragana engaged. 
There was a hedge there and we started chatting. And my 
understanding is that person still lives there today, Mr. 
Schlamp, and lived there when my dad was raised in that house. 
And I had no idea. Because after he looked at my brochure he 
said, are you Peter Wall’s grandson? And I proudly said, yes, I 
am. And he said, is John your dad? And I proudly said, yes, he 
is. And he said, well that’s where he grew up, right there. 
 
And even then I remember a moment of sort of symmetry, to 
think well what, I wonder . . . consider what a democracy 
affords us all, because my grandparents, both of them, were of 
very modest means. My Grandpa and Grandma Schmidt farmed 
a very small farm, never owned an inch of it. They were 
sharecroppers. They did what a lot of farmers did. They had a 
big garden and they had chickens and they had hogs and they 
had dairy cows and beef cows and they raised five kids with 
industry and enterprise and integrity. That was their tradition. 
 
And same with my Grandma and Grandpa Wall. My grandpa 
did a little itinerant preaching, but he was an entrepreneur. He 
had a water hauling business and he was a bit of a carpenter, but 
of modest means. And now their son was presuming to run, at 
that time, for the first time for office. And I wish, I wish my 
grandparents could have seen what happened in 2007. 
 
There were some other lighter moments on the campaign trail, I 
want to say. And some of them I referenced in that maiden 
speech in the House here when I first took to my feet. On the 
first night of the campaign we wanted to get our lawn signs up, 
and so I was out with a cordless drill. I had a small cordless 
drill. And so while they would site the sign location, the team, 
I’d go up and knock on the door and say hey, you know, just to 
make sure that they did want the sign — because that’s always 
uncomfortable when the people really don’t want it — and that 
we didn’t pound the stakes into the underground sprinkling, 
which also happened on occasion. 
 
And so I’m at the door and the main door is opened, the screen 
door is closed, and I’m sure there’s somebody there by who’s in 
the driveway. And I know who lives there. It’s the south side of 
Swift Current, known who’s lived there all my life. And I’m 
holding my cordless drill, but no one comes to the door. And I 
kind of make an executive decision. I said, I think we can put 
the lawn sign right there and we’ll go and we’ll check with the 
owners and make sure everything’s fine tomorrow. 
 

[12:30] 
 
Well I didn’t have to check with him because the owner, who is 
a good friend, Marv, called Bryon Campbell, the campaign 
Chair, and said, Brad and the team were there to put up the lawn 
sign last . . . And Bryon said yes, I’m pretty sure they were 
putting up a lot of lawn signs. And he said, well my wife, she 
was home but she was frightened. She was in the back. She 
could only see a shadow of what was on the front step, and she 
thought someone was at her door brandishing a gun. 
 
And I told that story in my maiden speech and I noted that there 
was at that time three Liberals still in the House here, and that I 
was hesitant to tell the story because knowing Liberals as we all 
do, they might try to set up a cordless drill registry. 
 
I’ll move through that period quickly, but walking up the front 
steps after being elected — and I had worked in the building 
before — I understood the amazing building that this is. But 
walking up the stairs for the first time as a duly elected member 
sent by your friends and family and neighbours and constituents 
you had not yet met to represent them in this place, I will never 
forget that feeling as long as I live — the stairs outside or the 
staircase inside. And, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made it known 
that there’s been other parking opportunities for me over the 
years, but I have always wanted to park out front so that I can 
remember that feeling. 
 
You cannot walk through that entryway as an MLA, whether 
you’ve been around for 18 years or a short period of time, and 
not be met by the honour of this place and the honour that’s 
been bestowed on us and the expectation of service on all of us 
that we probably forget from . . . I have moments where I have 
forgotten all of that from time to time. And I’m grateful for the 
chance to walk in the front door all of these years. 
 
I remember the orientation too. The Speaker was there for the 
day, as the member for Indian Head-Milestone has said, and the 
lieutenant governor at the time, Jack Wiebe. They did a great 
job. And the Clerks did a wonderful job at the time. Gwenn 
Ronyk was the Clerk. And we are so well served, by the way, 
by each generation of Clerks that serve this place who do their 
work with . . . basically in anonymity, but also help on days like 
that, on swearing-in days when it’s a big deal for all of us. It’s 
overwhelming. And for our families. And so I thank you for 
that on behalf of all of us that have had the chance to have been 
fortunate enough to have that service. 
 
It was an amazing first few days. And we’ve talked about the 
class of ’99. The House Leader was a part of that class as well. I 
want to inform members of the House that the House Leader 
gave me a present today. I got a trophy this morning at caucus. I 
got a trophy for most improved MLA. I don’t know this to be 
true, but I have a feeling it might have something to do with the 
fact that we all chip in some money at the start of each session 
so that we can have way more food than we need in the 
backroom during breaks. And I have been known to be 
sometimes tardy with my payment. But I made it promptly this 
year I would say, relatively speaking, I would say to the 
member for Lloydminster. Well I was thinking that’s why I 
chosen as the most improved MLA. 
 
But he was part of that class and the Finance minister, as we’ve 



3342 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

noted, and the Deputy Speaker of the House, the MLA for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and the Agriculture minister, the 
member for Thunder Creek. I know that’s not the name 
anymore but it’s still my favourite name so I’ll take a page out 
of your book and use it anyway. Our caucus Chair, Mr. Speaker 
. . . It was a great class and some as we have noted who have 
retired or who we’ve lost. 
 
An Hon. Member: — House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes, and I mention our House Leader as 
well. 
 
There were some interesting events that occurred early on. I’ll 
touch on them. When I was a critic . . . And it was the good old 
days when we didn’t have any lawyers in our caucus and so I 
was the Justice critic. And the member’s right. Members have 
referred to the fact that I was in full rhetorical flight that day, 
even though I was on the wrong bill. I was probably a little over 
the top, shocking as that might be to members. And it was also 
Chris Axworthy was very generous as well as Mr. Cline. 
 
I also got a chance to ask my first question early on in that 
session. And it had nothing to do with my critic file. It was 
actually a Health matter and I’m not sure why I was asked to do 
it until the scrum later, which really wasn’t all that fun, and so 
I’ve never forgotten Ian and Reg for that. But the set of 
questions were related to the fact that there were bats in the 
General Hospital maternity ward, bats reported. I mean I don’t 
think it was an infestation, but let’s say enough bats to warrant 
some question period questions. And so I asked the Minister of 
Health of the day — it was Pat Atkinson— about three sets of 
questions. It was pretty interesting. 
 
I’ve just recently reread them because it was one of my first sets 
of questions in the House. And one of her answers included to 
blame the fact that there were bats in the maternity ward at the 
General on the previous government. To which I said — and 
members will appreciate this — I said I think that the people of 
the province aren’t interested in what happened 10 years ago. I 
think they’re interested in what’s happening today. Things 
change and they stay the same. 
 
But after I raised those questions, Pat Atkinson did a wonderful 
thing. One of the staffers in the NDP at the time was a great 
animator and drew a picture of a Batman in an ill-fitting 
Batman costume, and it was me. I could tell that much. And she 
wrote a note on it. She said, great first question period and she 
also wrote, see you hanging around the building. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a perfect moment of serendipitous 
historical symmetry, just a few days ago, my friend, the 
member for Batoche, gave me another drawing of a Batman. 
It’s a little cartoon clip, and it was the day after the Leader of 
the Opposition had quite effectively raised concerns about my 
email account. So a Carpe Diem cartoon was given to me, I 
guess almost a year after, or 18 years after the first Batman 
drawing I ever got. It says this. It’s got a picture of Batman and 
it says, “That expression when you realize you used your 
batmail to send your Wayne Enterprises messages.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heckle from time to time. I do. And I know 
when I have gone over the line when I can’t smile, not in a 

mean way but in a good-natured way, if I can’t smile after the 
thing that I’ve said. And I have done that on occasion. And 
early on I’d try to send notes every time I knew that I had done 
that. I know I have failed even in that. So for all of those 
moments — and I kind of probably know when they are more 
than members — I want to apologize. I think it’s a good test for 
all of us to remember the Ralph and Sam piece. And it’s hard 
sometimes because we come here with our passions. And we 
are fighting for our side of things, our view of things, always 
with the desire to see what’s best for the province. And so I 
hope people will grant us some grace when we might not be 
able to smile after every single thing that we say. 
 
I can remember early on giving speeches in the House, and 
sitting very close to me was the former member for Estevan or 
former caucus Chair who’s joined us up in the gallery. And I 
have a number of wonderful memories and some that are 
frankly not very good. When I speak in the House, I have a 
tendency to sort of move out in the aisle, probably a little too 
close to whoever is beside me, and I lock my knees. And it 
didn’t take long for Doreen Eagles to figure this out because she 
could just swing her toe over far enough from outside the chair 
and hit the back of my knees. So there are a number of speeches 
I gave in the House where I seem to be having trouble standing. 
And I want you to know they have nothing to do with the hour 
of the day or anything else; they have everything to do with the 
mischievous former member for Estevan. 
 
There are so many memories, Mr. Speaker. Some, even the 
routine, commend themselves to tribute and memorialization on 
a day like today, like for example bowing upon entry in this 
place — I will have done it now thousands of times — as we 
leave and we enter through these doors that are reserved for 
members and former members who’ve been sent by 
constituents. It’s a door of honour to walk through. I do think 
it’s important that we bow because bowing is an act of service. 
It’s an expression of humility. We bow out of respect for the 
officiant, for the Speaker, for the institution of the House. 
 
We had a discussion about it earlier in the week. I’d heard this 
story that we also bow because at the mother parliament, 
Westminster, there’s a cross that’s above the Speaker’s chair. 
And so I was told that that’s part of the reason why some 
members bow. And I asked the Deputy House Leader, or the 
member from Meadow Lake, who knows these things, and he 
didn’t. He actually had no idea, and he said so. And that’s 
another reason why I now know it’s time to retire. 
 
We bow out of respect and gratitude to those who sent us here. 
We bow to honour those who are and were willing to sacrifice 
everything that we may so assemble in and with every freedom 
for which humanity has ever desired that reside right here in 
this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope you will indulge me, and that members 
across the way might indulge me the opportunity to talk a little 
bit about my time in government, not very long, but a little bit 
about our time in government because it’s been noted that I’ve 
been able to spend 10 years in this role of the 18 years I’ve 
served as the MLA. And I ask the pardon of my friends across 
the way to perhaps litigate the case for the last 10 years one last 
time. 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3343 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a question that now is engraved in the 
cabinet room, in subtle letters just above the door, and it simply 
asks, “Did you leave things better than you found them?” I want 
to thank Steve Bata, who helped make that happen, and the 
building crew here. 
 
By the way, I just want to say to Steve Bata who’s become a 
friend as well to all of us . . . And I’ve known Steve for years. 
This man loves this building. He is passionate about this 
building. He is a steward of it and a protector of it. And I will 
long be thankful that there’s the likes of Steve Bata taking care 
of this amazing building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did you leave things better than you found them? 
It is more than a cliché. It’s more than a rhetorical question, of 
course. It’s really kind of devoid of the temporal consideration. 
It’s devoid of a partisan consideration for the most part. And if 
it can be answered in the affirmative — yes, you left things 
better than you found them — then it has the potential to be 
transformational and generational. 
 
If each generation of our people can answer yes to that question, 
if each iteration of this government, however it’s constituted, 
whoever sits in these chairs can say, yes, we left things better 
than we found them, well then we will always have progress in 
Saskatchewan. There will always be progress, the thing that we 
seek for our citizens. There will always be improved quality of 
life because different governments of different stripes will be 
able to say at the end of their time, or individuals at the end of 
their time, it ain’t perfect but, you know, I think it might be 
better than we found it. What we all want for this province is 
that it could live up to its motto and its creed. We want a quality 
of life for every citizen we represent. 
 
And may I say this: that previous iterations of government 
formed by the party opposite can most assuredly answer that 
question in the affirmative. They left things better than they 
found them. 
 
I can think of the Romanow government who faced almost 
existential decisions. Well if you read former minister 
MacKinnon’s book, they were existential decisions. And they 
were aided, by the way, I am proud to say, by an MLA for Swift 
Current who was a minister in the government, John Penner, 
who was on the side of answering those questions in the 
affirmative as well. But we need to acknowledge the fact that 
that government and the Calvert government did leave things 
better than they found them. 
 
And so what did we find when we came into office, 
notwithstanding the progress that had been bequeathed to our 
government and to the people by members opposite and their 
party? Well we found some things that we did need to work on. 
And while I go through this list, Mr. Speaker, please know that 
I don’t think the government’s responsible for all the good 
things that have happened in the 10 years. I take responsibility 
for the bad things, but we’re not claiming credit for all of the 
good things. There is still more work to do. That’s another 
proviso. And finally I think it’s important to note, as I litigate 
this list or the case for the last 10 years, that we have a lot of 
work left to do on both sides of the House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we came to office, there was a serious 

nursing shortage in Saskatchewan, about 1,000 according to 
SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], I think. And there was a 
doctor shortage. And so we undertook to add training spaces 
and employ more nurses, provide for the budget for more 
nurses. And now there are 3,400 more nurses of every 
designation practising in the province, and that’s better than we 
found it. There are 750 more doctors, and that’s better than we 
found it. We had the longest wait-lists in Canada for various 
reasons, for orthopedic care, and now we have among the 
shortest because of private clinics in the system, an innovation 
we brought to the system. It is not perfect. People wait too long 
still. But it is better than we found it. 
 
There are significant new health care capital projects that this 
province needed, the replacement or the building anew of 15 
long-term care facilities, for example, in Saskatchewan. The 
North Battleford hospital, the vision of Walter Scott to have a 
psychiatric hospital and mental health centre, and it was 
needing repair and rebuilding, and expensive to do it. And it is 
now under construction and nearing completion, and it’s better 
than we found it. The same is true for the Moose Jaw hospital 
or what happened in Humboldt. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a long time, this province was the only 
province, other than Prince Edward Island, that did not have a 
children’s hospital. And so we took some proceeds from a 
privatization actually, the government-owned part of a fertilizer 
plant, and we decided, well we don’t need to be in the fertilizer 
business but we should be in the children’s hospital business. 
And so we used those proceeds. And that hospital will come to 
completion when someone else sits on that chair, Mr. Speaker. 
And there’s lots more that we need to do in terms of pediatric 
care in the province, but when that hospital is built and for that 
hospital, things are better than we found them. 
 
There were supports like a seniors’ income plan that had been 
locked at about $90 for 16 years and it’s now $270 per month, 
and it’s better than we found it. There are more people in the 
province who need new schools, and there are 40 new and 
replacement schools in the province, 25 major renovations. 
There are more teachers and more support and arguably more 
that is needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with respect to people with disabilities, and this is close to 
my heart, there’s still a lot of work to do here by the way, Mr. 
Speaker. But when we formed government I remember the 
Finance minister, then Social Services minister, came into 
cabinet and said, there is a wait-list of people who have 
intellectual disabilities. Those are the most vulnerable among 
us. If we are not here to serve them, to ensure that they have 
what they need, then I don’t know why we are here. And there 
was a list of 440 of them that were waiting for the dignity of a 
residence, whose families wanted respite care. And the minister 
said to an agreeing cabinet, we ought to take care of that 
because what is the use of all of the money, the dividends of 
growth, what’s the use of a growing economy if 440 of those 
who deserve it the most are waiting for these basic things? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that we eliminated 
that wait-list. And now it’s grown a bit in certain regions and 
there’s more needed to be done, but between that and SAID 



3344 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability], finally an assured 
income for the disabled — not welfare but ensured income that 
we’ve actually added to in terms of resources. Not perfection, 
but better than we found it. 
 
And Highways and Infrastructure, 12 000 kilometres of 
highways improved: projects like Saskatoon’s south circle 
bridge, St. Louis bridge, the twinning of Highway 11 and 16, 
passing lanes, overpasses at Warman and Martensville; yes, the 
bypass around Regina, Mr. Speaker. Major infrastructure 
investments made in highways but also across our cities with 
the help of the government and in our Crown corporations. And 
things are better than we found them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s true that when the Crowns are dealing 
with infrastructure challenges in the billions of dollars, they’re 
going to borrow. That’s what companies do. Companies finance 
these sorts of investments and they borrow. And so the overall 
debt, as members like to talk about, has changed from what it 
was. 
 
But there is also an operating debt in the province. That’s the 
credit card, if the former is a mortgage. The credit card is 
unsupported debt. It’s not attached to a Crown investment or 
any asset or any house. It’s just like the credit card. And 
sometimes it’s not even got a payment attached to it where it 
will be eliminated or discharged at a certain period of time. And 
some of the interest rates on that, by the way, from the ’90s are 
high. And I want to say to the members of the House that I am 
proud of the fact — I wish it was even more progress — but 
I’m proud of the fact that operating debt is a billion dollars less 
than it was when we took office. 
 
114,000 people that used to pay tax — low-income folks that 
paid tax — they don’t pay tax anymore. They’re off the tax 
rolls. And we have a good debate in this House, I think. Some 
even now are proposing, well we should have the private sector 
and other employers pay a higher minimum wage and that 
might be the right thing. But first and foremost, we should 
ensure low-income people aren’t paying any taxes to the 
government. And that change has made things better as well. 
Not perfect, but better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our exports have grown the second fastest in all of 
the Dominion of Canada. Our overall exports are up over 100 
per cent. And that’s not the government’s doing, but I hope 
we’ve set the tone. We’ve provided more funding to STEP 
[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] and we’ve 
engaged through trade missions, something new to the 
province, something that really didn’t happen before. And now 
our standing in the world is different today, especially in that 
part of the world that does want food security and energy 
security. Our standing in Asia is different on behalf of the 
private sector and the government. It’s also true in Washington, 
DC [District of Columbia]. And this was intentional. This was 
something that we made an effort to help achieve. And it is not 
perfect, but it is better than we found it. 
 
Population. Mr. Speaker, there are 160 . . . And again the 
government can’t take credit for this. However, there are certain 
direct things, intentional things again I want to note quickly: 
167,000 more people living in the province, many of them 
newcomers; 90,000 newcomers in the last 10 years to the 

province from all over the world, who are again giving life to 
our provincial motto and reminding us of our best and earliest 
days in terms of population growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you there are parts of the government 
program that I think helped. The graduate retention program 
was applied to by 55,000 young people plus, and they’re now 
living in the province. They chose to stay here. They didn’t 
need luggage as a graduation gift. If they did get it, it was to go 
on a holiday because they’re employed here and maybe they 
used the graduate retention plan to help with that. 
 
And Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, and we talked 
about this in question period today. From ’97 to ’06, the total 
number of nominees of newcomers: 18,737. We made changes 
in policy. We did — intentional changes. ’07 to ’16, 92,869. 
And let’s make sure that our message on both sides of the 
House is that every, every newcomer shouldn’t be new for very 
long. They are our people. They are our citizens. “From many 
peoples, strength.” Let’s always be the place that makes them 
feel welcome as we were from our earliest days after 1905. And 
things from a population perspective are better than we found 
them. 
 
Finally, on attitude, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say it was as if 
the people of this province decided, almost coincidental to the 
government getting elected, that they were going change their 
attitude, that this province ought not to be kind of looking at the 
dirt and kicking it around in terms of its future and its potential. 
The people of this province understood we are blessed with all 
of these resources and the most amazing people in the world. 
Why would we ever, why would we ever think anything about 
our province’s future other than that we could achieve 
excellence, that we could be a leader, that we could provide a 
quality of life. 
 
And so they tried. I think the people of this province decided to 
change the attitude. And I hope, colleagues, that we assisted in 
that. I hope they took some of their signal from what we were 
doing in government. 
 
I remember what was said — you know, and again I think we 
need to give credit to the other side — but there was a change 
that happened on the attitude side. Because I remember leaders 
in the province calling us the wee province and saying that 
we’ll always be in and out of equalization. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there was sort of a mediocrity about all of that. 
 
I remember a story being told and sort of held up as the 
quintessential Saskatchewan story about a canoe race in 
northern Saskatchewan, where someone was leading the canoe 
race and felt bad because all the other canoes were behind, and 
kind of stopped and waited for everyone to join them so they 
could all finish second together. 
 
Well with great respect, Mr. Speaker, that is not the 
quintessential Saskatchewan story, because my dad raised me, 
taught . . . My mom and dad raised me to know that it’s okay to 
win. Do it with grace. Do it with honour. Do it in a way so that 
if you have won, you can maybe benefit others and share in 
whatever dividends come from that. But it’s okay to win. And 
that’s the attitude change that’s happened in this province. 
 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3345 

People realize when we lead, when we win, when our economy 
grows, why there is more money for the disability wait-list and 
you can reduce wait-lists, or you can provide some basic 
supports for those who are most vulnerable. And I hope that’s 
been the doctrine of this side of the House. And I hope it lasts 
for a very long time, even on the other side as well. Let us do 
nothing but dream big for this province, because this province 
deserves big dreams — not for ourselves, but for the people we 
represent. 
 
I will be ever grateful, Mr. Speaker, for those on this side of the 
House who have helped me, who have shared this with me and 
given me the opportunity to be a part of an exercise whereupon 
I can say on a day like today that we left things, and I left 
things, better than we found them. So I thank them for that. I’ve 
gotten too much credit for the good things and not enough 
blame for the bad things. And I’m so grateful to my colleagues 
and my family. 
 
So all of this brings me to another and final transactional 
moment, Mr. Speaker, when I give up the title as MLA for 
Swift Current, first made formal by your predecessor 18 years 
and one day ago, or the other title that I gained 10 years and one 
month to the day ago, and I exchange them for just Brad, with 
no need to share it with any office or title. Just Brad, the 
grandson of Peter and Elizabeth Wall and Jacob and Tina 
Schmidt; just Brad, the proud and very thankful son of John and 
Alice Wall; the profoundly and immensely proud dad of Megan 
and Colter and Faith; just Brad, the unworthy husband of the 
amazing Tami Wall. 
 
And as it was 18 years ago, I want this trade. I am grateful for 
it, and I’m excited by the prospects that will follow. I am 
profoundly grateful for what I give up in the transaction today, 
but I’m even more grateful for what I get back. And of this, Mr. 
Speaker, you can have blessed assurance: as for either side of 
this transaction, what I might give up and what I know that I 
gain, I have not and I still do not deserve any of it. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
put forward by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly thanks and pays tribute to 
the Premier, Brad Wall, for his 18 years of service to the 
people of Saskatchewan as the member for Swift Current, 
as leader of the opposition, and as Premier, and for his 
many contributions to the people and province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request that this motion be 
passed nemine contradicente, which in Latin means, we’re all 

agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Nemine contradicente. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, just with leave 
to make some brief comments as House Leader. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to 
follow the speakers that were here, so I will be very brief. First 
up, thank you, boss. You’ve been the best boss I’ve ever had 
and ever will have. And I want to thank you again for putting 
confidence in myself as making me House Leader. 
 
I want to thank my staff, Jarret Coels and Michelle Lang, who 
has walked me through the many things I’ve had to in the 
House and basically did all the work behind the scenes; the 
member from Meadow Lake, the Deputy House Leader, that 
has helped me immensely and kept me probably from stepping 
in it a few times in correcting me with his experience. 
 
The Opposition House Leader who’s been . . . We’ve both been 
here a very long time and have gone back a long ways. And I’ll 
just say what a previous House leader has said about him, 
which I know to be true: his word is gold. If he gives me his 
word as we’re working through the House, it’s always been 
good. And I’ve always respected him for the number of years 
that we’ve been here. 
 
Saying that, you’d think it was an easy session. But it wasn’t; it 
was a difficult session. We lost a member, a sitting member, the 
member from Melfort. I want to thank the Opposition House 
Leader, acknowledge the Opposition Leader for the changes 
that they allowed us to make, the flexibility in the House to help 
us through that difficult time. Thank you. 
 
I want to thank yourself, Mr. Speaker, a very well-run House. 
Very good. Clerks, who have been here . . . I’ve been here a 
number of years, well, as long as the Premier. I’ve come to you 
many times over them years for questions, and you’ve always 
had the answers. Basically, is there nothing you don’t know? 
 
Pages, you did an excellent job here today. I want to thank all 
the people behind the scenes, give them a thank you: the 
Hansard, that had to work the late nights as committee goes into 
the evening; all the people behind the scenes; all the staff that 
work in this building; all the people that run our dining room 
that work here late to accommodate the many receptions that 
come here; the security which keeps us safe and do an excellent 
job. A lot of people don’t realize the many people it takes to 
make a smooth and efficient running House. And ever since 
I’ve been here, we’ve had excellent, excellent staff that runs this 



3346 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2017 

House. And I want to thank you. 
 
[13:00] 
 
Just to wrap up, I want to wish all the members a safe journey 
home and to remember what this is about. This break is to 
spend time with family. I want to say to each and every person 
in this building, Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Recognizing the hour, I want to thank members for not calling 
the clock on me as well. But certainly just to very quickly join 
with the Government House Leader in saying, thank you, thank 
you, thank you. The two most important words there are in, 
certainly in public life, Mr. Speaker: thank you. To those within 
the building, as the Government House Leader has ably run the 
roll . . . It’s sort of a cast of thousands that — well not quite 
thousands; dozens maybe — but that certainly make this place 
work, that enable us to serve the people of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, or Swift Current, or Arm River-Watrous 
but to set about the work of serving the people in this 
Assembly. So we’re very thankful for that. 
 
There are those outside the building that we think of as well, be 
it family, be it the folks that work with us in our constituencies, 
our thanks to them as well. Thanks to certainly my caucus 
colleagues and leadership. Thank you to members opposite as 
well.  
 
The Premier is right: there’s nothing like coming up these steps, 
coming into this Chamber, and to think that you work to 
represent the people of your constituency, that they thought 
enough of your abilities to send you here. Sometimes you 
wonder if that’s to keep you out of the riding or, in my case, I 
come from Regina Elphinstone-Centre where a lot of people 
know me and know my family, and yet they still vote for me. 
But it’s such a tremendous privilege. And again to be part of a 
day like today is certainly something you don’t forget, 
something that you will remember. 
 
I do want to say a particular thanks to my colleague, the 
Government House Leader. His word is as good as his bond, 
and I thank him for that. And sometimes it’s like we’re at the 
circus and, you know, you feel like the Government House 
Leader and I and our deputies and our various teams are sort of 
like cleaning up after the elephants at the circus. But sometimes 
there’s popcorn and peanuts and lots of shows to be seen as 
well. But certainly our work — and I know that we share this 
across the sides — is to try and make sure that the procedural 
stuff runs as smoothly as possible so that we can better spend 
our time arguing, litigating our sides of the issues of the day. 
 
So I want to say thank you very much to the Government House 
Leader, Deputy House Leader, and certainly to Jarret and 
Michelle. And again it is, as I’ve said different times before, 
being part of this, it’s like you’re one big, you know, sort of . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know if anybody’s ever seen 
Shameless or the Gallaghers. Anyway you’re part of a big, big 
extended family. And certainly through this we send our 
congratulations to Jarett. They’ve welcomed young Keiran into 
their family just days ago, through all of this. So 

congratulations on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our head, as our guardian of our rights and 
responsibilities in this Chamber, I say thank you to you on 
behalf of all our colleagues, and certainly to the Clerk and the 
table and everyone in this Assembly that does this tremendous 
job of helping the people’s business progress. 
 
And to those that hold the mirror up to reality in the media, that 
we might see what is taking place and, you know, do better as 
well, I say thank you to them. And it’s also interesting to see the 
changing of the guard that is taking place in the press gallery 
and how good that is and how difficult their work is. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, when I first showed up at this place the 
then member from Cumberland, Keith Goulet, would often say 
— he was a tremendous Cree speaker, you know, really fluent 
and compelling in the Cree language — one thing that he would 
say to close out speeches, and I think of it now as we head into 
this Christmas season, and that message of hope and that 
message of healing and again, how this most wonderful time of 
the year can be hard for those who have got an empty seat 
around those tables. And to everyone I just say on behalf of all 
of us certainly, Merry Christmas. Be safe. But to Keith Goulet I 
say, ēkosi, ēkosi, ēkosi. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to take an opportunity to 
speak because I usually don’t, and I have a few things that I 
would like to share and to thank the members. 
 
First off, I would like to thank all members for their effort and 
work that they put into their jobs and being down in Regina and 
away from loved ones. It’s much appreciated, the effort that 
everyone has to put in for democracy. 
 
To the Clerks — to Greg Putz, Iris Lang, Ken Ring, Kathy 
Burianyk — and the staff of the Legislative Assembly for all 
their effort in keeping us on task and, in doing so, enabling the 
democratic process to run smoothly. I too would also like to 
thank Steve Bata, and Ralph, and Jeff Tochor for making sure 
that this building is in top shape and as best as possible for our 
members to do the important work that we do in this Chamber. 
 
I’d like to thank the LAS [Legislative Assembly Service] staff 
who do their best to make us all look presentable. I would also 
like to thank my staff. We’ve been blessed in the Speaker’s 
office to have Sheila Sterling, Irene Bauer, and Hayley Lucas 
help me out. 
 
I too would like to just very briefly here thank the Premier for 
his years of service. I remember the first time I met Mr. Wall, 
and he quickly corrected me that it was Brad. And that was 
mid-2000s at my very first political event I ever attended. And 
from that, I was inspired by you to get involved, and I wouldn’t 
be here without attending that evening. 
 
And I would like to thank my staff back in Saskatoon, Conni 
and Helen, and our friends back . . . All our constituency 
employees have done a fabulous job to take care of the office 
while we’re down here doing the important work that we’re 
asked to do. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to thank everyone for their work and 



December 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3347 

please drive safely and Merry Christmas. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to thank the House Leader who has allowed me to move the 
adjournment. 
 
And just before I do, I forgot in part of my remarks to thank 
members opposite as I was litigating the case. Because I think 
to the extent there have been successes in the province that 
emanate from this room, it’s been because of the work of all, 
and being pushed, frankly, in the appropriate direction. And I 
failed to mention that, and it’s a point that I need to put on the 
record. So I’ve done that. 
 
And thanks to the House Leader for allowing me to move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to the sessional order dated 
November 22, 2017, this Assembly stands adjourned until 
Monday, March 12th, 2018. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:09.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3320 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3322 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3322 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3322 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3322 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3322 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3323 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Couple Recognized as Outstanding Young Farmers 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 
 Saskatoon Resident Wins Multicultural Youth Leadership Award 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 
 Team Saskatchewan Places Fourth at National Women’s Championship 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 
 Sports Club Provides Access to Community Sports 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 
 Government Principles 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 
 Couples Celebrate Their 70th Wedding Anniversary 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 
 Merry Christmas 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3326 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 
 Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 
 Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project and Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3328 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3328 
 Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3328 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3328 
 Licensing of Vehicles on Job Sites 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3329 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3329 
 Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3329 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3329 
 Truth and Reconciliation Issues 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 



 

 Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3331 
GOVERNMENT MOTION 
 Farewell to Brad Wall 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3331 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3333 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3334 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3335 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3337 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3337 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3339, 3347 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3345 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3346 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3346 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




