






















































Hansard: October 31, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2677 
 October 31, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased to stand in my place today to present a petition 
as it pertains to the town of Balgonie, Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles in and out of Balgonie, 
Saskatchewan at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and 
Main Street in Balgonie, Saskatchewan. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at Main Street, Balgonie intersection. It 
will not allow the public access to cross the east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these many, 
many pages of this particular petition are asking for action on 
this particular issue, and they have signed from many parts of 
the province, in Fort Qu’Appelle, in Balgonie. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we all know how 
devastating a carbon tax would be on our economy and we 
know the work that our agricultural producers have done as 
well as the sequestration in Estevan to counteract carbon. And 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing the carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented by citizens of Moose 
Jaw, Regina, and White City. I so do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to present 
a petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. The people who have 

signed this petition want to bring to our attention the following: 
the Sask Party has hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families and 
businesses by $1 billion per year. At the same time, the Sask 
Party has handed over 100 million in tax breaks to corporations 
and the wealthy and well connected. 
 
The Sask Party increased the PST [provincial sales tax] to 6 per 
cent and applied it to everything, from groceries and children’s 
clothes to a case of beer and even insurance premiums. Because 
of the Sask Party’s PST increase, Saskatchewan has become the 
only province in the country where people are charged PST on 
life and health insurance premiums. 
 
And the Sask Party’s new tax on crop insurance is a devastating 
hit on producers. Many small and medium-sized businesses, 
including those in the restaurant, tourism, construction 
industries, will be hit hard by the Sask Party tax hikes, and 
these business will be forced to pass the rising costs on to their 
customers. And hurting job-creating businesses and producers 
will only cause more damage to the economy and do nothing to 
help the 40,000 Saskatchewan people looking for work. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition 
here today are from the fair city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling on the Sask Party government 
to stop the cuts to our kids’ classrooms. The people signing this 
petition want to bring to our attention the following: that the 
Sask Party government has cut at least $674 in government 
funding for every student across Saskatchewan; and the Sask 
Party government has hiked education taxes by $67 million but 
cut total government funding for education by $121 million; 
and even though the Sask Party government is making us all 
pay more, that our kids are actually getting less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Birch Hills and Hagen. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

institutions. These citizens from Regina and Saskatoon wish to 
bring to your attention that the Sask Party is making students 
and their families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement; 
that Saskatchewan students already pay the highest tuition rates 
in Canada; that this budget cut 36.8 million from 
post-secondary education; that this budget cut 6.4 million from 
technical institutions; that funding for the Saskatchewan 
Student Aid Fund and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 
million; and that the Sask Party has broken a 2016 election 
promise by cancelling their first home plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Saskatoon and 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. In addition to the impact on jobs and 
reconciliation, Mr. Speaker, and having correctional facilities 
closer to northern residents, this particular closure came as a 
shock to the residents of Buffalo Narrows and the west side of 
the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre to better our community for future 
generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good city of Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Women’s History Month 
 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October 
celebrates Women’s History Month in Saskatchewan. One 
hundred and one years ago, women won both the right to vote 
and to run for public office here in Saskatchewan. In honour of 
that landmark achievement, I would like to bring attention to 
Sarah Katherine Ramsland, the first woman elected to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mrs. Ramsland was first elected in 1918 for the constituency of 
Pelly, where she served until 1925. She was a capable 
representative and she determinedly championed the causes of 
her constituents. Once she camped outside a minister’s office 
until the minister relented and signed an order to fix an 
infrastructure problem her constituents were having difficulty 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on her final day in the House, Mrs. Ramsland 

introduced a resolution to amend divorce laws to create equal 
rights for women and men. To her final elected hour, she was a 
champion for the cause of equality. After her retirement from 
elected service, Mrs. Ramsland continued to serve this province 
as a librarian and held several executive positions in various 
women’s organizations. 
 
I call on all members to help me recognize Mrs. Ramsland and 
the achievements of all Saskatchewan women this Women’s 
History Month. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Naturalist Wins Award for Literary Excellence 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Trevor Herriot is a 
household name for people in my neighbourhood and in 
communities across this province. As a devoted prairie 
naturalist, writer, and regular guest on CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] radio, he provides ample opportunity 
to learn from his wealth of knowledge that he’s so passionate 
about sharing. 
 
I rise today to congratulate Trevor on his most recent and 
well-deserved recognition as the recipient of the Cheryl and 
Henry Kloppenburg Award for Literary Excellence. This 
literary award recognizes Saskatchewan writers who have 
shaped writing in Saskatchewan through a substantial body of 
literary work. Anyone who has the pleasure of knowing Trevor 
would agree he embodies the Saskatchewan spirit. And those 
who haven’t had the opportunity will get a chance to see him 
tomorrow, as he gives a reading in the Legislative Library for 
Sask Book Awards. 
 
The jury citation from the award states: 
 

With wisdom and grace, with a head for facts but a poet’s 
heart, with an attention to scientific detail yet a willingness 
to soar into the transcendental, with a voice that is personal 
but has a universal resonance, Herriot tells us that natural 
history — those birds, that river — is our history, that we 
cannot escape it, nor should we [try]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to join me in congratulating 
Trevor for his efforts to make Saskatchewan a better place, and 
for the honour of receiving this important literary award. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Joint-Use School Opens in Regina 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to stand 
today to say that the new joint-use school in my constituency of 
Regina Pasqua has opened for this school year. École Harbour 
Landing, Regina Public Schools; and École St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha, Regina Catholic are two new schools in Harbour 
Landing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce that this P3 
[public-private partnership] build finished on time and on 
budget. The P3 model enabled our government to build more 
schools at the same time, which would not have been possible 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

through the traditional approach. This build was made possible 
through the hard work and collaboration that included input 
from students, teachers, parents, school divisions, and 
community members. 
 
The school is full of light, with presentation stairs as well as 
libraries and classrooms without walls. Both École Harbour 
Landing and St. Kateri Tekakwitha offer dual-tracking language 
programming, one of the only handful of joint-use schools 
across the province to do so. For our government, these new 
schools are about making students, staff, and education our top 
priority and meeting the demands of the growth in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Halloween Haunts 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, today is my favourite holiday, 
Halloween. Tonight kids will be going door to door and getting 
all kinds of goodies from friends and neighbours. But, Mr. 
Speaker, what kinds of surprises would our kids find if they 
knocked on the door of a Sask Party minister? 
 
Well the Education minister’s appreciation for witchcraft 
reasoning is sure to give kids quite the scare. The former 
minister of Social Services seemed to think it’s okay to leave 
kids in hotels, so her house is likely not worth stopping at. The 
best treat from the Finance minister, though, would be if she 
removed the PST they added to kids’ costumes and their 
everyday clothes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Halloween only haunts us once a year, but the 
Sask Party scandals, cuts, tax hikes, and sell-offs haunt 
Saskatchewan people every day. At least, that’s until we win 
government in 2020. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Happy Halloween. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

4-H Member Makes Donation to Children’s Hospital 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m honoured 
to stand and highlight a very special and inspiring constituent of 
mine, 11-year-old Porter Wolkowski. Porter is a member of the 
Good Spirit 4-H Club. This past summer Porter sold his 4-H 
steer to Logan Stevens Equipment in Yorkton at the 4-H 
regional show and sale. 
 
Porter has learned many valuable lessons from 4-H club and 
stays true to the pledge, “My club, my community, my 
country.” He cares deeply for his community and decided to 
donate a portion of his sale to a cause that means very much to 
him. Mr. Speaker, Porter donated $500 of his sale to the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital Foundation. His parents said that 
he’s always got such a big heart, and I am inspired by the kind 
actions of Porter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Porter has two cousins, unfortunately needed extra 

care and attention medically, which is why he chose to donate 
to this foundation. Porter’s cousin Preston Graham has been 
making trips back and forth between Invermay and Edmonton 
to seek medical attention to the children’s hospital. He has 
another cousin, Mikayla Babichuk, who is a diabetic for eight 
years and is looking forward to medical services and support 
closer to her home so she can receive the best health care and 
attention possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Porter 
Wolkowski for his generous donation to the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital Foundation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

HMCS Queen Charity Mess Dinner 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 21st I 
had the honour of attending the HMCS [Her Majesty’s 
Canadian Ship] Queen Charity Mess Dinner. The guest of 
honour for the evening was Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, and the event raised around $4,000 for the 15 Wing 
Family Resource Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening was filled with great food, 
entertainment, naval trivia, and music provided by the HMCS 
Chippawa naval band. And the event was attended by several 
important Saskatchewan military officers including the 15 Wing 
CO [commanding officer] Dennis O’Reilly, honorary colonels 
Jorstad, Hutchinson, and the CO of the Royal Regina Rifles, 
Lieutenant Colonel Grub. And of course the commanding 
officer of HMCS Queen, Lieutenant Commander Nichols. It 
was also attended by the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] cadets. It is great to see so much support for this event 
from all branches of our services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, military family resource centres are located on 
Canadian Armed Forces bases all across Canada. They provide 
services for serving members who are both here in 
Saskatchewan and deployed throughout the world. These 
centres are not-for-profit organizations and depend on 
fundraisers such as the mess dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the HMCS Queen on a 
successful event and thank the 15 Wing Family Resource 
Centre for all the great work that they do. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Girls’ Anti-Bullying and Self-Esteem Workshop 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on October the 22nd, the Minister of Central Services and I had 
the privilege of hosting the girls’ anti-bullying and self-esteem 
workshop again here in Regina. Girls ages 9 to 13 were invited, 
free of charge, to participate in the workshop with their moms 
or their mentors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were very fortunate to have a packed house 
again this year of 90 girls who participated in this workshop. 
Brie Ellard-Jedlic and Coach Kaylan from Girls in the Game 
gave powerful presentations on anti-bullying, self-esteem, and 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

the importance of girls’ involvement in sports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were all very fortunate this year to be able to 
use the image of the Fearless Girl, the statue on Wall Street 
created by Kristen Visbal. The artist was very generous in 
allowing us to use this imagery. This statue was commissioned 
by the State Street Global Advisors and is part of their 
campaign to encourage companies to recruit more women to 
their boards. The plaque at the bottom of the statue reads, and I 
quote, “Know the power of women in leadership. SHE makes a 
difference.” Mr. Speaker, this statue really conveys the message 
that we delivered to these young girls and their mentors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our sponsors: Girls in the 
Game, Tim Hortons, Advantage Sign & Display, Deloitte, 
Slayed Esthetics Lounge, Amaranth Designs, and Western 
Litho. We’d also like to thank Monique Goffinet Miller who 
helped out with the AV [audiovisual] on the day. But the big 
thanks goes to all the girls and their moms and mentors, and one 
dad, who came out and made this day such a fabulous event. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last week and yesterday I asked 
the Premier a very simple question. Though it’s hard to tell 
from his so-called answers, this was not a question about the 
auditor or what information the Sask Party may or may not have 
already provided. This was a simple question about his own 
involvement in the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal. 
 
Which of the two statements we’ve heard does the Premier still 
stand by? Is it, as he said in November of 2016, “I was there 
through this whole process. I know what was intended and what 
wasn’t.”? Or is it, as his office said, that he was “not involved 
in any of the negotiations regarding the GTH”? 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the third time in three days: which is it? Was 
he there for the whole process or was he not involved at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is both. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, these are ridiculous answers to 
these questions. They are very, very . . . And if he doesn’t like 
the questions that I’m asking, he should look over his shoulders, 
because there’s people all around him who don’t like his 
answers. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake says, “We should have never 
been in this business in the first place.” The member for Regina 
University thinks there should be a full judicial inquiry. And the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest says, “Unacceptable that 
there are still more questions than answers.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question doesn’t need to wait for the RCMP to 
do its work. It’s not even about the decisions that led to the 
Sask Party’s GTH scandal. It’s about the Premier’s own words. 
So again, clearly, what did he tell the RCMP? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what I shared with the RCMP 
were truthful answers to all of their questions, as did I’m sure 
all that were interviewed. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
RCMP will . . . We have all heard and read that the review is 
done. We look forward to the results of that review. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unacceptable for a Premier to 
say that he’s refusing to take any action at all and to casually 
state that he’s doing nothing while the RCMP investigates the 
actions of his government. 
 
Now police investigations may seem normal to this Premier, 
given the governments that he’s worked in, but they aren’t 
normal to anyone else. Mr. Speaker, on September 6, when the 
Premier admitted to media that he’d been questioned by RCMP, 
he also said that he was open to finally letting the senior Sask 
Party operative at the centre of the GTH scandal answer 
questions about the GTH. So will the Premier commit today to 
letting that Sask Party operative testify before a committee? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we are looking forward to the 
results of the RCMP review and, as I’ve said publicly, we’ll not 
rule out any other review that might be possible with respect to 
this particular issue. Mr. Speaker, I think the government’s 
track record in this particular instance has been to fully answer 
all the questions, in fact to request, the government now 
requesting the Provincial Auditor to do a full review of the 
matter, including making cabinet documents available, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s a markedly different approach we’ve taken on this issue 
than members opposite have taken on a number of issues that 
they dealt with, that they managed, that they led when they 
were in government, Mr. Speaker. I can think of SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. I can 
think of the Murdoch, I can think of the Murdoch . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well members opposite seem to think that 
that’s not current enough. Maybe there’s some other internal 
NDP [New Democratic Party] matters that are very, very 
serious that involve the former leader of the party that would be 
more relevant and more current, and questions that they should 
be answering on that side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the aforementioned senior Sask 
Party operative still works for this government . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . May I? That operative was in direct contact 
with the Premier’s chief of staff and the minister of the 
Economy all along. But each time that we’ve asked for Mr. 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

Pushor to answer questions about the GTH, the Sask Party has 
blocked him from testifying. Even the member from Meadow 
Lake has said he would have fired the minister and Mr. Pushor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the Premier stands by Bill Boyd, the 
DNA of the Sask Party, but does he also stand by Laurie 
Pushor? If not, why will he not clearly say today that he should 
be brought to committee and allowed to answer questions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to say to the member opposite that, that individual that he’s 
talking about has answered many questions from the Provincial 
Auditor. In fact the Provincial Auditor quotes that individual 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
is saying that’s not good enough. The Provincial Auditor is an 
independent officer of this Legislative Assembly that reports to 
the Public Accounts Committee. And the Public Accounts 
Committee, who as legislators, have the right then and the 
opportunity to interview the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we won’t rule anything out on this side, but we’re 
going to let the RCMP do its work, Mr. Speaker. And in the 
meantime, I do think it’s interesting that the party that’s 
lecturing on the issue of accountability and transparency has a 
former leader who is alleged, alleged to have a complaint on 
sexual harassment brought to him, and it’s also been alleged 
that he did nothing about it. We know this because the 
individual that is alleged to have done the harassing is still in 
the employ of the NDP office. So, Mr. Speaker, I think there are 
answers required on that side of the House as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Wait Time for Young People to Receive 
Mental Health Services 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the millions and millions 
wasted on the Sask Party’s GTH scandal is money that went 
into the pockets of their supporters instead of money going into 
supporting our kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While the Sask Party is not taking this scandal seriously, the 
Children’s Advocate has said: 
 

. . . children and youth in the province do not have timely, 
equitable access to psychiatric assessment and care. Long 
wait times in hospital emergency rooms often results in 
children and youth waiting for hours during times of 
mental health breakdown. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why has this minister refused to make children’s 
mental health care a priority, and why is he denying these 
children the care that they desperately need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s simply 
not the case, Mr. Speaker. We recognize the seriousness of this 
situation. Mr. Speaker, there’s been instances recently that the 
member’s referring to that the Children’s Advocate had 

referenced, for example, wait-lists for psychiatrists. Mr. 
Speaker, we take that very seriously. Ministry of Health 
officials have been working the Saskatoon Health Region to 
deal with this. 
 
It’s important to remember, Mr. Speaker, that that waiting time 
that they’re referring to is in the Saskatoon Health Region. 
Other health regions have much shorter wait times. But again 
we take this very seriously. I don’t want to leave anybody with 
the impression that waiting that long is the only services that the 
children received, Mr. Speaker. They also have access to 
psychologists, to clinical social workers, to registered 
psychiatric nurses, and to mental health therapists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the health region to recruit 
vacant positions in Saskatoon, looking at temporary people to 
help fill in, and doing our best to bring down that wait time. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, if that minister put as much 
effort into supporting our children as he does into delivering his 
lines, maybe we wouldn’t have this growing crisis on our 
hands. Children’s mental health was not even mentioned in the 
Throne Speech — not a word, Mr. Speaker — a speech that 
happened the day after the Children’s Advocate tweeted: 
 

The wait-list here in Saskatchewan to see a child 
psychiatrist is up to 2 years! Our kids are literally dying as 
we continue to fail to meet their needs. 

 
The minister boasts, and they all claim to be concerned about 
the terrible reality that young children are turning to suicide. So 
why isn’t the Sask Party making this an issue, a priority? Why 
was it not even mentioned in the Speech from the Throne? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 
in the first answer, we do take this very seriously, and we are 
taking steps to reduce that wait time. But, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
look at mental health overall as an issue. Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
at the level we intend to be. We’re going to continue to 
incrementally keep increasing spending on mental health 
services. The arrangement with the federal government on 
transfer payments to go towards home care and mental health, 
certainly we’re going to make every use of every dollar we can 
to increase services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s put this in perspective. The critic gets on 
her feet frequently, criticizes, always says that not enough’s 
been done. But, Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been given the 
privilege of forming government, we’ve increased spending on 
mental health by 44 per cent. Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite is saying that that’s not good enough, just exactly how 
bad was it under the NDP government? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

Access to Bus Service for Northerners 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it’s about access, and the Sask 
Party aren’t even interested in the people in the North having 
access to the rest of the province. Since they scrapped STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], the minister has said 
the private sector would take over those routes. Wrong, wrong, 
wrong. The one bus to Meadow Lake was just cancelled. So 
now not a single bus runs north of Prince Albert. How does the 
minister expect businesses and people in the North to react to 
being cut off from the rest of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member opposite for that question. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said 
many times in the past in the House here, it was a very tough 
decision to wind down STC as it affects the 200, over 200 
employees that were there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the fact is in the North, Mr. Speaker, that 
there are . . . Medical health has a budget, Mr. Speaker, that 
helps provide for passengers to come out of the North. And, Mr. 
Speaker, last year there was over 5,200 people that were 
assisted out of the North for medical reasons, Mr. Speaker. Of 
that number, Mr. Speaker, 44 — 1 per cent — 44 people took 
the bus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to also mention, Mr. Speaker, that there are a 
number of companies waiting approval and not yet in operation, 
Mr. Speaker, that will also be serving the North. They’ll be 
serving La Loche, Beauval, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Speaker, and 
La Ronge. So, Mr. Speaker, it has taken a little bit of time for 
private companies to develop their full systems but we fully 
expected that, Mr. Speaker. But we’re optimistic that this will 
all work out in the near future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Well actually they just cancelled that, as I 
said, but he never answered that. Mr. Speaker, since the Sask 
Party scrapped STC, people are walking on the side of the 
highways and hitchhiking. Our elders, people in their 80s, are 
hitchhiking because they have no other choice. Mr. Speaker, 
three people have already been hit by cars and killed in the 
Prince Albert area. So instead of laughing off these questions or 
ignoring the serious issues, will the minister tell us what their 
plan is to bring this much needed service back to these 
communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we are by no means laughing off this situation, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, the deaths, any death on the highway is one too 
many deaths, Mr. Speaker. We know that. We don’t know all 
the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, of why people were 
hitchhiking on highways, Mr. Speaker. I know of one recent 
one, Mr. Speaker, that was 1:30 in the morning, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know if he was on his way to a medical appointment or 
what exactly it was, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we do take 
this very seriously, this matter very seriously. 

There are a number of companies, Mr. Speaker, that have been 
approved and that are in operation from Prince Albert to 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and they operate daily and their rates 
are very competitive of what STC was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Northerners and Reconciliation 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. From 
mental health to transportation to the Sixties Scoop, the 
Saskatchewan Party are continuing to fail the North, and some 
of our own children are losing the hope to live. 
 
In the Premier’s final Throne Speech, there is not a single 
commitment for Saskatchewan’s northern people. They’ve got 
billions to hand to a foreign company that can’t build a 
Saskatchewan highway that fits farm equipment, millions of 
dollars for land deals for their friends and supporters. 
Meanwhile La Loche school continues to feel abandoned and 
ignored by this government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was not 
any mention of Saskatchewan’s North, not a single word for the 
North, a region in need of more resources, respect, and 
opportunity. 
 
Why are they so intent, this government, on leaving northern 
people behind? Mr. Speaker, we need the North to be strong for 
Saskatchewan to be strong. Why can’t they figure that out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 
Nations and Government Relations.  
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the Sixties 
Scoop situation, I would report that our government is 
committed to issuing a formal apology to all those adversely 
affected by the adopt Indian and Métis program. We’ve being 
trying to schedule a time with FSIN [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations] and the Métis Nation, and that has proven 
to be a bit of a challenge. 
 
In the spirit of reconciliation, the government remains 
committed to an ongoing dialogue on this issue as well as those 
identified in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission calls to 
action. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, 24 months, two years of 
waiting for an apology, and they have the gall today to blame 
FSIN and the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they 
could have got this done two years ago. They still refuse to 
apologize because, Mr. Speaker, apology comes with 
reconciliation, and that means serious projects and issues to be 
dealt with in concert with FSIN and the Métis Nation. 
 
Now going back to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, another 
good example of the betrayal of northern Saskatchewan and the 
abandonment of northern Saskatchewan was a direct result of 
the La Loche shooting incident, not more than several years 
ago. 
 
The principal of the high school in La Loche, Mr. Greg Hatch, 
had these following words to say to the Premier, to the cabinet, 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

and to the entire Sask Party government, and I quote, “Almost 
two years later, there is still nothing done to our building. We 
still have the makeshift offices, and classrooms are closed up. Is 
there a plan moving forward for our community and our 
school? We need to heal,” he says. In his final comment he 
says, “Many dignitaries came to our community for ceremonies, 
to shed tears with us, and offer support. But what we need is 
follow-through.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the North was ignored in this Throne Speech. 
They continue to ignore the North and once again, in order for 
Saskatchewan to be strong, the North must be strengthened and 
respected. Will they finally do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Taking 
specifically La Loche first, Mr. Speaker, of course our hearts 
will always go out to those who were affected by the tragedy, 
and it was a heartbreaking tragedy. It is important, I think 
though, to not discredit or belittle the efforts that have been 
made toward healing, because they’ve been made in the utmost 
good faith, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly we appreciated the words of Mayor Robert St. Pierre, 
who did say last spring that the government cares, they want us 
to move forward. And he acknowledged that healing takes time. 
And I spoke with Mr. St. Pierre on Friday, had discussions 
about the school renovation, which the member opposite 
references, and how best to move forward. Those discussions 
continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s also important to note that following the tragedy that the 
number of student counsellors at the school has increased from 
two to six. We increased administrative support at both schools, 
invested over 100,000 to improve security and put in place a 
RCMP school resource officer at Dene High School. Several 
real attempts at real supports, Mr. Speaker, which I think go 
some way to the healing that the mayor referenced. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that still doesn’t answer why there 
wasn’t a single word in the Speech from the Throne about the 
North. Last year, all the Sask Party gave the North were cuts, 
including NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher education 
program-Northern Professional Access College], a program that 
had been successfully run for and by the community for 
decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for teachers in the North is growing. It’s 
estimated that another 145 teachers will be needed in the next 
five years. This year there are only five students entering the 
first year of the teacher education program. Last year under 
NORTEP that number was 35, Mr. Speaker. Not only did they 
have no plan to get students in the North the support that they 
need, they scrapped a program that was actually working. When 
will this government start to prioritize these kids and a strong 
future for the North? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And teacher 
education in the North is indeed very important to this 
government, and that’s why the consolidation of that education 
program in the North is about expanding programs and 
enhancing access for northern students while it also ensures that 
the program remains of a high quality and it is sustainable. 
 
Northlands College has had 40 years experience in educating 
northerners and has seen significant increases in their university 
education enrolment program offerings. Since 2007, Mr. 
Speaker, enrolment at university education has increased by 226 
per cent. I think that speaks well for what they’re doing. 
 
Communities of Air Ronge and La Ronge, with just over 3,700 
people . . . We felt the best use of taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, was to reduce the duplication, and that’s what we’ve 
done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — It also reduced the numbers of teachers being 
trained in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Chris Steer’s three-year-old son Leslie was not 
able to register for pre-kindergarten in Kindersley because there 
were a lack of supports in his school. Mr. Speaker, little Leslie 
lives with a developmental and physical delay, and he is being 
left out of pre-kindergarten because of the Sask Party’s cuts. 
His pediatrician has recommended that Leslie attend 
pre-kindergarten to aid in his development, but the Sun West 
School Division told his family they didn’t have a single EA 
[educational assistant] at Westberry School to support his 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a decade of resource wealth, how can this 
government possibly, possibly defend cutting education so 
badly that Saskatchewan kids are being kept from school due to 
underfunding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
times it fairly pulls at the heartstrings how attached the member 
opposite is to programs that, in many cases, didn’t exist when 
the opposition formed government. Supports for learning 
funding this year, a challenging budget year, Mr. Speaker, is 
277 million — a quarter of a billion — that goes to divisions 
specifically for students with intensive supports, including in 
early years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s important to acknowledge that since ’07, we’ve made 
significant investment in pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs. 
We’ve doubled the numbers; they’re up 100 per cent. We’ve 
increased our overall funding amount to pre-K from 7.6 million 
in ’07 to 27.3 million this year. These aren’t just numbers, Mr. 
Speaker; they are significant achievements and important 
context. 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister can pontificate 
upon these lovely achievements to this little three-year-old boy 
and his family. You simply cannot pull millions out of 
education and expect that no one will suffer. 
 
Let’s look at the facts. The Sun West School Division was 
forced to cut more than a million dollars out of their 
instructional budget — $1 million cut out of children’s 
classrooms. That has meant fewer teachers and fewer 
educational assistants. Why can’t the minister just admit that 
these cuts to support staff are hurting kids who need the help 
the most? Can she please set the revisionist rhetoric aside and 
just tell us, how does it make any sense to leave these kids 
behind? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just on some of 
the numbers that the member referenced yesterday, we would 
suggest that she check with the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] or whoever gave her those numbers, Mr. Speaker, 
because the $4,500 number is inaccurate and, we understand, 
completely anecdotal. Let’s wait for the final numbers and how 
many of that 181 number include administrators as well as 
retired and attrition numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We always hope that when it comes to staffing, the classroom is 
not affected. That’s what the member, the former minister, 
always said, that good decisions are made. I do however take 
exception, Mr. Speaker, to the comment by the member 
opposite yesterday that I should get my . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — That I should get my “body” into the 
schools. I have had the honour, as a previous school board 
trustee, of being in many schools, of touring them and talking to 
teachers and students and staff and principals about the issues 
that matter to them. And I have said on the record, for example, 
about the staff at John Dolan School in Saskatoon, that they are 
the real citizens of the year, Mr. Speaker. I have visited these 
new and cutting-edge P3 schools these past few weeks in 
growing communities in Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and 
Martensville. 
 
In body, in mind, Mr. Speaker, this government and I stand with 
pre-K programs, and we stand with education. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Women in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the only people not concerned 
about the people in Saskatchewan losing their jobs and being 
out of work are sitting in the Sask Party benches. But even most 

of them will lose their jobs in three years. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party’s wasteful mismanagement and 
dangerous cuts are hurting our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is even more drastic for 
Saskatchewan women. Last month there were 28 per cent more 
Saskatchewan women relying on EI [employment insurance] 
than a year ago. Twenty-eight per cent in just one year, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s just while every other province is about 
seeing a drop in EI use, just about every other province. 
 
What is the Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
doing to improve the economic conditions for women in our 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education and 
Responsible for the Status of Women. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know the 
member opposite isn’t known as exactly a glass half-full kind of 
person, Mr. Speaker, but surely even she has to acknowledge 
some of the positives. The 875 new teachers, 173 new support 
teachers since ’07, they include women. When new schools 
open as opposed to close, women are employed in those schools 
too, Mr. Speaker. There are more specialized staff in the 
province in the education system than there have ever been. 
Many of those are women. 
 
In health, those are women too, and they are the real citizens of 
the year, Mr. Speaker. Across the economy there were over 
34,000 self-employed women in the province last year. Female 
entrepreneurs owned about one-third of the small- to 
medium-sized Sask businesses. Right here in Regina, 
employment rates are higher for women. They have higher 
incomes than the national average. In Saskatoon, they’re more 
likely to complete university. And it’s one of the rare cities, 
Saskatoon, where they’re better represented in politics than 
men, Mr. Speaker. The only way is up, but we’ve come a long 
way. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 72, 
The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 72 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly ready for the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, 
The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 73 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 
Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 74, 
The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 74 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention 
Implementation Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention 

sur les communications électroniques 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 75, 
The Electronic Communication Implementation Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 75 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank to you to 
my colleagues for allowing me some time here to enter in some 
comments with regards to our Speech from the Throne that was 
delivered here about mid-last week, Mr. Speaker. I do want to 
begin with ensuring that everyone is aware that I will be 
supporting the motion with respect to the Speech from the 
Throne that was put forward by my colleague from Estevan, 
and I will not be supporting the amendment that was put 
forward by the member from Nutana. 
 
As is customary, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin with a few thank 
yous to people that have been important to me not just over the 
course of the past year, not even just over the course of my half 
a dozen years of elected life now, but over the course of my life 
in general. 
 
But prior to getting to that, Mr. Speaker, I’d just take a quick 
moment and welcome and congratulate the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview on her win in the by-election, welcome her 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

to this Assembly. And I did have an opportunity to listen to her 
maiden speech yesterday, and I congratulate her on a good 
speech. Although we may have some differences of perspective, 
I think we serve for similar reasons, Mr. Speaker, to improve 
our communities, improve our province. And I can assure her 
that I won’t have near the comments that the member from 
Cannington had with respect to her maiden speech, but I do 
congratulate her on being here and look forward to serving with 
her. 
 
As is customary, Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank also my 
constituency assistant, Sally Fitch who, thankfully, as I always 
say, is the eyes, ears, and most thankfully the face to the people 
of Rosthern-Shellbrook as she serves in our office and in 
communities across the constituency, brings a great effort to 
each and every day that she serves in that office, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And she treats each 
and every phone call or visit from a constituent from within the 
constituency, or a resident of Saskatchewan that may be 
contacting our office, with great care and compassion and the 
great effort that she brings to bring answers to them on behalf 
of our office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank our family, my family, not just my 
immediate family, Mr. Speaker, but my previous, I guess. I 
guess it is my immediate family, but my mom and dad, my 
brothers and sisters, my in-laws, my extended family if you 
will, that live all across the province, all across Western 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. But they’ve been a great resource and a 
great support not just over the last decade and the last number 
of decades, Mr. Speaker, but in particular over the last number 
of weeks and months with respect to the efforts that we are 
making in our party. 
 
And my friends from back home, Mr. Speaker, great supports, a 
group of friends that I have from across the constituency and 
across the province — people that I went to university with, 
attended high school with, formed friendships over the different 
careers that we’ve had, Mr. Speaker, both my wife and I, over 
the years. And I want to thank them for their great guidance and 
counsel that I rely on from time to time as we serve them and 
others across the province in this Assembly. 
 
And last — not last and definitely not least — are the 
constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook. It’s truly a great honour 
that each of us gets the opportunity to represent people in our 
constituency, and communities that raised us quite often, across 
constituencies across this province. And I’m no different, Mr. 
Speaker. It is truly a great honour for me to have the 
opportunity to represent, you know, people from the 17 rural 
municipalities, the five First Nations, the 12 villages, and the 
five towns that I represent in the vast constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
And I thank them again for their input, their guidance that they 
provide me, the conversations that we have, both that 
sometimes pertain to politics, sometimes pertain more directly 
to governance and decisions that we may have made or 
decisions that we may yet have to make as a governing party. 
And I am forever indebted with the opportunity that they have 
provided me to stand here in this legislature for the time that 
I’ve been here, and I ask them for support as we move forward 
as well. 

Mr. Speaker, last but not least, I think it’s important for us and 
myself to say a thank you to our Premier for his years of service 
to his constituents in Swift Current, to the people across the 
province of Saskatchewan as the leader of the opposition for 
some years, but most importantly as the Premier of this 
province. He has represented not just the people of Swift 
Current, but the people of Saskatchewan I think very, very well 
over the last decade. 
 
And at times, I would put forward that he has also stepped 
forward and represented industries and people in Western 
Canada, as well as our nation of Canada, on trade agreements 
and our relationships that are so very important — that I’ll get 
into a little bit later, Mr. Speaker — with countries all around 
the world. And in light of this likely being his last Throne 
Speech — unless maybe five or so potential candidates happen 
to step back and we’d see what he does then — but, Mr. 
Speaker, in light of this likely being his last Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, I think, I would like to wish him all the best in 
everything that he chooses with his family in the years into the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I read through the Throne Speech — the 
Speech from the Throne, pardon me — and looked at some of 
the ambitious goals that we set out to achieve as a governing 
party as representing the people of Saskatchewan over the 
course of the next 12 months and months into the future, I 
couldn’t help but be reminded of our plan for growth here in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the focus that we have as a 
governing party on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, but 
working with our industries and the growth of our communities 
over the last decade, and how that plan for growth and how this 
Speech from the Throne actually ties in as, and I always say, a 
rung in the ladder or a step forward in continuing to lay the 
framework so that our industries can grow, our economy can 
grow, and ultimately our communities and our population can 
grow. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was reminded of four planks in our plan for 
growth, the first being international engagement, the second 
being our willingness to accept and embrace innovation and 
technology as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, as well as our 
commitment, our party’s commitment and our government’s 
commitment to fiscal accountability and fiscal responsibility 
here in the province of Saskatchewan so that the investments in 
infrastructure and people and services that we make today will 
be available for your kids and my kids, as well as their children, 
into the future. And last but not least in the ambitious 
investment in infrastructure that we have, that we have put first 
and foremost, Mr. Speaker, investment in infrastructure in our 
communities that can be used by our families across this great, 
this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the first point with respect to international 
engagement, which this Speech from the Throne definitely 
supports with initiatives with respect to agriculture and our 
agricultural exports, what I have been asked over the last 
number of weeks is, why would we engage internationally as a 
province of Saskatchewan? Why would we not just allow the 
nation of Canada to take care of that for us? And here’s why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our 1,165,365 people in this province export on 
average about $30 billion worth of products each and every year 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

to over 150 countries. Those countries include the United States 
of America, China, India, Mr. Speaker. Many exports into the 
European Union with more to come with the Comprehensive 
Economic and Trade Agreement being ratified by Japan, Brazil, 
Mexico, Indonesia, and many more countries, Mr. Speaker, that 
we engage, with our industries and our export-based industries 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, engage with on a regular 
basis. 
 
And it’s working, Mr. Speaker. That engagement with those 
countries, whether it’d be through partnerships in education, 
discussions with respect to freer and more open trade between 
our nations, or whether it be with partnerships that we form 
through culture and immigration, Mr. Speaker, it is working. 
 
Over the last decade our exports to these countries and others is 
up some 65 per cent. Mr. Speaker, over that same decade just in 
agriculture alone, our agricultural exports have more than 
doubled in just 10 short years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is our source wealth in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, is that 30-something billion dollars of exports that we 
do each and every year. This is our source point of wealth in 
our communities. It’s our source point of careers in our 
communities as well. And why it is important for us to engage 
to attempt to grow that even further to 35 billion to 40 to 45 
billion in the years ahead is, as we grow those exports or the 
value of those exports through value-added agriculture, through 
opportunities that we have to export our energy products, 
through opportunities that we have to support our sustainable 
mining products here from the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that then in turn creates careers in our communities 
across this great province of Saskatchewan, and it’s those 
careers that we have the opportunity to attract people from 
across Canada, from across our nation in North America . . . our 
continent of North America, Mr. Speaker, but also as we attract 
people from around the world. And I think that our 
communities across this province are reflective of that attraction 
and that immigration that has occurred into our communities 
across this province over the last decade. 
 
[14:30] 
 
But just as importantly, Mr. Speaker, or possibly even more 
importantly than that, as we grow that economy, as we grow 
those careers in our communities across this province, it 
provides our children, it provides our children with the very 
great opportunity to choose a career in the community where 
they were raised in this province of Saskatchewan or in another 
community in our province, Mr. Speaker. And if we do 
anything over the last decade and into the years ahead, Mr. 
Speaker, that should be our guiding light and that should be our 
goal, is to ensure that we provide jobs and careers and 
opportunities not just for our generation but for the generations 
yet to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is happening in our constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, and it is not happening due to directly the 
decisions of government, but government is supporting the 
environment on where that can occur. And I think of companies 
operating in the constituency that I have the honour to service. 
 
We have Fast Genetics, Mr. Speaker, that’s employing in the 

neighbourhood of about 100 different people, dealing with 
countries such as China and the United States and a numerous 
number of countries in the European Union. 
 
I think of Hannigan Honey, looking for export markets in 
conjunction with STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership], Mr. Speaker, and looking to Japan to export their 
product and to further refine it right here in a community an 
hour and a half north of Saskatoon. 
 
I think of the effort our ag producers are making, Mr. Speaker, 
in their opportunities to export their products to additional 
countries all around the world. We have an organic processor 
employing people in the communities in Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
We have a dog food manufacturer, Mr. Speaker, making dog 
food out of pulse crops. And that is in particular surprising to 
me, the innovation that is occurring in that particular plant, Mr. 
Speaker, but again employing people in the community of 
Rosthern and in that surrounding area and just over the last 
number of years. 
 
We have one of the largest transportation companies in the 
province of Saskatchewan that is centred out of that area, Mr. 
Speaker. And it began with a couple of brothers with a dream, 
with a dream to build a company that would employ people in 
their community and employ themselves, Mr. Speaker, so that 
they could do better and so that their children could do better 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to innovation, innovation here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we have some of what I’d consider 
the greatest innovators in the world right here. And I always say 
if a farmer just outside Saskatoon can build a dispenser for 
saran wrap, which was a particular trouble for me over the 
years, we can build anything in this province. And we did that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think of a friend of mine I stopped by and talked to the 
other day who has formed a company called SynergyAG, Mr. 
Speaker. And he’s formed it with the specific focus to expand 
and enhance the opportunities to push the limits in agriculture, 
to push the limits around innovation and technology, and to 
make those opportunities available to farmers in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, so that we can remain to be some of the most 
competitive and the most highly productive producers in the 
world, Mr. Speaker. We are there at the moment and it’s 
individuals like that that continue to challenge the industry, to 
challenge the individuals in it, that I think bode well for our 
future in our industries here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a number of months ago that the Premier 
released his white paper on climate change which talked about 
our focus and our commitment to innovation and technology, 
and how we can share the information and knowledge that we 
have here in the province of Saskatchewan to reduce our 
greenhouse gas emissions, to increase our sequestration. Not 
just here in this province, Mr. Speaker, not just in our province 
— which is a fraction of global emissions — but we share that 
technology around the world on how we can further reduce 
emissions, capture those emissions, Mr. Speaker, or sequester 
those emissions. 
 
And if we truly, truly want to address a global challenge like 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

climate change, Mr. Speaker, this is the effort that needs to 
happen in the months and years ahead. We need a global 
conversation around more than just emissions, Mr. Speaker, 
more than just something as punitive as a carbon tax which 
ultimately has not worked in any jurisdiction where it has been 
introduced in North America, to my knowledge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It won’t work in Saskatchewan. What it will do is it will drive 
jobs and industry to other areas of the world, where quite 
frankly those industries will emit more greenhouse gas 
emissions in many cases than they are right here under our 
sustainable environmental regulations that we have available to 
our industries here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think of our industries such as mining, manufacturing, energy, 
and in particular agriculture, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward. 
Some of the most sustainable mines in the world are right here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And I think of what we do and 
we do well when we look at the suite of environmental 
regulations that our potash mines operate within, Mr. Speaker, 
our uranium mines in the North, Mr. Speaker. That suite of 
environmental regulations, I will put those alongside any 
environmental regulations around the world with respect to 
those industries. And it should be recognized, the good work 
that we do here. 
 
We have, just north of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, 
a steel manufacturer that actually uses 80 per cent less 
emissions, Mr. Speaker, than steel manufacturers in other areas 
of the world. This is significant, Mr. Speaker. This is 
significant, and we want product and we want steel to be made 
at this manufacturer because of the good greenhouse gas 
emissions footprint that it actually has relative to its industry 
colleagues around the world, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 
attract that type of investment and that type of effort to 
Saskatchewan where we have this environmental suite that we 
can be proud of, and the sustainable products that we 
manufacture, that we grow, and that we mine here, Mr. Speaker. 
And we export those $30 billion worth of products to nations, to 
people, all around the world. 
 
I think of the energy that we import into the nation of Canada. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve travelled across this province the last 
number of weeks and this has come up time and time and time 
again, as our opportunity to export our products, Mr. Speaker, 
in particular our energy products through pipelines, to not just 
other areas of the world but also to other areas of our nation. 
And this is being hampered and this is being hindered, Mr. 
Speaker, by some of the changes that have been made recently 
with respect to the National Energy Board. 
 
And it’s unfortunate. It’s unfortunate that our nation continues 
to import oil and energy resources from Saudi Arabia, from 
countries such as Iraq, Algeria, and Nigeria when we have a 
sustainable supply that is being produced right here in Western 
Canada that can be exported to other areas of our nation and 
other areas around the world, Mr. Speaker. And I would put 
forward that it is a much more sustainable supply when you 
consider the fulsome suite of environmental regulations that we 
have in place here, Mr. Speaker, to not only protect the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, but to protect our 
environment and to ensure that we are continuing to take part in 
these sustainable exports to people across the nation and around 

the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very passionate about the industry of 
agriculture. My training as a youngster was in . . . I have a 
Bachelor of Science in agriculture and got to know many good 
people at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And as 
we move forward with the changes that have happened and the 
innovation that has been discovered and worked on here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we can be very proud of what we’re 
doing in the industry of agriculture, in particular when it comes 
to the conversation around climate change and sequestration 
and our carbon content in our atmosphere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are sequestering carbon each and every day in 
this province. We are sequestering it through the use of 
zero-tillage technology. And if we back up about 20, 25 years 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think of my 
grandfather that had always told me, the way that you’re going 
to kill your couch grass out in the field is you’re going to take 
your kid — that was me — and you’re going to send him out 
there with a cultivator and he’s going to keep it black all 
summer. Well it’s under that type of tillage practice, Mr. 
Speaker, that the soils in Saskatchewan were actually net 
emitters of carbon. 
 
It’s since that, Mr. Speaker, and over the course of the last two 
decades with the implementation of zero-till agriculture, that 
our agricultural industry, our crop agricultural industry, has 
become a net equal at the very least, Mr. Speaker, and quite 
likely a net sequester of carbon. As the carbon that we are 
sequestering is in excess of 11 million tonnes here in the 
province of Saskatchewan through zero-till agriculture, and just 
over 12 million tonnes that are being emitted by that same crop 
agriculture. 
 
A great story, Mr. Speaker, and an even greater story when we 
look at companies such as Seed Hawk, such as SeedMaster, 
such as Bourgault, such as CNH, such as Morris Industries, 
Pillar laser works, that are now taking that technology, that 
innovation, and they’re over in Agritechnica as we speak, Mr. 
Speaker, marketing that zero-till technology. And that is being 
utilized now, Mr. Speaker, in places such as Kazakhstan and 
Germany, the European Union, eastern Asia, and sequestering 
carbon now far beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think you can start to see how the argument starts to 
frame, or how the position starts to frame, how you can take the 
knowledge and innovation and technology from this province, 
apply it to other areas of the world and really start to make a 
difference when we want to talk about climate change and 
carbon content in our atmosphere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have grasslands, vast amounts of grasslands 
across this province, 17 million acres that are protected by 
provincial easements, each of those acres sequestering about 11 
tonnes each and every year of carbon, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
about 187 million tonnes of carbon being sequestered each and 
every year by provincial easement protected grasslands here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We emit about 75. These are 
tremendous numbers, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a tremendous 
impact that . . . The province of Saskatchewan, through 
provincial easements, through innovation, and through 
technology is making a tremendous impact in the carbon 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

content in our atmosphere, in the global conversation that we 
need to have with respect to climate change, and an impact far 
beyond the emissions in the borders of our province. 
 
We have carbon capture and storage, Mr. Speaker, which has all 
sorts of opportunities that we’ve talked about many times in this 
House, to be exported and utilized in the 1,600 to 2,400 
coal-fired power generators that are either under construction or 
being planned, never mind all of the coal-fired power that is 
even currently under use, Mr. Speaker. This is tremendous 
technology, not only in reducing the emissions of those plants, 
Mr. Speaker, but in increasing the efficiency of the uptake of 
our energy as well and making a more efficient system for all of 
those involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the conversation that we need to be having 
around innovation, around technology, around knowledge, and 
how we share that around the world to ensure that we can have 
this very global and important conversation with respect to 
climate change, Mr. Speaker. What we don’t need is to have an 
imposed tax on the people of the province of Saskatchewan that 
will drive those jobs, quite frankly will drive and increase those 
emissions to other areas of the world. 
 
I know there’s a couple of members that are putting their foot 
forward — and I commend them for putting their foot forward 
with respect to the leadership race of the members opposite — 
that have committed to taxing the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan based on the carbon that they use. They’ve 
committed to driving those jobs out of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, by committing to that tax. 
 
And I would put forward that that commitment to that carbon 
tax is going to be about as popular, Mr. Speaker, as a previous 
leader when he made a commitment to improve the highways in 
the province of Saskatchewan by asking the people to grab a 
shovel and go out and start filling potholes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been a tremendous amount of investment 
in infrastructure across this province, Mr. Speaker: $26 billion 
in our highways over the past decade, Mr. Speaker, and that 
didn’t include the people of Saskatchewan filling their own 
potholes. That included proper projects that were contracted out 
across this province. And I think of the highways that the 
member from Athabasca drives over on his way home, Mr. 
Speaker, to his constituency, as he passes through the 
community of Rosthern-Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker: Highway 11 
which has been twinned, Mr. Speaker; Highway 12 which has 
been resurfaced this spring, Mr. Speaker; Highway 40, three 
years ago, 15 kilometres resurfaced; another 15 kilometres two 
years ago; this past year another 15, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Highway 3 has been raised through the areas that were flooded 
out, Mr. Speaker, as well. There’s about 15 kilometres of that 
has been resurfaced, Mr. Speaker. They needed it quite dearly. 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of the turning and passing lanes into the 
community where I live, where we lost a life just a few years 
ago, Mr. Speaker — it’s safer now. They did the study. They 
invested the money, Mr. Speaker, and we have safe accesses 
into the community that I enter each and every week when I go 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased, increased investment in our 

health care. Not just in the facilities, Mr. Speaker, across our 
province but in the people that work in those facilities. Mr. 
Speaker, we had the 13 rural facilities, the long-term care 
facilities that were invested in by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
As well, I think of the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I think of the Saskatchewan Hospital 
in North Battleford, as I see that come up just about five miles 
out of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. 
 
But just as important as replacing that 100-year piece of 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we’re filling it up 
with the medical professionals that we need so that we can 
ensure access in my community, in your community, and in 
communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. Whether that be 
the efforts that have been made in rural communities . . . And I 
think of the six or seven physicians and the nurse practitioner 
that we have in Shellbrook, the physicians and the nurse 
practitioner in the community of Spiritwood, and the continued 
physicians that we have access to in the community of 
Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is important. This is important effort that has been made, 
not just an investment in the College of Medicine, but 
investment in changing how we bring physicians in from 
around the world, Mr. Speaker, to ensure we have that access. 
750 more physicians working in the province of Saskatchewan, 
some of them out in our rural communities, some of them lining 
up to move into a piece of infrastructure such as the children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, specialists to ensure that 
they’re there to treat all of us across the province when we need 
them. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of the 40 new schools that have been 
invested in across this province. Twenty one just this past year, 
Mr. Speaker, opening up. But I also think of the 875 teachers 
that are working in communities across this province serving 
the families and ensuring that our next citizens of our 
communities, Mr. Speaker, are highly educated and have every 
opportunity that we have. And I think in particular of, in the 
community of Rosthern-Shellbrook, the planning dollars that 
were put forward for that so-much-needed school, Mr. Speaker, 
in that community. And we look forward to the construction of 
that. 
 
There is no doubt over the course of the last number of months, 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been faced, due to a drop in 
our natural resource revenues, we’ve been faced with some 
difficult decisions. I’ve had the opportunity to travel across this 
province and talk to people with respect to those. Mr. Speaker, 
we had to make those decisions to ensure that we’re able to get 
back to balance, this government’s effort and commitment to a 
three-year plan to balance. 
 
But I would say this as well, Mr. Speaker. All members on this 
side of the House continue to work with their constituents and 
people across the province so that we can continue on that 
three-year plan to balance to ensure that the investments in that 
infrastructure and in our communities is there for our children 
and our children’s children. But we cannot shock the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s the conversation that is happening now 
and continues to happen in the weeks and months ahead. 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

I think it’s also important for us, Mr. Speaker, as we go through 
this process and these challenging decisions, that we recognize 
that through this natural resource, drop in natural resource 
prices, that there’s some private sector industries that have had 
to make some very challenging decisions. And I’ve met a few 
of those individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think in particular of an individual I met that has owned 
his company for about 15 years. He is very proud of his 
company. He’s even prouder of the team that he has assembled 
to work within that company. And he’s been faced with some 
challenges. And he talks to . . . The most difficult day in those 
15 years was when he had to gather his employees, his team 
members, his friends, and his colleagues that worked alongside 
him — not behind him or in front of him, but worked alongside 
him — and he had to ask them to take a reduction so that they 
can continue because the rates in that industry had just dropped 
that much that it wasn’t working out. 
 
And it was the very last thing that he felt . . . He ultimately had 
to do it, but it was the worst day in his 15-year career. And he 
was concerned. He was concerned he was going to lose a friend 
and a colleague and a member of his team that he needed when 
things come back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as tough as that day was, I could tell the 
pride that he spoke with when he said, when he asked me, he 
said, you know, how many, how many guys do you think I lost 
that day? How many team members do you think I lost? And 
the number was zero. Each and every one of them stayed on to 
work with him, Mr. Speaker, because that’s true leadership, to 
work alongside your team members, Mr. Speaker. Each and 
every one of them stayed on with him and they were ready for 
when things start to improve, and it looks like they may. Mr. 
Speaker, this is leadership. This ensures that that company and 
those jobs and those individuals have a sustainable business that 
they will be able to be employed at in their community into the 
years ahead. Mr. Speaker, it’s this same sustainability that we 
need to ensure as we move into the next number of months and 
years in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think we’re going 
to be just fine. 
 
In my travels, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to go to 
Rosthern the other day and watch the Twin Rivers municipal 
group sign a friendship agreement with the community of 
Beardy’s and Okemasis. And in that friendship agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, they committed to working together where they have 
opportunities, on municipal infrastructure, on things of mutual 
interest, Mr. Speaker. And although it may not seem like a lot, 
it’s a great step forward for not just municipalities that are 
neighbouring one another to work together very, very closely in 
the way of joint investments, but to work together with First 
Nations communities in the geographic area as well. And I 
commend the Beardy’s and Okemasis leadership for their 
participation in this friendship agreement and all that it can 
bring both them and the communities of Twin Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of the story that my colleague from 
Canora-Pelly told of Porter Wolkowski who raised his 4-H steer 
with the ambition of selling that steer, not to fill his pockets for 
something that he may like, but to donate to the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon. That is such an important 
piece of infrastructure and service for all of us across the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And most notably and most recently, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
reminded of what a great province that we are so honoured and 
thankful to be a part of, and why that is. And it’s because of the 
communities that we have across this province, communities 
that I’ve had the opportunity to visit the last number of weeks, 
and because of the people that are in those communities. 
 
And I think of, most recently, of a fundraiser that I had the 
opportunity to attend in the community of Fox Valley. Mr. 
Speaker, it was a fundraiser and a gathering put on by the 
community of about 160 people. It looked like to me there was 
upwards of a thousand people in the curling rink, Mr. Speaker, 
and it was put on to discuss and to raise funds with respect to 
those families that have been affected by the wildfires in 
southwestern Saskatchewan. And my heart goes out to the 
families that have had injury or loss of life: the Hargrave 
family, the Wedrick family, and the Riehl family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I saw happen, Mr. Speaker, was a silver lining to what 
was a very tragic and dark cloud. And I see a community 
coming together to start to heal, Mr. Speaker, and to start for the 
first time in a number of days just be able to sit back and relax 
and discuss everything that has happened to their community 
and the region over the last number of days, but also start to 
discuss how they’re going to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen this before and I saw it again last night, 
and I would just close with this, and this would give us all, I 
think . . . Many of us have seen this before, but it just 
reinvigorates and refurbishes the hope and the passion that I 
know is in communities across this rural Saskatchewan. And I 
left as the live auction started, Mr. Speaker, and the first item 
came up, and it was a couple of picture frames, barn wood 
picture frames if I remember correctly. I think they sold for 
about $600, which was a fair amount more than they’re worth, 
and when they asked for the name, Mr. Speaker, he said, “Yes, 
I’ll pay it,” he said, “but run them through the auction again and 
sell them one more time.” 
 
And I think that’s indicative of what we do as Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. We’re always willing to give back to our 
community. We’re always willing to give back to our province, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s that type of an attitude that I saw 
displayed again last night in Fox Valley that will ensure that our 
province is always going to be the very best place for us to 
receive our education, to start our career, to start a business, Mr. 
Speaker, but most importantly, it’s our communities and our 
province that will always be the very best place for us to raise 
our families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to ensure that everyone in here is 
aware that I will not be supporting the amendment putting 
forward by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, and I will be 
supporting the motion put forward by my colleague from 
Estevan in support of the Speech from the Throne this year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before getting into 
responding to the Throne Speech, I want to begin like many of 
my colleagues have by thanking some very special people who 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

have supported me and encouraged me along the way as I 
continue to serve and represent the people within my 
constituency of Lloydminster. 
 
First, my husband, partner in life, and strongest supporter of 
them all. It’s no doubt tough for him when I’m away, but he 
knows that I am committed to doing the best job I can in this 
role. He manages, but is definitely glad to see me when I return 
and is appreciative of all that I do. Knowing his love, devotion, 
support, encouragement is there to back me up keeps me 
grounded and working hard. 
 
My children, mom, and siblings as well are very supportive and 
encouraging and recognize the time and commitment I give to 
serving the people of my constituency and the province. I know 
all the members of this Assembly can appreciate the strength 
and support of our spouses, partners, and family members who 
take care of responsibilities back home so that we can serve. 
 
Secondly, I would like to recognize and thank my constituency 
assistant, Tracy Patterson. What an amazing person. Her 
constant willingness to educate herself on many topics, listen to 
constituent concerns, guide them in the right direction to get 
answers, always showing care and compassion for others, and 
keeping me informed, has been nothing short of amazing. 
Thank you, Tracy, for all that you do in support of me. 
 
Lastly I’d like to thank my constituents for their ongoing 
support. They definitely keep me abreast of their concerns with 
numerous phone calls, letters, emails, meetings, and visits to the 
office. I always listen carefully to their concerns, take them 
seriously and address them as soon as possible. I am honoured 
to work for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to focus my reply to the Throne 
Speech mainly on the economy. In 2007 when we formed 
government, our Premier and members of caucus knew that 
focusing on growing the economy was imperative to creating a 
have province and a renewal in the excitement and investment 
people and businesses wanted to see for Saskatchewan. 
 
As we all know, under the NDP Saskatchewan was a have-not 
province, receiving federal equalization payments in 15 of the 
16 years they were in office. NDP Premier Lorne Calvert did 
not even believe Saskatchewan could maintain a permanent 
status as a have province, and would always be in and out of 
equalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s lucky for the people of Saskatchewan our 
government recognized and saw the potential of our province 
and our people and began working hard to put into play the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth, which has changed the 
perception and confidence the people of this province and many 
others, even outside this province, have today about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the opposition cannot deny that growth and 
strength in one’s economy is what drives the agenda for 
meeting the needs of improved health care, education, social 
services, infrastructure, and international engagement and 
recognition. But I could be wrong, as the questions they keep 
bringing up in question period are nothing new and that they 
aren’t focused on what is important to people in Saskatchewan, 

which is the economy. 
 
Our population growth of over 160,000 more people in the last 
10 years, and continuing to grow faster than it has since the 
earliest days of our province, is a clear sign of the confidence 
many have in what Saskatchewan has to offer. A growing 
population means more revenue, more start-up businesses, and 
more companies recognizing this is the place to invest. 
 
We also realize that more people means there is a need for more 
and improved services to support that growth. So what have we 
done to address this? Let me share a few items with you. During 
a decade of growth Saskatchewan recorded the second-best job 
creation record in Canada of 12.6 per cent, nearly double the 
national average. That’s 63,000 new jobs, and we had the 
second-highest growth in average weekly incomes. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what’s important to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We led the nation in retail sales and manufacturing sales growth 
and our exporters set new records with agriculture leading the 
way. Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s important to people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We took care of, and are continuing to take care of the 
infrastructure deficit left behind by the NDP. Our infrastructure 
investment in this province, which has included building new 
schools, hospitals, long-term care homes, and highways, has 
been an astounding $11.2 billion in just 10 years. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what’s important to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have supported our municipal governments by providing 
them with predictability and certainty in their budgets. We 
introduced a formula that ties municipal revenue sharing to the 
province’s economic growth by providing one point of the 
provincial sales tax. As a result, revenue sharing to 
municipalities has doubled since we took office, from $127 
million in 2007 to 258 million in 2017. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what’s important to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 2007 we have recruited more than 750 new doctors and 
3,400 nurses of every designation, and increased the doctor and 
nurse training seats in our colleges to fill the gaping retention 
holes in health care left by the NDP. We introduced the 
Saskatchewan surgical initiative, helping to reduce the surgical 
wait times in this province to now be among the shortest in 
Canada. 
 
We have increased access to diagnostic imaging with our 
two-for-one approach, helping patients get care sooner. And 
this year we have begun a new initiative establishing 
accountable care units as part of an effort to once again improve 
service and provide better patient care. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what’s important to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Twenty-one new schools accommodating more than 11,000 
students, including many newcomers to our province, opened 
their doors for the first time. Eighteen of those schools are 
joint-use facilities built using a P3 model that reduced 
construction costs, saving taxpayers $100 million. We also 
spent millions of dollars to renovate schools in this province 
that were neglected under the NDP. Our government’s 
unprecedented 17 billion investment in K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] education over the past decade has also paid for 875 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

more teachers and the creation of 6,000 new child care spaces. 
 
We also announced in the Throne Speech a pause on curriculum 
development has been lifted and curriculum renewal will 
continue in a number of subject areas, giving our students an 
even higher quality of education and helping to prepare them 
for their future. 
 
Even our focus on post-secondary education over the past nine 
years with the graduate retention program was an investment in 
the future of this province’s economy. It provided nearly 70,000 
students to receive about 345 million in tax credits, and they 
have chosen careers right here in our province, contributing to 
the growth and prosperity of our economy. 
 
[15:00] 
 
This year we will allocate nearly 45 million to support 
post-secondary programs and skills training and employment 
initiatives for indigenous students. This includes 9.4 million 
provided to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, 
which has received a 114 per cent increase in funding from the 
province since 2007. Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s important to 
the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the past decade we have doubled support crisis prevention 
and outreach support services, doubled the number of group 
homes in the province, and have supported more than 4,000 
individuals and families with respite, residential, and day 
programming services. There are also 96 group homes 
operating in Saskatchewan today that did not exist a decade 
ago. 
 
In 2012 we created the personal care home benefit to support 
seniors residing in personal care homes. Since 2008 we have 
tripled the seniors’ income plan benefit, from $90 to $270 per 
month. Our government will soon introduce the seniors’ 
education property tax deferral program, giving seniors with a 
household income under 70,000 the option to defer the 
education portion of the property taxes on their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the economic progress of the last 
decade, our government was in the position to invest 3.7 billion 
to support people with disabilities. Since creating SAID, the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, we have 
increased benefits to recipients of the program four times. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what’s important to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year after the rural crime reduction committee 
spent time travelling around the province, listening to many 
groups and individuals on their concern over rural crime, our 
government put in place the PRT, protection and response team, 
and added approximately 6 million to address those concerns. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have reduced expenses within government, and our 
operating debt is more than $1 billion lower than it was in 2007. 
We have chosen to work towards continuing to focus on 
reducing expenses and balancing the budget in the next few 
years, unlike other provinces that continue to add to their debt 
and straddle future generations with an overwhelming burden. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the past decade, this government has ensured we have 
enacted a plan that allowed for Saskatchewan to leave 16 years 
of a deplorable economic position as a have-not province to a 
force to be reckoned with in this country. Competitive taxes and 
sensible regulations helped build the Saskatchewan advantage, 
and this government will do everything it can to defend it. Mr. 
Speaker, this Throne Speech continues to speak to our 
government’s commitment to ensure our economy stays strong, 
healthy, viable on the global scene, and invested in maintaining 
the best possible services and lifestyle for our citizens. And as 
our Premier stated in the Throne Speech, “Saskatchewan’s 
favourable business climate has played a major role in attracting 
investment.” 
 
We all know the oil and gas sector and even the potash sector 
has seen a drop in production, sales, and commodity prices over 
the past few years and continues to struggle to regain their 
positions within the markets. My constituency of Lloydminster 
had been the second-largest contributor to the oil and gas sector 
revenue in this province over the years and was hit hard when 
oil prices drastically dropped. Some companies closed their 
doors and many laid off employees. This downturn in our 
resource sector hit communities and people hard. 
 
But today there is optimism as oil prices are slowly rebounding 
and companies are rehiring and continuing to invest in our 
province. Our energy sector is one of Canada’s and our 
province’s greatest strengths. Yet its economic potential is 
being hamstrung by our own national government, even as 
Canada continues to import thousands of barrels of oil every 
day from other countries, countries who do not treat their 
people well and who do not care about climate change. 
 
Time and time again our Premier and government has stood up 
for the people of this province in opposing a carbon tax, which 
has no proven benefit to the people of this province and would 
do more harm than good to our economy. Whether it is the oil 
and gas industry, the mining industry, or our farmers, a carbon 
tax would be detrimental to keeping their livelihoods 
prosperous and viable into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has consistently opposed the Energy East 
pipeline, a pipeline which not only would have provided safe 
transportation of oil to eastern tidewaters and markets beyond 
Canada and the United States, but would have provided 
thousands of jobs to many within our province. This was a blow 
to many in my constituency alone, as well as the energy sector 
that employs thousands and has paid, on average, over the last 
three years, $17 billion annually in taxes and royalties to 
Canadian governments. Mr. Speaker, $17 billion is enough to 
pay for 680 new schools, 1.8 million knee replacements, and 
4.25 million child care spaces, not to mention the many more 
kilometres of highways and roads that could’ve been fixed or 
more senior care homes that could’ve been built with some of 
those dollars which now seem forever lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Energy East pipeline was an opportunity to 
strengthen the quality of life for many in Canada. For some 
reason, the NDP expects us to grin and bear it and move on. 
Something needs to change here. The taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan should not have to continue sending billions of 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

dollars derived from our resources and labour in equalization 
payments to support Quebec. 
 
A carbon tax would be detrimental to this province. Carbon 
taxes are attractive to some governments because they are 
lucrative propositions. Whether they effectively reduce GHG 
[greenhouse gas] emissions or actually cause consumers and 
business owners to alter their behaviour in ways that reduce 
their carbon footprints, is yet to be seen or proven. Our farmers, 
manufacturers, mining, agribusinesses, value-added food 
processing, research, and innovation industries continue to play 
a huge role in keeping our economy strong and competitive in 
foreign markets. More than 100,000 jobs in our province 
depend on exports. We need those jobs to stay here in 
Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue to support them by opposing 
a carbon tax that we know will only do more harm than good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan small businesses contributed almost 
a third of the province’s gross domestic product in 2016 at 31 
per cent. Small businesses are those with fewer than 50 
employees and account for more than 98 per cent of all 
businesses in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
business and investment in our province, most of us think of 
larger companies. To repeat some recent comments by our 
Minister of Economy, and I quote: 
 

We know that small business in Saskatchewan is actually 
big business. These enterprises help to grow our economy 
. . . [grow] jobs and encourage investment in communities 
across the province — contributing to the quality of life we 
all enjoy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan ranks third nationally for the share 
of its total economic output generated by small businesses. We 
have 129 small businesses per 1,000 people, the highest rate in 
Canada and above the national average of 105. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why this government is committed to creating and 
maintaining a positive business climate and policies that enable 
the small business sector to thrive. And that is why the Throne 
Speech introduced an increased threshold of $600,000 before 
business will jump to the higher corporate tax rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to join the 
thousands in thanking our Premier for his vision, guidance, 
enthusiasm for improving the life of people in this province, 
patience in dealing with the challenges we have faced, and 
above all for his strong leadership. 
 
I’d like to quote from John Quincy Adams, the fourth president 
of the United States, and I quote, “If your actions inspire others 
to dream, learn more, do more, and become more, you are a 
leader.” Mr. Speaker, this describes our Premier to a T and is 
why I ran for this party and want to do the best I can in serving 
my constituents. 
 
Our Premier leaves behind a solid legacy of population growth, 
infrastructure building, a strong economy, and an advancement 
of the energy sector. Under our Premier’s leadership the sinking 
ship was turned around, and this Throne Speech shows he is 
still at the helm and keeps us sailing under strong Saskatchewan 
winds and a full sail. 
 
This Throne Speech provides an ambitious and exciting plan for 

more growth and prosperity in Saskatchewan’s economy. This 
government and the citizens of Saskatchewan want the 
Saskatchewan advantage and growth plan to continue. I too 
believe the best is yet to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my children are all just starting on their way to 
successful careers. I’m very proud of all eight of my children, 
who have all attended and graduated from the University of 
Saskatchewan. Well two of them are still there attending, but 
I’m confident they will complete their degrees successfully as 
well. 
 
I have three beautiful granddaughters — Pearl, four; Belle, who 
will be three next month; Hazel, one; and a new granddaughter 
on the way. I want them to see the hope, opportunities, and 
potential that this province offers them to be successful in their 
careers, raise a family here, be happy, and enjoy all that this 
wonderful province has to offer. That’s why what this Throne 
Speech offers and commits to ensures that Saskatchewan is 
growing stronger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised in Saskatchewan. I’ve raised 
all my children in Saskatchewan, and I continue to live and 
work in this great province. This is my Saskatchewan and I am 
proud of it. I am proud of the growth and prosperity we have 
accomplished over the past 10 years. Our government has great 
ideas and the enthusiasm and ambition to continue growing 
stronger as a province. Mr. Speaker, that is why I will be 
supporting this Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 
along with my colleagues, it’s a pleasure to stand in this House 
and talk about the positive Saskatchewan and the Throne 
Speech that was just delivered a week ago. The theme of the 
Throne Speech was “Growing Stronger,” and it is very 
characteristic of this government to keep moving forward — 
not like in the past under the administration of the NDP. 
 
Before I get going and do a lot of comments, I want to say a 
few thanks as is customary. First to my family, and my wife, 
Debbie, for all the support and assistance they provide and, you 
know, the late suppers, the 10 different functions as we try to be 
as prominent in our constituencies and promoting our 
communities as much as we can. I thank her for that. 
 
Judy Hatfield and Rosalie Boots are the constituency assistants 
who work very diligently at the office. I’m quite firm on good 
office rules, and the office is open from 9 to 4 every day, and 
they do a great job of making sure that they’re there to serve the 
people of Moose Jaw and Moose Jaw North with regular 
attendance and handling all the concerns that come in to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 2007 my favourite number was 33 
because that was the margin of victory by which we won in that 
election. Well the last election that number had grown to 1,908. 
And I will never take for granted the confidence that the people 
of Moose Jaw North put in me. The 4,425 people that cast their 
ballots in my favour at the last election, I certainly appreciate 
that. I will never have an opportunity to thank them 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

individually, but I will always be indebted for the confidence 
they put in me and I try every day to live up to their 
expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Moose Jaw is a very active 
community. There’s a lot of beauty in the city. We’ve got the 
Crescent Park that’s right in the downtown heart of the city with 
an amphitheatre, very attractive for a city of its size and 
attractive for visitors and tourists that come in there. Wakamow 
Valley goes through the southern part of the city and again 
offers a lot of recreation and opportunities for camping and 
leisure there as well. We have a world-classed health spa and 
hotels, unique gift shops, and tea rooms and speciality stores, 
beautiful hotels, and convention facilities like the Grant hotel, 
the Temple Gardens, and the Heritage Inn. 
 
Mosaic Place that was brought in just after . . . This government 
helped with the creation of Mosaic Place, which is home for our 
WHL [Western Hockey League] Warriors who are doing very 
good this season. The field house, likewise, along with the 
soccer pitch. We were able to construct a brand new hospital, 
complete with a helipad and a hyperbaric chamber and the first 
rural MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] in Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:15] 
 
In Moose Jaw, you could call it a car dealer heaven for all the 
car dealers that are represented there and the good deals that 
they provide and the service they provide along . . . And we 
don’t want to underestimate the agriculture, which is the heart 
of agricultural area in Saskatchewan. The dealerships and the 
service there are second to none, along with the progress of the 
marketing and processing that is starting to see some real 
insights, insteps into Moose Jaw. 
 
We’ve got new restaurants. Next month we will turn the sod for 
the seventh Habitat for Humanity home, which shows the 
progression in Moose Jaw, a live theatre company along with 
— we’ll never take for granted — the 15 Wing and Colonel 
O’Reilly and what they contribute to our community as well. 
 
Along with that we’ve got community service clubs and 
organizations. Recently I attended the Sports Hall of Fame 
inductee dinner. And I want to, just for the record, read some of 
the names into the Hansard. Rod Heisler was inducted for 
baseball and hockey, and Graeme McMaster was from the 
medical profession and what he provided for the teams. Brian 
Towriss, who is from Moose Jaw but is a retired coach from the 
Huskies. He was included in this year’s inductees as was Steve 
Michaluk for lacrosse, Ryan Anholt for baseball, and the 1995 
Master Relics, the ladies fastball championships. It was a great 
pride in having these people inducted and recognized in our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I’m going to take a few minutes, if I 
may, to mention Valley View. As you can recall, the decision 
not to accept admission into Valley View was introduced by the 
former government in 2003. In 2012 the decision was made to 
close down or wind down the operation of Valley View Centre 
and transition residents to community inclusion. Obviously 
when we take a step like this there was big concerns from a lot 
of people, especially the people that worked out there, and the 
families of the residents. And the public at large had some very 

big concerns about the process. Well we knew that the process 
would take time and it’s taking far more time than we expected, 
but that’s not a problem. We face this with the certainty that 
we’re going to do it right and time was not the issue as we went 
forward. 
 
Well last week I attended a public discussion, Courageous 
Conversations, that was co-hosted by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Community Living, and in this they had some of 
the residents who had transitioned into some of the group 
homes that were established. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was delightful to hear the answers and the 
description they had of their life going into the communities. 
For example, they could go for coffee with their friends or they 
could stay up after supper and watch TV. Some of them were 
delighted that they could go grocery shopping because they 
never had an opportunity to go grocery shopping before, and 
even, I have my own bedroom now. And when you think about 
it, there’s some great living experiences that these people are 
given by making that transition, and it’s turning out to be really 
the right decision. There’s about 52 that have been transitioned; 
there’s a number more to go. We’ll take some time and we’ll 
make sure we’ll do it right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne takes me back to 
2007 and the election when I walked up those steps for the first 
time. It was a new beginning. And it really was a new 
beginning with the pride and anticipation as I sat in my seat for 
the first time. That new beginning was also for Saskatchewan, 
that would bring about the hope and positive attitude and 
growth and economic expansion of our province. Our province 
has since emerged as a national leader in a lot of sectors, 
improving the lives of people who reside here. It was the 
beginning of the new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve been always amazed at the resources that we have in this 
province and how, for the greater part of 73 years, this province 
didn’t grow. It remained stagnant. And especially the previous 
16 years, this amazing province was listed as have-not status 
under the NDP. The province then was governed by 
small-thinking people who didn’t understand the concept of 
business or how business works or growth or how to create 
employment or how an economy is structured. We all know that 
without good economic policies you can’t have good social 
programs. 
 
I recall in 2004 when I was the president of the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce wanting to talk to the premier, and the 
premier at that time was from my city as well, from Moose Jaw. 
I remember meeting with him at a function, saying, I’d like to 
sit down and talk to you about business, about growth, and he 
said absolutely. He gave me his card and said phone the office. 
When I phoned the office, they said well you have to send it in 
writing. So I sent a letter in writing requesting a meeting with 
the premier of the day. I hadn’t heard nothing and a month later, 
I resent it. Still heard nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t until 
several months later, when they tried to force the available 
hours legislation on the backs of businesses, and finally they 
backed off of that imposition which would have been the dart of 
the heart of business because they didn’t understand business or 
how business works. 
 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

The NDP prided themselves as a social justice party, yet they 
do little for the social justice conscience. Just google Murdoch 
Carriere. Just go ahead and google that, and you can find out 
the values of their justice conscience — $275,000 for ex-civil 
servant convicted of assault. It tells a story of their real moral 
judgment. 
 
The seniors’ income plan, which was mentioned before by my 
colleagues, the NDP had it at $90 a month, a supplement for 
low-income seniors. It stayed at $90 a month, Mr. Speaker, for 
16 years under their governance — $90 a month. When our 
government took over, almost immediately we doubled that 
benefit, and later we increased it even threefold to the amount it 
is today of $270 a month, helping those seniors. 
 
Our government introduced the seniors’ drug plan. Yes, it has 
increased in the past budget, but under the NDP, they didn’t 
have any such plan for seniors. A $100 prescription would have 
been a cost of $100 to our seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech includes a new seniors’ 
education property tax deferral program that will assist seniors 
with household incomes under $70,000 with the option to defer 
the education portion of property tax on their homes. 
 
I mentioned our abundant resources and the lack of business 
understanding under the NDP. I mentioned their social injustice 
and their seniors disregard. Mr. Speaker, they even devalued 
education. They closed 176 schools, 176 schools including Ross 
School in north central Moose Jaw, a part of my constituency. 
Teachers were laid off. They didn’t put education first; they 
never have. And after all our tax dollars, all our tax dollars 
going into education for that many years to education for our 
students, our students had to leave the province because there 
was no opportunity. They left our province and they moved to 
other places where there were opportunities, and grew the 
economies of those provinces because there was no job creation 
strategy to develop the work opportunities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the new Saskatchewan our Saskatchewan 
Party government has built or is building 40 new schools. 
Twenty-one new schools accommodating 11,000 students 
opened their doors for the first time this year. Further to the 
construction of the 40 schools, our government has expanded 
and fixed dozens of schools throughout the province. I’m 
thinking here in Moose Jaw, the major roof repair in St. 
Michael’s in Moose Jaw. They include improvements to 
Peacock and to Central Collegiate. And just very recently, 
within the last two weeks, Sunningdale School was excited 
when a new portable classroom was delivered and will be in 
function for their schooling very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from teachers and parents about 
curriculum development and proficiency in mathematics. Our 
government will ensure all Saskatchewan students are schooled 
in the basics of math and will expand math reinforcement and 
support, broadening access to common sense methods that have 
proven successful in the past, as well as other jurisdictions. 
 
To help create an active investment atmosphere, our 
government created the Saskatchewan plan for growth. It’s a 
growth plan that created a competitive tax system, a tax system 
that would attract investment in new ventures and create 

growth. 
 
We offered students retention incentives like the graduation 
retention program and the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship. With more jobs available and the best retention 
plan for graduates in Canada, our young people found the future 
here in Saskatchewan. They stayed in Saskatchewan and began 
contributing to our economy, building our province and 
growing their future in a place abundant with wealth 
opportunities. 
 
In the last decade under the Saskatchewan Party government, 
Saskatchewan has gone from the worst job creation to the 
second best, attracting businesses, creating employment, 
providing an opportunity for our young adults to work. 
 
In one decade, Saskatchewan’s population has increased by 
over 160,000 people and continues to be an attractive place for 
investment, for opportunity for families to grow and to enjoy a 
better quality of life. 
 
The Speech from the Throne continues to be mindful of the 
concerns of business, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan, 99 per 
cent of all businesses are small businesses with fewer than 50 
employees. These small businesses contribute nearly one-third 
of the province’s GDP [gross domestic product]. They employ 
over 30 per cent of the province’s workers and paid out over 
$6.2 billion in wages and salaries last year. Small business is 
big business in Saskatchewan. To assist small businesses, we 
have announced plans to raise the small-business income 
threshold from 500,000 to $600,000, the highest threshold in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s capital investment in Saskatchewan is 
forecast to be $14.5 billion. We continue to build our province 
for the benefit of our citizens and we are doing it in a 
responsible manner. 
 
To review, the NDP showed a lack of business understanding, a 
lack of social program assistance, a lack of respect for seniors, 
and a lack of education understanding. So let’s look at health. 
When the Saskatchewan Party took office, there was an extreme 
shortage of doctors and nurses, with the longest surgical 
wait-list time in Canada, the longest surgical wait times in the 
country. Fifty-two hospitals had been closed. They didn’t close 
the Moose Jaw Union Hospital; they just abandoned it. For 
years and years and years, the medical staff in the community 
were asking for at least an addition, but the answer from the 
NDP government of the day was no, no, no. 
 
This is changing under the Saskatchewan Party government. 
We have hired over 750 more doctors and 3,400 more nurses of 
every distinguished designation. Our hospital in Moose Jaw is 
relatively new and I’m certainly proud of it. It’s got the 
hyperbaric chamber and the first rural MRI. And throughout the 
province we are pleasing to improve health care with the 
construction of the Jim Pattison Hospital in Saskatoon and the 
new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, and we’ve 
constructed 13 long-term care facilities. 
 
Before the end of this year, the government will complete the 
consolidation of the province’s 12 regional hospital authorities 
into a single Saskatchewan authority. The single authority will 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

reduce administration costs while improving the coordination of 
care and enhancing the accountability of our health care system. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Also in this session, our government will fulfill its commitment 
to provide individual funding for children under the age of six 
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, or ASD. The initial 
funding level will be $4,000 per year for each child. All this, 
Mr. Speaker, and in the last 10 years we’ve paid down a 
substantial part of provincial debt. 
 
The theme of this year’s Speech from the Throne is “Growing 
Stronger.” The province continues on that regard and growing 
stronger. Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other items, but I’m 
running a little bit short on my time. But the Speech from the 
Throne, the theme is to grow stronger. That’s what this 
government has done in the last 10 years, is to keep on growing 
and it will continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t tell you a few 
comments about our leader, the Premier of the province. I first 
met the province when I was managing the radio station in 
Swift Current where he lived, and at the time he was the 
economic development officer. When we combined the AM and 
FM radio station, we were looking for a program director at that 
time. And I knew there was a young gentleman that had some 
radio experience who was very sharp, and I actually interviewed 
him for a job at the radio station as the program director. 
 
Well he didn’t accept the offer and he moved on, and a few 
years later I had the opportunity to move to Moose Jaw to 
operate their radio station there. Shortly after that, I had a call 
from the member from Estevan who was now the leader of the 
opposition, and asked me if I would be interested in, would I 
look at the nomination for Moose Jaw North. After giving it 
some consideration and knowing the leadership abilities of this 
gentleman, I decided to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under his direction this province has certainly 
moved forward and grown, and I can appreciate what he has 
done. And he has certainly helped me in that decision, in asking 
me to be part of his team. And it just shows the leadership that 
he has and the confidence he has put in a lot of the people on 
this side of the House, and the reputation that he has developed 
for himself throughout Saskatchewan as such a capable leader, 
and for Western Canada and Canada as a whole throughout the 
nation, and even with a world influence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be hard to see somebody take his 
place, but it is an opportunity to look at new ideas and refresh 
the policies that we have, to move forward, and even keep 
going stronger. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place, but I will not be 
supporting the amendment and I will support the Speech from 
the Throne as it was made from our members here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
real honour and a privilege to be able to reply to the Speech 

from the Throne which was delivered on the occasion of the 
opening of the second session of the twenty-eighth legislature in 
Saskatchewan, our lovely province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we know, this will be the last Throne Speech that our 
Premier will be, Premier and his government will be delivering. 
As we can see, the Premier has not let up or taken time off, if 
you like, at all. The Premier’s been very busy and working for 
the betterment of this province and the Saskatchewan people. 
You can only look at this Throne Speech and see how full it is 
and how innovative it is to continue to deal with any issues in 
the province. So I’d like to thank the Premier for his service and 
for the work he’s doing now and right up to the last day that he 
is in that position. 
 
I need to thank a few people, of course. I’d like to thank my 
wife, Cindy, who is an educational assistant in Biggar Central 
School 2000 — and today is her birthday, so happy birthday, 
Cindy — and recognize my son Marshall who works in 
Saskatoon, daughter Alex who is going to the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] and is going to graduate with a 
degree in social work this spring’s convocation. My daughter 
Lacey who works at Nature Saskatchewan and her husband, 
Nick, and their two children, Surayya and Amara. Amara just 
turned one here back in June so she’s a big joy in our household 
and our heart. 
 
I’d like to thank my CA [constituency assistant] Janet Hanson, 
who does an excellent job in the office in Biggar, and she goes 
out one day to Hepburn to look after the constituents’ concerns. 
We’re always available to help wherever we can and she can 
with constituents’ concerns and get the issue to a minister’s 
office or help resolve the issues. 
 
A number of other people I’d like to recognize and thank: my 
constituency president, Mayor Ray Sadler, the mayor of Biggar, 
been president for a number of years. He’s a great help and we 
travel lots together to party functions, and I value his friendship 
and advice. Vice-president Lorne Cornish who is a great source 
of advice as well; the secretary of Biggar-Sask Valley, Desiree 
Hinse. Now poor Desiree has been having some problems. She 
has filled in part time when Janet’s away in my office. She is 
going through some very difficult times with some medical 
issues. And her son Zane, who I speak about quite often, he’s 
four years old. He lives with us, so my wife, Cindy, is having to 
raise a four-year-old in my absence. I look forward to seeing 
Zane when I get back home from the legislature. 
 
And a thank you to James Walker who’s vice-principal of 
Central School 2000, who is my treasurer, and Dakota Ekman 
who’s been my long-time membership director and news 
director. 
 
My constituency, Biggar-Sask Valley, of course changed after 
the last election. And so it includes the town of Biggar 
naturally, and everything north of Highway 14 which is Asquith 
and goes right up to Cando to the boundaries of The 
Battlefords, includes much of Highway 16, Ruddell and 
Maymont, Radisson, Borden, and Langham. 
 
The new part of course, the Sask Valley part, is the area 
between Rosthern and Osler, Warman, and Martensville. So 
that’s the communities of Dalmeny and Hague, Hepburn and 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

Waldheim, goes right to the Saskatchewan River. So it’s a great 
. . . very friendly people, and constituency’s made up of, is very 
much an agriculture constituency, great farms in the 
constituency. 
 
We have more than agriculture in the constituency just in the 
town of Biggar: Prairie Malt, and they’ve been a long-standing 
business making malt for the brewery industry; AGI, who is a 
manufacturer making everything from oil tanks to the shaft that 
was put in at the mine at Bethune. So they’re a very innovative 
family and do great work, employ a lot of people in Biggar. 
E-Kay manufacturing is a short line manufacturer making bin 
sweeps and augers and a number of things like that. 
 
In Maymont it just happened to, this year the GrainsConnect 
terminal was just recently opened, so they’re taking grain this 
fall. So congratulations to them and to the community of 
Maymont, which they are a valuable asset as well. 
 
So I’d just like to get into some of the items in the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As our Throne Speech has 
outlined, Saskatchewan has enjoyed a decade of growth. The 
population has grown faster than it has since the earliest days of 
our province. During the decade, Saskatchewan has grown by 
160,000 people, reversing the decline of the previous two 
decades, which of course most of it was under the government 
of the NDP. 
 
You know, you can see it in every town and community and 
even in the rural areas where the population has grown, in 
Biggar-Sask Valley as well as in the cities and other parts of the 
province where people are buying homes, building homes. And 
you can see the number of people that now fill our schools and 
our churches, quite frankly. In the town of Biggar, the largest 
influx of immigrants are from the Philippines. And most of 
them are Catholic, so many of them go to church, and our 
Catholic church has really grown also. And a lot of them send 
their children to the separate school in Biggar, St. Gabriel’s. But 
both the separate and public school has grown. 
 
It’s the same way right across the province wherever you go. So 
that’s such a great advantage, when you have employment and 
you have opportunity that brings people in to the province, and 
there’s nothing but good things come out of that growth. 
 
Under health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few things 
have to be pointed out. Since 2007 we have recruited more than 
750 new doctors. In the town of Biggar, we have the only 
hospital that’s in the constituency, and we have three doctors 
there with the hospital and long-term care. We’ve also recruited 
more than 3,400 nurses of every designation. In the province, 
we’ve built 13 new long-term care facilities that have opened. 
New hospitals built or under construction, including the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon and the new 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 
 
In the town of Biggar, as I mentioned, there was a new 
long-term care home built. It has 54 beds and the total shareable 
cost of the project was $22.9 million. The province put up 18.3. 
So it attached the long-term care home to the hospital and 
renovated the hospital as well, so we have a great facility with 
three doctors and very good health care in Biggar and in the 
constituency. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s just some of the things in health care 
that our government has done. I mean we’ve shortened the 
surgical wait-lists. And a very innovative thing, is reduced 
down to one health region. That process is rolling out and I am 
very confident that’s going to be a great improvement to health 
care in the province. 
 
Our government accepted a recommendation made by an 
advisory board that examined the administrative structure 
governing health care in Saskatchewan. The panel 
recommended the consolidation of the province’s 12 regional 
health authorities into a single Saskatchewan Health Authority, 
and it will begin operations in December. So they’re very busy 
putting that in place right now. 
 
We also, under our government’s direction, will implement a 
new organ donation program, building on work undertaken by 
the standing committee. The program will be led by the donor 
physicians, who will provide education and support to fellow 
health care providers and champion organ donations across the 
province. Also, we will also expand the pool of donors by 
amending regulations to allow for donation after 
cardiocirculatory death by implementing a mandatory referral 
program. And also we’ll continue to explore the option of 
moving into a presumed consent model of organ donation. I’m 
really keen on this. I think that’s something that we should do, 
but we need to consult with the citizens of Saskatchewan before 
we move on that, of course. It’s a very important step. 
 
Of course our government also will fulfill its commitment to 
provide individualized funding for children under the age of six 
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, or ASD. And I’d just 
like to put a bit more detail on the record. Our government will 
introduce individualized funding for pre-school children under 
the age of six who are diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, 
ASD, this session, as part of the next budget. The funding of 
$4,000 annually per child under six years of age will begin in 
2018-19. The Government of Saskatchewan currently provides 
nearly $8 million in funding for ASD through the Ministry of 
Health, which includes $5 million for professional medical 
support and consultations in health regions. ASD supports are 
also provided through the Ministry of Education and Social 
Services. 
 
[15:45] 
 
In 2017 and ’18, to facilitate the transition towards an 
individualized funding model for ASD services in 
Saskatchewan from the current model where funding is 
provided to health regions to hire specialists, our government 
established a working group of stakeholders to review best 
practices in other jurisdictions and provide recommendations to 
government on issues involved in transitioning to the new 
model. And that’s very exciting. My wife, as I said, is an 
educational assistant. She works with, pretty well, children with 
autism on a regular basis, and it’s just one of those conditions 
that is, I don’t know . . . It’s perplexing, I guess, to see that. But 
you know, we are offering help to the families and individuals 
with those problems. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under education this year, 21 new 
schools accommodating more than 11,000 students opened the 
doors for the first time. Eighteen of those schools are joint-use 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

facilities built using a P3, or public-private partnership, model 
that reduced construction costs by $100 million. These schools 
are located on nine sites in Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and 
Martensville, and they were completed in less than two years. 
And our government has constructed or renovated 65 schools 
during the last decade, including several new community 
schools. 
 
And in the constituency of Biggar-Sask Valley, a couple of 
projects: 2008, Biggar and district daycare project was 
completed with an investment of $368,000; 2010, the Borden 
School roof project, $200,000. And the list goes on and on with 
those types of improvements in schools and daycares across the 
constituency and the province. 
 
Our government had an unprecedented $17 billion investment 
in kindergarten to grade 12 education over the past decade and 
has also provided for 875 more teachers and the creation of 
nearly 6,000 new child care spaces. And child care spaces are 
so important for families, you know, when both parents are 
working or single parents. It’s so vital, and we have a daycare 
in Biggar and other communities that help families so much. 
 
During this session, our government will introduce legislation 
that will protect the right to school choice by invoking the 
notwithstanding clause of The Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. So I applaud the Premier and our government for 
that as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Under the area of protecting our communities, as we know, 
earlier this year the federal government announced its intention 
to legalize non-medical use of marijuana by July 2018. And 
despite these concerns, the federal government has not changed 
its timetable. Therefore our government has no choice but to 
prepare for this historic revision to the Criminal Code. Our 
government is in the midst of a review process that includes an 
online public consultation that received nearly 35,000 
responses. This review is guided by four objectives: preventing 
the growth of the underground marijuana market, restricting 
access to minors, ensuring road and workplace safety, and 
protecting public health. Once the review is completed this fall, 
our government will introduce legislation that will govern the 
sale and distribution of marijuana, and online measures to 
protect public health and safety and enhance public education. 
 
During the last decade, more than 600 people have been killed 
and more than 4,000 people injured in accidents involving 
drivers impaired by alcohol. And in the last year, our 
government has introduced a number of measures. These 
actions include increasing the age of which drivers are 
prohibited from having any drugs or alcohol in their blood 
system from 19 and under to 21, and I think that’s a very, very 
good move. Introducing a three-day vehicle seizure for drivers 
over the age of 21 found to have blood alcohol levels between 
.04 and .08 for the first time. And another innovative move 
because even though a person will not have a criminal record, 
this, you know, this is a serious, serious situation. A vehicle is 
seized whether it’s owned by an employee or a spouse or a 
family member. That vehicle is out of service for three days. So 
people need to really take a look at their habits about drinking 
and driving. And of course making Saskatchewan’s ignition 
interlock law the toughest in Canada — another great, great 
innovation that we brought in. 

We will be urging municipalities to allow ride-sharing services 
to protect within their jurisdiction. Our government will also 
introduce legislation enabling SGI to offer affordable insurance 
to drivers working for ride-sourcing companies like Uber and 
Lyft. 
 
Also we have brought in innovation to address the concerns of 
rural crime in Saskatchewan. Our government appointed a 
committee of government MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] to consult on measures that might strengthen public 
safety. And I went to one meeting, and you know, crime, drugs 
and crime, and property theft and damage is a very serious 
concern in Biggar-Sask Valley in the northwest as it is in many 
other areas, and our government has responded to that. And I’ll 
outline what our government is doing that has been outlined in 
the Throne Speech. 
 
Our government acted on the committee’s recommendation to 
create a new protection and response team or PRT consisting of 
258 armed officers who have the authority to arrest and detain 
those suspected of committing crimes. The PRT is composed of 
120 police officers from the RCMP and municipal police 
services, 40 commercial vehicle enforcement officers who have 
been given expanded powers, and 90 conservation officers. The 
protection and response team will improve response times to 
emergency calls and increase the visibility of uniformed officers 
in rural Saskatchewan. Our government has committed nearly 
$6 million to support the PRT and other initiatives rising from 
the committee’s report. Very innovative and very welcomed by 
the citizens of my constituency and around the province. 
 
Under infrastructure, I’ve touched on a number of infrastructure 
areas, but during our last decade our government has invested 
more that $26 billion to renew and expand Saskatchewan 
infrastructure. Of that total, 7.4 billion has been committed to 
the province’s highways. And we can go through the list. This 
record investment resulted in the repair and improvement of 
12 000 kilometres of highway and the completion of significant 
projects such as Saskatoon’s Circle Drive South bridge, the St. 
Louis bridge, the twinning of Highway 11, passing lanes on 
Highway 7 and Highway 10. This year work continues on the 
Regina bypass, overpasses at Martensville and Warman, the 
Saskatoon north commuter parkway bridge, twinning projects 
on Highway 39, 16, and 7, and passing lanes on Highway 5, 
among many other projects. 
 
And there’s many, many more infrastructure projects that our 
government has invested in. As an example in my constituency: 
Dalmeny, a new storm water system for $378,000; Hepburn 
received $228,000 for a water distribution system; and Radisson 
received $110,000 for a swimming pool reconstruction. So 
there’s many innovations, plus the highways, that have been 
approved that go through the constituency. 
 
Last session our government passed Bill No. 40, a legislation 
that would allow for the sale of up to 49 per cent of a Crown 
corporation. This legislation would have enabled a Crown 
corporation to enter into a partnership beneficial to the province 
while ensuring the government remaining the majority owner of 
that project. Over the last few months our government has heard 
many people feel very concerned about this legislation and 
potential sale of even a small stake in a Crown corporation. 
Consequently our government repealed the provision of Bill . . . 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

will repeal the provisions of Bill 40 that allow for the sale of 
partial equity position of a Crown corporation. So our 
government is listening to the people of Saskatchewan. There’s 
an example of that in this Throne Speech. 
 
Demand for electricity has grown by 25 per cent since 2007 and 
is expected to increase by another 13 per cent by 2025. 
SaskPower has responded by investing nearly $8 billion during 
the last decade to meet increased demand and to restore and 
replace aging infrastructure. This year the company expect to 
allocate another $1.1 billion in capital projects. 
 
Since 2008 SaskTel has invested more than $2.6 billion to 
improve telephone Internet service in the province. This year 
SaskTel will spend $300 million to expand and enhance its 
network with a total of $1.1 billion expected to be invested in 
the next four years. So that’s very important infrastructure 
investment because one of the concerns we see and hear is poor 
cell and Internet service in many parts of the province. So this is 
there to address that concern. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our government also recognizes that there’s 
more than 100,000 jobs in our province that depends on 
exports. During our decade of growth, Saskatchewan exports to 
emerging markets, particularly in Asia, have grown by 
staggering amounts. Saskatchewan’s exports to China have 
increased 530 per cent over the past decade to $3 billion last 
year. Exports to India are up 272 per cent, $1.5 billion. Pakistan 
exports are up 293 per cent to 548 million and exports to 
Indonesia are up 132 per cent to $543 million. 
 
Our government will continue to expand our export markets 
through further trade missions in these and other countries 
through the support of trade-focused organizations like the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. So we’re doing 
great things there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just want to definitely touch on agriculture. In 2016 
Saskatchewan shipped $14.4 billion worth of agriculture 
products, more than half of all exports. In the coming year my 
government will continue to provide strong support to farmers, 
ranchers, and agribusinesses. We will stand up for our 
agriculture sector in opposing a federal carbon tax and the 
federal small business tax changes that will hit farmers and 
ranchers hard. We will work to expand access to important 
markets across the globe, and we will continue to invest in 
research through the Agriculture Development Fund, the Global 
Institute for Food Security, and the livestock and forage centre 
of excellence at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our support extends to Saskatchewan’s value-added food 
processing industry, which has grown tremendously through the 
years. There are now more than 300 food companies operating 
in the province, generating more than 4 billion in revenue and 
employing 5,000 people. And to build on this momentum, our 
government will launch an agriculture value-added new-growth 
incentive intended to attract more investment into the sector. 
 
My time is running out, Mr. Speaker, but you know, we’re 
doing great things on the environmental front. SaskPower is 
expanding its renewable power as well, doubling renewable 
generation in less than 15 years and of course investing $1.3 
billion in the world’s first commercial power plant equipped 

with a post-combustion carbon capture system. So doing great 
things there, and SaskPower will continue to do great things on 
the environmental side. 
 
You know, under the social services, because of our economic 
growth in the last decade our government was in a position to 
invest more than $3.7 billion to support people with disabilities 
and in 2009 created the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability program, or SAID. And since then we have increased 
benefits paid to recipients of the program four times. The 
government supports more than 4,000 individuals and families 
with respite and individual day programs. And the list goes on 
and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve only touched on some of the things in the Throne Speech 
that our government has done and our government will continue 
to do in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and will not be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. I think we’re having troubles here. Greg, 
the mikes aren’t . . . 
 
Mr. Meili: — Is it all right if I go from this chair, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Meili: — That’s okay? Well thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Please disregard the technical difficulties there. Now 
the mike seems to be working. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And you know, the theme for the Speech from the Throne was 
around gratitude, so grateful that the equipment is back on. I’m 
also, like the Throne Speech said, I’m grateful to be here in 
Saskatchewan and from Saskatchewan. 
 
This year our family has a little bit extra to be grateful for. We 
have a new son who was born on September 4. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much. Our little Augustin Bleu. 
So some of you on the other side of the aisle will know that I 
have a bit of an affection for wordplay and puns. People on this 
side of the room would call it an affliction. So I was very 
pleased when my son decided that he would be born on Labour 
Day. Thought that was very fitting, especially since his father is 
from a workers’ party. So I’m thankful for that arrival, and of 
course that everyone is doing well. Mahli’s doing well, as is our 
son Abraham, who’s very happy to be a big brother. On est 
aussi vraiment remerciant pour l’aide de Françoise, ma 
belle-mère. Sans elle on ne sera pas capable; même avec, c’est 
un défi. 
 
[Translation: We are also truly thankful for the help of 
Françoise, my mother-in-law. Without her we would not be able 
to cope; even with, it’s a challenge.] 
 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

I want to also, as is customary and is my first chance to get to 
do so, thank Jasmine Liska who is my constituency assistant. 
She’s been doing a terrific job setting up our office in the little 
red house on 3rd Avenue, and being very accommodating and 
helpful to the constituents and to her errant MLA. 
 
I also want to take an occasion to welcome a friend to the 
legislature. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Dave 
Mitchell. Dave is one of my oldest friends. We’ve known each 
other for many years, bonded over a shared love of bad jokes 
and good politics, and he is working on the campaign for 
leadership as our communications director. Thankful to him and 
all of the staff on that team and volunteers on that team. And 
also thankful to my caucus mates, even the Whip. It’s a great 
group, very supportive and helpful as one is still learning the 
ropes, even after a few months here. 
 
I’m very grateful to have Ms. . . . not saying her name. 
Saskatoon Fairview. See, one of these things that you’re still 
learning. Our member from Saskatoon Fairview, who is a 
terrific addition to our group. You know, the former prime 
minister, Mr. Harper, used to caution us against practising 
sociology, but I actually think practising some sociology is 
exactly what we need. Someone who’s interested and 
understands the academic and theoretic underpinnings of the 
ideas that we’re discussing, but also is deeply concerned with 
their practical application, and the experience of people on the 
ground. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the summer I got a chance to 
travel around and learn more about what that experience on the 
ground is for people in Saskatchewan. We were all over the 
province: Maple Creek, Meadow Lake, Preeceville, Rocanville. 
You name it; we were there. And you know, we heard a lot 
from the people of Saskatchewan about their concerns. 
 
We heard a lot about the shutdown of STC, hearing from 
farmers who were losing days in the field as a result of not 
being able to get parts, from small-business owners in larger 
cities and smaller centres who aren’t able to get their shipments 
out to their customers in a timely or affordable way. Heard 
about elders in communities who can’t keep appointments 
anymore, medical appointments, and are even considering 
moving out of small towns into larger centres because they 
aren’t able to access those appointments. And of course hearing 
the stories of people having to hitchhike, having lost that 
lifeline to the rest of the province and how dangerous that is. 
 
Other things that we’ve heard a lot about are the introduction of 
PST, in particular, on crop and hail insurance. That’s really 
harming producers, as is PST on construction. That’s a really 
good way to slow down the building economy in a time where 
it actually needs to be picked up. 
 
Of course there was also a lot said about cuts to health care, 
cuts to things like the hearing aid program and podiatry. And I 
heard a lot from my constituents and my patients, because I 
continue to practice family medicine on occasion, about the 
cancellation of the special diet fund, or the limitation of the 
special diet fund for people with chronic illnesses like HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] and diabetes. That’s a real 
hardship on people that are barely scraping by with a few 
dollars. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if the mike from the other seat is 
connected, if that’s why they’re not able to hear? Are we okay 
now? Thank you. Technical difficulties all along. 
 
The other thing that I certainly heard a lot of, Mr. Speaker, as 
we were travelling the province in places that hadn’t elected a 
New Democrat in a long time and from individuals who don’t 
tend to vote New Democrat, I still heard great frustration on 
their part around . . . are we okay? . . . around the discussion of 
the sale in part of the Crown corporations. There’s a very 
consistent disagreement with that as a possibility. 
 
The other thing that we heard a great deal about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was the injustice of, in the time of all those cuts, in the 
time where we’re talking about selling off key pieces of 
infrastructure and key pieces of our system that supports us, of 
those Crown corporations, at the same time we’re talking about 
cuts to corporate taxes and cuts to income taxes for the highest 
earner. Moving taxes from the highest earners to the lowest, it’s 
really backwards. It’s not at all a fair or a helpful way to go. 
And while they might not have used the term exactly, the 
people of Saskatchewan understand that austerity is not a 
functional approach, that when you cut deeply in a time of 
economic downturn, you don’t correct the economy. In fact you 
make things worse. You hurt people in the short term with 
decreased access to health, education, other supports they truly 
need. You also slow down any economic recovery. 
 
So these are the things that we heard about, the complaints that 
we heard. But the other thing that I heard, and perhaps most 
consistently, is that people didn’t want just to know what we 
didn’t like. They knew that we would stop the cuts, that we 
would save the Crowns. They didn’t want to just hear what 
we’re fighting against. They wanted to know what we’re 
fighting for. And I’m sure that something similar has been 
heard by the leadership candidates from the Saskatchewan 
Party, as they’ve been pushed to identify the mistakes that have 
been referenced by the Premier and others, but also to propose 
their own vision and put forward some promises and platform 
as one of them will very soon become the new Premier. But I’m 
sure what they’ve experienced, as we have, is that people are 
looking to be inspired. They’re looking to have a vision for the 
future of Saskatchewan laid out before them. And there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is where the disappointment really lies in this 
year’s Throne Speech. 
 
As I said, this is my first time for a Throne Speech here on the 
floor. And there’s a lot of pomp and circumstance. There’s a lot 
of interest in the process. But the actual content, well it left a lot 
to be desired. There was little hope. There was little substance. 
It’s a backward-looking document, not just in its reliance on 
applauding a legacy but in ignoring current needs, current 
realities, and emerging understanding of what actually works to 
advance a province. 
 
Now of course this wasn’t my Throne Speech to give, but had it 
been, had it been an invitation to imagine a better 
Saskatchewan, it would have looked quite different. It would 
have started with a commitment to making health the primary 
goal, to using a Health in all Policies approach model in order 
to assure that decisions across different departments, across 
different ministries, kept in mind what should be our primary 
goal, which is improving the quality of life of the people of this 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

province. And improving that quality of life starts with a 
commitment to a healthy economy, an economy in which we 
keep people working, with opportunities for businesses to 
thrive, but also an economy that works for people. 
 
You know, after a decade of growth, as this Speech from the 
Throne describes, well my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana 
pointed out there are a lot of things that grew in that period that 
we shouldn’t be so proud of — for example, inequality. For 
each dollar that the incomes of the bottom 20 per cent of 
Saskatchewan earners went up in the last decade, the incomes 
of the top earners, the top 20 per cent, went up by $7 — seven 
times as much. And in that same period you saw life expectancy 
decreasing for that bottom quintile, while it increased for the 
top. The way that inequality has grown has resulted in greater 
disparities in health outcomes and worse quality of life and 
earlier death for those who don’t benefit the most. 
 
So in order to have an economy that works for everyone, we 
need to make some improvements. We need a $15-an-hour 
minimum wage and pay equity legislation. And instead of a 
passive-aggressive partial repeal of Bill 40, a repeal that appears 
to blame Saskatchewan people for not accepting the Newspeak 
of a pretend World Bank definition, we need a proper 
commitment, not just to keeping our Crowns, but to strengthen 
them by expanding the markets in which they can operate, by 
looking at opportunities in technology, such as leveraging the 
strength of SaskPower, SaskTel to actually host 
cloud-computing storage here in Saskatchewan. I’m looking at 
how do we distribute energy production, solar and wind around 
the province in order to provide income, much needed energy, 
and opportunities in small towns and reserves. 
 
And we need a Throne Speech that recognizes the cost of 
poverty, that nearly $4 billion a year is lost to our economy 
because of the number of people who are living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. I mentioned it’s my first Throne Speech down 
here, but it’s not my first Throne Speech that I’ve been in the 
legislature for. I came in 2014 to witness the Throne Speech in 
which the Premier made a significant effort to focus on poverty, 
a word that is missing in this year’s Throne Speech. And in that 
2014 speech, he even singled me out and others, who had 
advocated for a poverty reduction strategy, and promised that 
such a thing would be put in place. And there was a process, 
nearly a year long, to come up with recommendations and a 
strategy, but unfortunately the recommendations were largely 
ignored and the strategy, such as it was, has not been enacted in 
any significant way. 
 
A Throne Speech that was really focused on our future would 
put in place a real poverty reduction strategy, following those 
recommendations to institute a 50 per cent decrease in five 
years, because those recommendations, even after a few years, 
they’d still stand up. They’re still there, ready to be used. A 
Throne Speech that would make a real difference would focus 
on investing upstream, on the return of investment to the 
economy. And we heard from the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce and the transform Saskatchewan project about the 
need to have an upstream economy where we recognize that 
investments now pay off in the long term, investments like, not 
just child care, but actual high-quality early childhood 
education, giving every child in those first 1,000 days a chance 
to really establish the skills, the opportunities to be able to 

thrive in the long term. 
 
We need to restore funding to schools, expanding the 
community schools model and making sure that children with 
special needs or language needs have the educational assistant 
support they need in the classroom. 
 
And we need to look at the decrease, the very sudden decrease 
over the last decade in the number of students from lower 
income families who are seeking out higher education. It’s 
plummeted in Saskatchewan compared to the rest of Western 
Canada, which is coincident with a significant rise in the cost of 
tuition. We need to move from the highest tuition in Western 
Canada to the lowest. 
 
Something that wasn’t mentioned in any significant way in this 
Throne Speech was First Nations and Métis people. The only 
real reference was an increase in post-secondary enrolment 
among that population, which is a positive thing, but does it 
really represent a change or is it just reflective of an increase in 
the numbers in that population overall? 
 
What’s clear is that we need to do much more than just see a 
few more people getting into post-secondary education. A 
Throne Speech with a real vision for our future would identify 
closing the gap in health, education, and economic outcomes as 
a primary priority by re-establishing a ministry of First Nations 
and Métis relations in order to meet the recommendations of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission that apply to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like to see us consider the model done in Australia 
where every year they have a speech called the closing the gap 
speech, which is elevated to the level of a budget or Throne 
Speech in importance, and it examines the degree to which in 
the previous year that government has been successful in 
advancing action on the disparities that increase. We need to 
elevate that discussion to its rightful place of importance here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When it comes to health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all that we 
saw was discussion of the amalgamation of the health regions 
and an indication that that would somehow save money, despite 
the fact that it hasn’t been shown to do so in any other province. 
But what has been shown to happen is that when there are 
major changes with this government you also see changes to 
privatization of services, to job cuts. That’s what concerns me 
most there. 
 
[16:15] 
 
We also saw crowing about the increased number of MRIs that 
were done through the privatized MRI system, but no actual 
indication of whether that is decreasing waiting lists, which 
isn’t actually surprising because nowhere has it been 
demonstrated that privatizing that kind of service actually 
decreases waiting lists within the public system. 
 
How much more interesting would it have been for us to see 
commitment to a Choosing Wisely model, where the most 
evidence-based and cost-effective methods are chosen within 
the health system; so rather than increasing the numbers of tests 
we don’t need, actually decreasing unnecessary prescriptions, 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

testing, and surgical procedures. 
 
We also are the only OECD [Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development] country without a national 
pharmacare plan. We need to continue to advocate for that, but 
if we aren’t able to achieve that at a national level, 
Saskatchewan can once again take the lead and establish such a 
program here on our own because by buying in bulk and 
covering people’s medications now instead of covering their 
expensive treatment once they’re ill, we can save significant 
funds. 
 
The other thing that was not significantly mentioned — or 
understood, I think — was the way in which rural 
Saskatchewan has been taken for granted. And the cancellation 
of STC is not the only element. We also of course saw the 
introduction of PST on hail and crop insurance. We’ve seen 
very little action on the significant water drainage problems and 
the waste management challenges faced by smaller 
communities. 
 
A real plan for the future would be recognizing that farmers are 
talking today about climate change. They’re recognizing that 
that’s changing growing seasons, that’s changing the length of 
droughts and of wet periods, and that they need support in 
marketing and research to be able to adapt and mitigate that 
growing problem. 
 
And a shocking omission to my mind, in this speech, right after 
the incidents in southwest Saskatchewan, is that there was no 
mention of disaster relief for those who had their livestock and 
their land affected by wildfires. That seems to me a shocking 
oversight. 
 
We also saw nothing in any significant way in terms of energy 
leadership. We’ve been a laggard in that area in terms of 
moving, transitioning to the 21st century in energy 
infrastructure that is so much required. It’s time for us to stop 
grandstanding and start showing leadership with a 
made-in-Saskatchewan response to the federal carbon pricing 
plan that introduces more jobs in energy production, in 
retrofitting existing buildings and building new green buildings, 
in protecting families and producers and trade-exposed 
industries and, most importantly, actually decreasing emissions 
rather than pretending that they will go away on their own. 
 
We need to be leading the change to the energy infrastructure of 
the next century, and we need to be leading the change to a 
deeper democracy. That means moving away from corporate 
and union donations but also involving people in a citizens’ 
assembly to find ways to increase democratic engagement, 
increase the level of trust that people have in the process, 
increase voter turnout, and make sure that we have fair 
representation. 
 
I appreciate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the spirit of gratitude that this 
Speech from the Throne led with, and I share in that gratitude. 
Saskatchewan has provided so much for me, my family, and so 
many. 
 
But people aren’t looking for a Throne Speech that gives thanks 
to the Sask Party, that gives thanks to this Premier. They’re 
looking for a vision. They’re looking for a plan for a better 

Saskatchewan. And this Throne Speech, while it might satisfy 
those in the mood for a self-congratulatory look back, for those 
who want a forward-thinking, far-reaching set of ideas, well this 
Throne Speech came up far short, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And for 
that reason I’ll be supporting the amendment. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
to rise in this House, Mr. Speaker, and reply to the Speech from 
the Throne. It truly is an honour and a privilege to serve the 
constituents of Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to thank Premier Wall for 
his unwavering commitment to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It not only was an honour to have his name on 
every piece of literature that I handed out during the 2016 
election, but it was also an honour to be on billboards and to use 
his name when you greeted someone on the doorstep. 
 
Those things were nice, Mr. Speaker, but they were only 
symbols of the truly remarkable person that he was and still is 
to this day. What really helped so many of us get elected was 
his honesty, his integrity, his hard work ethic, and his vision for 
our province. But probably even more important to me was his 
humility. When someone would congratulate him for a job well 
done, he rarely took credit but would pass on the praise usually 
right back to the people of Saskatchewan. It truly has been a 
humbling experience to serve under the leadership of Premier 
Wall. So thank you, Premier Wall, and may God bless you, 
Tami, and your family as you enjoy a less political life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few thanks to some other people 
who truly make a difference in my life. And the person that I 
want to thank first is my wife, Karen. Karen is always 
supportive, always there to help, and usually without even being 
asked. And as an example, my clothing that I sometimes put in 
the laundry basket, but more than likely it was left on the bench 
at the end of the bed somehow, and I don’t know how it 
happens, it just ends up hanging on hangers in the closet. Socks 
end up paired, and everything is ready to go before I even need 
it. Some might call it magic, but I think we all know better. I 
think we all call it love and the support of our spouses. 
 
I would also like to thank my constituency assistant, Sasha 
Peters, for her hard work helping our constituents. Sasha is a 
great listener and never underestimates people’s needs when 
they come to the office, regardless of which constituency they 
live in. 
 
I also want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon Westview for 
their support during my last year and a half as their elected 
representative of the provincial government. It is an honour and 
a privilege to serve them. 
 
This last year has been a challenge as we struggle with low 
resource revenues, as our government continues to work 
towards balancing the budget. This government has listened to 
the people and reacted to their concerns. Mr. Speaker, this is not 
a time to shift the shortfalls of today to the next generation, well 
not unless you want to go back to buying luggage for our 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

graduates because we are no longer a province that business 
wants to invest in, days like when the NDP were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently we opened a new school in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Westview, a school the NDP voted 
against in the budget, and a school that constituents said they 
desperately needed. This school will educate hundreds of new 
students, of which many are new Canadians. The 18 new 
joint-use P3 schools were built on time and on budget, and in 
fact saved over $100 million using that process. And I think it’s 
important to point out that we would not have been able to build 
as many schools if we had used a traditional model. 
 
These two schools, Ernest Lindner and St. Lorenzo Ruiz, were 
designed with input from teachers, from students, from parents, 
the school division, and from community members. I want to 
say thank you to the government of the day that made those 
important commitments to build 18 joint-use schools. Education 
is very important and one of our government’s most important 
priorities and meets the demand of growth we have seen over 
the past 10 years. Another promise made and another promise 
kept. 
 
Since 2007 this government has built 40 brand new or 
replacement schools and 25 major school renovations. This is in 
stark contrast to the NDP who closed 176 schools while they 
were in government. This government has hired over 875 
teachers and 173 more student support teachers since 2007. 
This is also in stark contrast to the NDP who from 2001 to 2007 
let go 400 teachers. The new joint-use school in Saskatoon 
Westview will also alleviate a lot of congestion in the 
neighbouring schools. 
 
This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I attended and brought 
greetings to the World Mining Competition in Saskatoon. 
That’s right, a world mining competition right here in 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. This competition has university 
students from all over the world here to compete and put their 
problem solving skills together to solve complex mining 
questions. These groups compete in groups of four and have 
roughly two days to come up with solutions using new and 
existing technologies. 
 
When I told them how much potential Saskatchewan has in the 
mining industry, they became very intrigued. Some even 
commented that they would like to return to Saskatchewan 
when they finish their respective degrees. For our province, the 
mining industry employs thousands of people right across this 
province, and in the last decade there has been 2.87 billion 
invested on mineral exploration in Saskatchewan. Last year 
alone, the value of our mineral sales was 6.4 billion. I told the 
students that 80 per cent of US [United States] uranium imports 
came from Canada in 2016, and as a result of those imports 
from Canada, one in 19 houses received power derived from 
Canadian uranium — an impressive number, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also explained how Saskatchewan held almost half of the 
world’s reserves of potash and that Saskatchewan was the 
largest producer in the world. This year saw the first potash 
mine being completed in Saskatchewan in over 45 years. In 
2016 Saskatchewan had sales and production of 11 million 
tonnes K20, the second highest in our history, and 2017 is 
expected to reach an all-time high. 

The importance of predictability managing our resources while 
encouraging responsible and competitive investment is 
something that informs our policy and decision-making 
rationale at every level. In a 2016 annual survey of mining 
companies, the Fraser Institute ranks 104 jurisdictions around 
the entire world. These rankings are based on a combination of 
two things: geologic attractiveness for minerals and metals, and 
policy attractiveness. Saskatchewan ranks no. 1 on that list of 
104 jurisdictions, again a very impressive number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the projects that I worked on in the last 
year was on organ donation in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan has 
an organ donation rate much lower than other parts of Canada 
and many other countries. Last year the Standing Committee for 
Human Services reviewed the current organ donation program 
and was looking for ways to increase the rate of organ donation. 
During this session this government will implement a new 
organ donation system, building on work undertaken by the 
standing committee. The program will be led by donor 
physicians who will provide education and support to fellow 
health care providers and champion organ donation across this 
province. 
 
We will also expand the pool of donors by amending the 
regulations to allow for a donation after cardio-circulatory death 
and by implementing a mandatory referral program. In addition 
we will continue to explore the option of moving to a presumed 
consent model of organ donation. 
 
During this session this government will fulfill its commitment 
to provide individualized funding for children with autism 
spectrum disorder or ASD. The initial funding will be 4,000 per 
year for each child for a total investment of 2.8 million next 
fiscal year. This funding is in addition to the nearly 8 million 
this government already provides to support ASD within the 
health care system. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Our government has made significant investments in 
infrastructure to ensure that we can compete and prosper. 
During the last decade our government has invested more than 
26 billion to renew and expand Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. 
Of that total, 7.4 billion has been committed to the province’s 
highway system. This record investment has resulted in the 
repair and improvement of 12 000 kilometres of highway and 
the completion of significant projects such as the Saskatoon 
Circle Drive bridge, the St. Louis bridge, the twinning of 
Highway 11, and the passing lanes on Highway 7 and 10. 
 
This year work continues on the Regina bypass, overpasses at 
Martensville and Warman, the Saskatoon north commuter 
parkway bridge, twinning projects on Highway 39, 16, and 7, 
and passing lanes on Highway 5, among many other projects. In 
the Saskatoon region, highways have received significant 
funding from this government in the last 10 years. 
 
In 2016-17 projects include 15 million for the north commuter 
bridge, 5.2 million to finish the twinning of Highway 16 from 
Saskatoon to just past Clavet, 26.6 million for the continuation 
of interchanges at Martensville and Warman. Other notable 
investments, 11.4 million for twinning Highway 7 from 
Saskatoon to Delisle in the 2015-16 budget. In 2009, 98.5 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

million was spent for the Saskatoon south Circle Drive bridge. 
In 2011, 150 million was spent twinning Highway 11. In 2008, 
44.3 million was spent on Highway 219, south of Saskatoon; 
2015, 43.5 million was spent on Highway 305; 2011, 24.4 for 
the Dalmeny access road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I worked in the trucking industry for several years, 
and these are all very significant investments and will help our 
province well into the future. These investments in highway 
infrastructure are vitally important as we continue to build the 
building blocks of a vibrant and a promising province. 
 
Another of the important investments in Saskatoon is revenue 
sharing. In 2017-18 revenue sharing was over 48 million, which 
is up 161 per cent since 2007-2008. Investments in the 
Saskatoon health area are the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital 
at 15.5 million, the IT [information technology] system for Jim 
Pattison Hospital, the capital equipment funding of 3.65 
million, block funding for capital maintenance of 14.65 million, 
and 8 million to Parkridge Centre for renovations. 
 
Our government has worked hard to ensure prosperity and 
competitiveness. International engagement is a priority for our 
government because trade drives Saskatchewan’s economy. 
More than 100,000 jobs in our province depend on exports. 
During our decade of growth, Saskatchewan exports to 
emergent markets, particularly in Asia, have grown by 
staggering amounts. Saskatchewan exports to China have 
increased by 530 per cent over the past decade to 3 billion last 
year. Exports to India are up 272 per cent to 1.5 billion, and 
exports to Pakistan are up 293 per cent to 548 million. Exports 
to Indonesia are up 132 per cent to 543 million. Our 
government will continue working to expand our export 
markets through further trade missions to these and other 
countries and through support for trade-focused organizations 
like the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, better 
known as STEP. 
 
As negotiations continue on a new North American free trade 
agreement proceed, we will join with others in Canada in 
reminding our trading partners about the benefits of free trade 
and the dangers of protectionism. Our government will also 
continue to advocate for free trade within Canada. 
Saskatchewan stands to benefit from the new North American 
Free Trade Agreement which came into force July 1st. The 
CFTA [Canadian Free Trade Agreement] will reduce barriers to 
trade, investment, and the mobility of workers. 
 
However, our government is concerned that other provincial 
governments do not share Saskatchewan’s commitment to free 
trade. An impartial trade panel has ruled that Alberta’s rebate 
program for small brewers discriminates against brewers in 
Saskatchewan. The panel also determined the rebate program is 
not in accordance with Alberta’s trade obligations to other 
provinces. Alberta is appealing the decision. Our government is 
considering a range of retaliatory measures in response to 
Alberta’s unfair trade practices. 
 
This year capital investment in Saskatchewan is forecasted to be 
14.5 billion. While this is down from a few years ago, it is still 
43 per cent higher than in 2007. Saskatchewan’s favourable 
business investment climate has played a major role in 
attracting investment. In the last provincial budget our 

government increased and broadened the provincial sales tax 
base in Saskatchewan to reduce our dependency on resource 
revenues. But even with those changes, Saskatchewan remains 
the lowest of provinces that have a sales tax. We have reduced 
income taxes for all citizens. Saskatchewan’s manufacturing 
and processing taxes are the lowest in Canada. Competitive 
taxes and sensible regulations help build the Saskatchewan 
advantage, and our government will do everything it can to 
defend the Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
In the spring budget our government committed to keeping 
Saskatchewan competitive with our neighbouring provinces by 
moving to the lowest corporate tax rate in Canada, matching 
British Columbia’s rate of 11 per cent. Since then, two things 
have changed. First, the BC [British Columbia] government has 
announced it will raise its corporate tax rate to 12 per cent, 
which will be the same as Alberta and Manitoba; and second, 
the federal government introduced tax changes that could 
negatively affect Canadian small business. 
 
While we are pleased the federal government has backed down 
on most of its proposed tax changes that would have hurt small 
business, our government has decided to refocus its business tax 
reduction plan on Saskatchewan small business. Effective 
January 1st, 2018, we will raise the small-business income 
threshold from 500,000 to 600,000, the highest threshold in 
Canada. This is the amount of income up to which small 
businesses pay tax at a significantly lower 2 per cent tax rate. 
We will also return the corporate tax rate to 12 per cent, the 
same as other Western provinces. 
 
Our government is monitoring developments in the potash 
industry, particularly the merger of PotashCorp and Agrium 
into a new company called Nutrien. Our government’s priority 
is to ensure Nutrien’s continued head office presence in 
Saskatoon and increased employment in Saskatchewan as the 
merger moves forward and market conditions improve. 
 
Our government will continue to lead the national discussion in 
competitiveness in the resources sector. With multi-layered 
reviews and climate change initiative being advanced by the 
federal government, there is a high level of uncertainty in 
energy and mining. Our energy sector is one of Canada’s 
greatest strengths, yet its economic potential is being hamstrung 
by our own national government even as Canada continues to 
import thousands of barrels of oil every day from other 
countries. In the past year energy projects worth 56 billion have 
been abandoned, including the Energy East pipeline which 
would have moved Saskatchewan oil to tidewater, enabling our 
province to get full value for the oil it produces. 
 
Our government will continue to call for transparent, 
predictable, and timely approval processes for resource 
companies. This fiscal year our government will introduce a 
new targeted mineral development strategy. The strategy will 
include an incentive for mineral exploration to cover the costs 
associated with ground-based exploration activities. 
 
I could go on and on about the Speech from the Throne and 
how it is important to keep moving forward, but it appears my 
time has elapsed, and so I will leave with that. And with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the main motion and I will not 
be supporting the amendments. Thank you. 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
an honour to stand in my place again this year in this legislature 
to speak in favour of the Throne Speech, as delivered by the 
Lieutenant Governor, from our Premier and our government. 
And just for the record, I will be speaking in favour of the 
Throne Speech obviously, and I will be speaking against the 
amendment by the opposition. 
 
As is customary quite often in this Assembly, we do recognize 
those that support us and got us here, Mr. Speaker. This year 
actually my list is quite long. Of course I want to thank my 
family. My wife, Leone, my daughters, Katelin and Rayanne, 
are very supportive and always supporting me in this job and 
looking after things at home when I’m not there, and I really do 
appreciate them. And of course, as I talked about I think last 
Throne Speech, maybe the one before it, how we were blessed 
with a new granddaughter in March, two and a half years ago. 
And actually we’re expecting another grandchild on the way, 
from the same daughter, shortly, in March or April. So we’re 
really looking forward to that, which is . . . You know, it 
changes your perspective as a parent. You have a bit of a 
different perspective change as a grandparent. You have a bit of 
a different perspective change. 
 
I think a lot of the Throne Speech and what we’ve seen in the 
final budget, or the last budget, kind of reflects that. As the 
Premier communicated quite eloquently, you know, some 
difficult decisions to make, but still decisions that have to be 
made so that we don’t have our children or our grandchildren 
paying the bills that we would accumulate now. But we see 
many, many jurisdictions, provincially and federally of course, 
that are racking up the tab, so to speak, and our young ones are 
going to have to pay that tab eventually, Mr. Speaker. So of 
course again, I appreciate my family, all the support and the 
love that they do give me and allow me to do my job here. 
 
Of course I’d be remiss if I didn’t thank the staff back in 
Yorkton, Lauretta and Rachelle back in Yorkton who represent 
me very well when I’m here, and of course do the casework and 
address the concerns and the questions of constituents back 
home when I’m here as well, and of course keep me up to date 
with what’s going on and keep my schedule quite full as well 
when I get back home, consulting with constituents, going to 
public events, and the other duties that are aligned with being 
an MLA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course I want to thank all of my colleagues throughout the 
Assembly actually, the opposition and my fellow colleagues. 
It’s been a very interesting year. I might even touch on some of 
that briefly, Mr. Speaker. But I really appreciate the support and 
the prayers and everything that’s been afforded me and my 
family over the last better part of the year. 
 
And of course my colleagues on this side of the House, I 
obviously couldn’t do what I do without them, including the 
staff in the Minister of Rural and Remote Health’s office, you 
know, all the way from the chief of staff down through the MAs 
[ministerial assistant], the executive assistant, the administrative 
staff. Of course they serve the office very well. They support 
my job very, very, very well, but also the work ethic they have 

in addressing concerns and issues that arise through the Health 
office that come to our attention, Mr. Speaker. I’m so 
appreciative of how they do work and their work ethic that they 
do come to work with every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course my fellow minister, the Minister of Health, the 
member from Rosetown, is a great colleague. The former 
minister of Health from Weyburn was a great colleague as well, 
Mr. Speaker. But I do appreciate as well the new Minister of 
Health. I guess he’s not new anymore. It’s like a year or so; he’s 
not a rookie anymore. He claims to be, but he’s not. But just, 
you know, the way he’s approaching some of the issues that we 
have to deal with right now, of course I’ll touch on a little bit 
later, moving to one health region is something that takes a lot 
of attention to detail, a lot of administrative and, you know, just 
fact-checking and walking this process through, Mr. Speaker. 
So I so much appreciate his attention to detail and all that he 
offers that job and all that he brings to that position as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And of course our Premier, we know he’ll be . . . This is his last 
session as the Premier of our province represented in this 
Assembly. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I can’t say enough how 
much I’ve appreciated him as a mentor and as a friend and also 
as a support here, Mr. Speaker. In fact over the last years I have 
been very publicly diagnosed with colorectal cancer, and still 
wanting to do my job as best that I could, and having the 
support of the Premier allowing me to do the best that I could 
through that, of course with the support of all the staff and 
family and my colleagues here, able to for the most part not 
miss too much work, even in ICU [intensive care unit] and in 
the hospital, Mr. Speaker, using a lot of email and texting, and 
not able to do some of the public events, but still able to carry 
on.  
 
[16:45] 
 
And I’m just so thankful for the confidence of the Premier and 
of course his friendship. And I would point to as well, Mr. 
Speaker, his selfless leadership style has afforded this province 
advancing leaps and strides over the past 10 years. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, by any measure, looking at any premier in history, 
aside from time served in the Assembly, I think all statistics 
would show him as the most successful premier to sit in this 
seat in this legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, I think history will 
record that very aptly in the future. 
 
Again, you know, over the last year I talked about it, it would 
have been probably about this time last year I knew something 
was up, and I was very public about it as well, Mr. Speaker. 
Denial and embarrassment probably could have cost me a lot 
more than my health, maybe even my life if I wouldn’t have 
been more proactive with my health. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, through the support of my family and encouragement 
of my family, and of course medical professionals that we do 
have in the province, you know, getting engaged in the medical 
system, seeing my family physician who referred me to a great 
surgeon, actually back home. 
 
Being Minister of Rural and Remote Health, it was great to be 
able to get a lot of my care that was able to be accomplished 
back home in my hometown of Yorkton, and at the hospital 
there with their very skilled staff was something that I really 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

appreciated. And I think it supported a lot of what we’re doing 
and it supported me in doing my job, getting a better 
understanding not only from a minister’s point of view, from a 
parent’s point of view, but also, you know, for the first time in a 
long time as a patient’s point of view while actually being a 
minister in that very system was very useful. 
 
In fact a few times I joked about almost feeling like I was in an 
episode of Undercover Boss because quite often when I look at 
the Allan Blair Cancer Centre here, they’re doing their jobs 
every day. They’re not worried about who’s coming in and 
what their positions are, what they do out in the public life. 
They’re worried about the patient and looking after the patient. 
 
So it probably was about four weeks before they realized, 
number one, I could stay in Regina most of the time. I actually 
worked in Regina and eventually we got to the point of 
conversation where they realized I was an MLA, and about a 
week after they asked me if I had a position. So when I told 
them I was actually one of their ministers, it was very 
interesting because it not only opened up . . . The care was great 
all the way through, but it opened up some conversations 
where, you know, they’re normally hearing from their unions or 
from the media certain things that we’re doing, but it opened up 
an opportunity for conversation about things like continuous 
improvement and going to one health authority and operation of 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and our support for them. 
 
So it really opened up a lot of opportunities where you can 
speak to the front-line providers first-hand and actually give a 
different perspective. And I was really, really encouraged by 
their openness to hearing that other perspective and maybe even 
changing some of their minds in maybe certain areas, Mr. 
Speaker. So again, thank you so much to the very many medical 
professionals all the way through the health care continuum that 
I was able to interact with and who did give such top quality 
care, I know, to myself and of course supports to our family. 
 
Getting into the Throne Speech, there was a huge health focus 
in there and that’s, I guess, for good reason because we know 
that about 40 per cent plus of our budget is actually focused on 
health and the provision of health. 
 
So when we look at the Throne Speech, it talks about our 
two-for-one MRIs and the success rate that we’ve had there. 
And admittedly the federal government is, you know, maybe 
not really so much onside with that approach. But about a week 
and a half ago the Minister of Health and I were in Edmonton 
for the federal-provincial-territorial ministers’ meetings, and we 
had opportunity at some of their private dinners and some of 
their breakout sessions to talk about some of our initiatives. 
 
And I was quite encouraged that the minister from Quebec, the 
minister from New Brunswick, the minister from Manitoba 
were very supportive of our position. The federal minister was 
understanding, although you know admittedly she’s quite new 
in her role, so she was trying to get a grasp I think of where 
we’re coming from. But I was really encouraged by the minister 
from Ontario, although he would say he’s not really in favour of 
maybe the total package and how it’s delivered, but he could 
really understand from our net benefit to the province why we 
were promoting this and why we were encouraging it, and of 
course I think understanding of our success rate. 

And I think now we’re looking at about 1,800 scans through our 
two-for-one MRI process that have been done without the 
public system, that actually do again have a net benefit to the 
public system. 
 
You know there’s so many highlights in this Throne Speech 
about our numbers, and I’m very proud of our government’s 
initiatives that we have been able to accomplish, whether it’s 
the 750-plus physicians that we never had 10 years ago; 
whether it’s, you know, part and parcel because of our increase 
in medical training seats, increase of our residency positions, 
many of those opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. So we see a 
lot of these professionals being exposed to rural health care, 
seeing those opportunities and actually taking advantage of 
those opportunities. 
 
We’re to the point now, we see previously under the former 
administration 60 medical seats, about 57 per cent of those 
stayed in the province. Now we have 100 medical training 
seats, 75 per cent retention rate. A lot of those local students are 
actually looking at those rural opportunities and taking 
advantage of those. So we’re making steps in health care 
throughout the province when it comes to medical 
professionals, but again also in rural and remote areas, which is 
of course close to my heart because of my portfolio. 
 
You know, whether we look at 3,400 nurses by different 
designations, whether we look at more care aids in the system, 
whether we look at a lot of the other supports, the numbers 
don’t lie, Mr. Speaker. And very proud of the record, although 
realizing we do have more to do. But we still have to recognize 
where we are and of course give the appreciation to those 
professionals that have chosen to stay here, work, and serve the 
people of the province. 
 
You know, we look at the surgery wait-lists. Although they’ve 
crept up from time to time, we do see them far shorter than they 
were under the previous administration, and we’ll continue to 
work in those regards to shorten a lot of those lists, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, when we start thinking about one other portion 
of the Throne Speech that highlighted our move to one 
provincial health authority, and going back to our panel report 
and the suggestions coming from that panel report, three very 
apt experts did a very comprehensive study across the province, 
looked at other jurisdictions, recommending we go to one 
health authority. 
 
And I’ve got to admit when I first heard that, I had some 
apprehension based on the story coming out of Alberta. But 
again, realizing what happened there — they basically flipped 
the switch overnight, they weren’t prepared — warning us or 
giving us the insight that we needed to slow-walk this, take our 
time. And I believe we are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Realizing there may be a few challenges ahead as we move to 
one provincial health authority, but I have full confidence, 
especially after the meeting the Minister of Health and I had 
with the new health board and some of the key executive 
positions that are to lead this new health authority. Their 
confidence and their assurance that the work is well under way 
and we’re well positioned to roll that out and then continue to 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

roll it out in different areas and reap the benefits of that system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we look at things, I’ll try and breeze through a few 
high-level items, but things like the accountable care unit that 
showed so much success in Regina, and actually because it was 
so successful without a whole bunch of additional funding, they 
rolled that out into different areas in the Pasqua Hospital. And 
then since then, our own initiative of rolling, expanding 
accountable care units in Regina, as well as having two in 
Saskatoon and, you know, reaping the benefits of that for the 
people of the province, we see 37 per cent quicker rate of being 
let out of the hospital. And then the supports that are in the 
community to help them not have to revisit the emergency of 
the hospital, Mr. Speaker, shows a lot of promise. And we’ll 
continue down those roads as well. 
 
Looking at again the Throne Speech, I talked about moving to 
one provincial health authority and the successes I believe 
we’re going to see there, and that rolling out December 4th, I 
believe, is the date for the provincial health authority to be 
instigated. And then we’ll just watch the progress and work 
along with that organization to of course deliver top-quality 
health care to the province. 
 
I think a lot of our other members talked about the organ 
donation program. That’s something again very close to my 
heart. Previously I was an organ donor and a blood donor, and 
now because of my diagnosis I think I need a period of five 
years of being cancer-free before I can go on that list. But be 
assured, Mr. Speaker, at my first available opportunity, I will be 
going back on that list to make sure that, you know, some of the 
tissues and things that I carry, that once I decease I probably 
won’t need anymore, that it can be there to help other families 
to enjoy their loved ones a little bit longer. 
 
We talked about in the Throne Speech the individualized 
funding for autism spectrum disorder. I think that’s a great 
initiative, giving people that choice. And it kind of ties right 
into the direction we’ve gone even in health care where, you 
know, we have private providers in the public system. We also 
have areas again with people having choice on how they want 
to get their health care delivered. And I think we’ll see, you 
know, maybe some more initiatives in the future where people 
will have more of a choice in their lifestyle, their health care, 
and their way of life. 
 
Something that it’s out of health care, but it really falls close to 
home, is our introduction of legislation that will protect the 
right of a school choice for parents. And of course that comes 
close to my home because of the Theodore School decision. 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I sincerely think it was just about 
one small school, maybe not that big of an issue. But when you 
look at the bigger picture, how it takes away choice specifically, 
firstly of people wanting to put their kids in the Catholic 
system, but outside of that, the Muslim school, the Huda school, 
the Christian schools around the province who do get a little bit 
less funding than the public system, but still deliver top quality 
education, we want to make sure that parents have that option, 
that choice, that they can do that — have their choice in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, looking at the marijuana legislation that the federal 

government has put in place, and they’ve made no bones about 
it, they’re going to roll that out in July although many 
provinces, I think in fact every province at the FPT 
[federal-provincial-territorial] meetings a week and a half ago, 
have a lot of concerns about that. So you know, we’re going to 
look at that very closely. We’re going to do our best to protect 
the people of the province and make sure that’s rolled out 
properly, but also make sure that there’s some accountability on 
the federal government side because we recognize — even the 
good stories you hear out of the States, whether it’s Colorado or 
Washington — if you listen to Justice officials and health care 
officials, they will point out some of the ills and some of the 
side effects and some of the social effects and some of the costs 
that they’re actually realizing right now.  
 
So I’ll do the best I can in my position. I’m sure I’ll have the 
support of the Health minister in lobbying the federal 
government. If we can point the cost that it’s costing us because 
of an initiative that they took on, I’m very hopeful that they’ll 
be open to actually increasing supports in some areas to help us 
offset some of those costs. 
 
You know, increasing cellular coverage in rural areas is 
something of course very close to my heart. 
 
Bill 40, repealing parts of Bill 40. It hits close to home because 
we have a huge Crown presence in town. And although I’m not 
opposed to, you know, the Crowns exercising partnerships and 
strengthening the Crowns through partnerships and expanding 
their client base and their business base, we realize people have 
a concern with that. So regardless of our ideology or what we 
might think, we’re willing to listen to our constituents, the 
people of the province, and act on their recommendations. 
 
You know, looking at some of the tax changes we’ve talked 
about, we’re still going to be rolling back the corporate tax side 
of our previous budget but also realizing, even at that 
percentage point, we’re still the most competitive jurisdiction, 
especially when you tie that in with some of the small-business 
tax changes that we’ve talked about instigating as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Looking at the other part of the Throne Speech talking about 
agriculture, value-added new-growth incentive to track more 
investment, when I look at my hometown of Yorkton, we look 
at some of the implications that have happened locally, whether 
it’s expansion of Grain Millers; two canola crush plants; TA 
Foods, a flax processing plant; you know, manufacturing. We 
look at a lot of those agriculturally based . . . If we look at the 
job creation, the economy that it’s helped create around my 
hometown is something that just can’t be denied, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, when I look at more initiatives that we’ve talked 
about, of course encouraging pipeline development, we’re in a 
bit of a battle right there at this point, Mr. Speaker, but of 
course we want to get the best net benefit for our resources as 
we can. And of course increasing pipeline capacity or having 
pipeline capacity to tidewater is something very important to us. 
 
I could go through the list of infrastructure investment. I know 
my colleagues will talk about that as well, whether it’s 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, the children’s 
hospital, 18 new schools plus the renovations of other schools 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

— a total of 40 — highways infrastructure investments. 
 
I know in the Throne Speech it talked about the Highway 10 
twinning, which again is close to Melville-Saltcoats and 
Yorkton and Canora-Pelly. Looking at that project, passing 
lanes somewhere between Fort Qu’Appelle but specifically 
Melville, Yorkton to Canora, that will of course increase safety 
along that road as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Getting back to some of our economic initiatives, the taxes, we 
know because of our competitiveness, we are recognized by 
having a AAA credit rating. It’s something we enjoy and does 
reap benefits when it comes to debt repayment and the financial 
status of our province. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work to do. 
We’ll always say that, but by any measure, as I’ve talked about 
our Premier’s record, this government’s record is something 
I’m very proud of and I will stand by and continue to talk about 
and promote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, with that my time’s coming to an end — I think it’s 
almost 20 minutes — and there is so much more to speak about. 
But of course more colleagues, we have a lot of colleagues on 
this side of the House, they’re going to speak about some of 
those initiatives, Mr. Speaker. So again, I strongly support the 
Speech from the Throne, the motion moved forward by my 
friend the member from Estevan, and I sincerely speak against 
the amendment by the opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
get up here and speak to the Speech from the Throne in this 
wonderful building, and it’s a great place to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess first thing I want to do is I want to congratulate the new 
member from Saskatoon Fairview. I think that she is very eager 
to be here. It’s a wonderful place. I could just imagine you’re, 
the same as what I did. The first time you walk up the steps, it is 
really something to behold is to be in this House, which is a 
fantastic place. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to run out of time here 
right about now. 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2677 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women’s History Month 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 
 Naturalist Wins Award for Literary Excellence 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 
 Joint-Use School Opens in Regina 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 
 Halloween Haunts 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2679 
 4-H Member Makes Donation to Children’s Hospital 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2679 
 HMCS Queen Charity Mess Dinner 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2679 
 Girls’ Anti-Bullying and Self-Esteem Workshop 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2679 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 
 Wait Time for Young People to Receive Mental Health Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2681 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2681 
 Access to Bus Service for Northerners 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2682 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2682 
 Support for Northerners and Reconciliation 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2682 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2682 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 
 Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 
 Women in Saskatchewan 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2684 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2684 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2684 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2685 
 Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2685 
 Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act 
 Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les communications électroniques 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2685 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2685 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2690 



 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2693 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2696 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2699 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2702 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2705 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2708 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


