


















































December 5, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 23A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3263 
 December 5, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to section 14(1) and 14(3) of The 
Advocate for Children and Youth Act, I am submitting to be 
tabled the 2017 special report for the Legislative Assembly. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — I am prepared to rule on the point of order 
raised yesterday by the Government House Leader. He stated 
that during question period, the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition yelled, “That’s a lie.” The Opposition House Leader 
requested that there be a review of the tapes. I have reviewed 
what was said on record and listened to the audio of the 
proceedings in question. I did not find nor did I hear the 
comments alleged to have been said by the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition. Accordingly it is impossible for me to rule on 
this matter. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Later 
this month, many in our province will celebrate Christmas, will 
celebrate the birth of the Christ. Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting 
that during his ministry, he was asked by a lawyer what was the 
most important law of all of the Hebrew laws, and he actually 
mentioned two. He said, love God and love your neighbour, if I 
can summarize it that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce today, to you and through you 
to all members of the House, a worldwide organization and our 
representatives of that organization that have lived out those 
laws every single day and especially at Christmastime. They are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are members 
of the Salvation Army. Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge and 
thank them for being here at the legislature today. We all heard 
the brass band playing in the rotunda, reminding us of the 
season and also of their good work, the Christmas Kettle 
campaign. 
 
And so joining us today — and I’ll ask them perhaps to give us 
a wave as I introduce them — joining us today are Major Mike 
Hoeft, area commander for Saskatchewan; Majors Kristiana and 
Bruce MacKenzie, corps officers for Haven of Hope; Ivy 
Scobie, director of the William Booth Special Care Home; 
Captain Kyla McKenzie, director of Grace Haven/Gemma 
House; Major Wayne McDonough, director of Waterston 
Centre; Major Sharon McDonough, chaplain at the William 
Booth Special Care Home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge Wayne Mantyka of 
CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] News, who I think is 

instrumental and has been instrumental in coordinating this 
relatively recent development and now a tradition here at the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And may I just say by way of the introductory comments here, 
on behalf of a grateful province we are so thankful to the 
Salvation Army right across Saskatchewan for what they do all 
the year round, but especially at this particular time of year. 
And we remind all of our fellow citizens to give generously 
when they hear those bells and see the kettle, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming these special 
guests to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming these folks from the Salvation Army 
to their Legislative Assembly. They did a tremendous job of 
providing a musical performance with some snacks and some 
coffee earlier today. It’s always a delight to see them come into 
the legislature at this time of year and provide us with some 
Christmas cheer. The work that the Salvation Army does 
throughout the province is absolutely invaluable, Mr. Speaker, 
especially at this time of year but also throughout the year. 
 
And since I’m on my feet talking about them, I do want to give 
a special plug. I know the Salvation Army does incredible work 
in many different areas in helping those in need but in particular 
they do a partnership with the charity I used to work for, Pro 
Bono Law Saskatchewan, in ensuring that people in need can 
access legal services free of charge throughout the province. So 
thank you for that partnership. Thank you for all the work that 
you do and thank you so much for being here today, on behalf 
of the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery today is a number of professional firefighters from 
across the province. They’re represented by Lloyd Zwack who 
is their president, as well as a number from different 
municipalities across the province. They’re down here for their 
government relations days. They’ve met with both sides, and I 
understand we’ll have further meetings later in the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to thank them for what they do as 
part of their job every day, not just in firefighting but in health 
and emergency responses. They do, every day, things that keep 
us safe and make our province a better place. So on behalf of all 
members, I’d like to thank them for what they do. 
 
In particular I’ve been asked to mention the firefighters from 
Swift Current who recently saved a dog that had fallen through 
the ice, which gives them a remarkably wonderful human touch. 
It received national, some international attention. And good 
news is always better than sometimes the other news that 
comes, so we’re always pleased to see that type of thing. So, 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members, I’d like to welcome 
them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 



3264 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the minister also to welcome the Saskatchewan Professional 
Fire Fighters Association for attending here with their president, 
Lloyd Zwack. 
 
I think it’s important to also point out that the Professional Fire 
Fighters Association represents the firefighters across 
Saskatchewan, but they also represent paramedics and 
emergency communication dispatchers also in this province. 
And these men and women, they risk their safety on behalf of 
fellow citizens every day, and for that we are thankful. 
 
And I think it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to point out that 
the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association were 
key driving forces to helping establish and promote the 
expansion of post-traumatic stress disorder supports for 
workplaces, which I believe both sides of this House can agree 
was much needed. So thank you. So I ask that all members of 
the Assembly welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to welcome some guests seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are owners of a company called 
sMedia, and I’ll introduce them by name. Just wave if you 
wouldn’t mind, please: Regan Hinchcliffe, this is my son; 
Marshal Finch; Tayler Ursu; and Tommy Douglass. These men, 
these young men are Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker, 
thriving in Saskatchewan and in Canada. There’s more to come 
on a member’s statement. I ask all members to please welcome 
them to their Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to request leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through 
you, I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce some special 
guests seated in your gallery: Roland and Laurie Schulz, along 
with Greg Mildenberger. Give us a wave, please. Thanks. 
 
Roland and Laurie recognized the need for a different type of 
music instruction in our province. They combined their business 
acumen with their musical gifts and opened our province’s very 
first School of Rock. Greg is, by day, a long-time civil servant. 
Outside of office hours, he fronts the blues and rock band called 
Call Me Mildy, who you may have seen or heard of at various 
venues throughout Regina. Roland is also a drummer in the 
band. 
 
The partnership brings a fresh take on music instruction in the 
Regina area, with a focus on band performance and more 
contemporary songs. It’s a style that they wish that we would 
have had at option when we were growing up and learning 
music. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members of the House to 
join me in welcoming Laurie, Roland, and Greg to the 
Legislative Assembly. 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to 
introduce a school group that’s seated in the west gallery. We 
have 26 students, grade 4 students, from W.S. Hawrylak School 
in my constituency. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Meaghen DaCosta, and educational assistant, Dianne Swann. I 
ask all members to join in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister and member on our side of the House in 
welcoming the Professional Fire Fighters Association today. I 
had the privilege and the pleasure of working very closely with 
them when I brought forward the private member’s bill on 
presumptive legislation for those injured on the job with a 
psychological injury. And the minister built on that, and the 
Assembly passed that bill, which was really important. 
 
But I continue to appreciate the work that the association 
continues to do to ensure that that legislation is rolled out well. 
There’s lots of work to do around policy and making sure that 
forms and details make it easy for people with psychological 
injuries to get the support that they need. So I want to thank the 
professional firefighters for the work that they continue to do 
around mental health. 
 
I’d also actually like to give a little shout-out to a long-time 
friend of mine, Tony Johnston. Tony is a new member on the 
Saskatoon Local 80. Tony and I grew up together actually, 
elementary and high school, although Tony’s a little bit older 
than me. But his mom actually, Ev, still lives across the street 
from my parents, actually just across the school grounds, and 
his wife, Anna, was the much-beloved teacher of my daughter, 
Ophelia, just a couple years ago. And I’m not sure what Tony’s 
going to think of his first trip to the legislature and his first 
viewing of question period, but I just want to ask all members 
to welcome Tony and all the members of the Fire Fighters 
Association here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a friend of mine, no stranger 
to the House. She’s a constituent and a former colleague from 
Prince Albert Northcote. She’s sitting behind us: Victoria 
Jurgens, a woman with a big work ethic and an even bigger 
heart. Please welcome her to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, there’s many guests that certainly that deserve our 
honour and respect here today. I appreciate very much having 
the Salvation Army with us here today, but I wanted to take a 
moment just to pass along a thank you for the leadership of the 
Saskatchewan professional firefighters all across this province. 
We’re all thankful for their service, the protection they provide 
all of us, the peace of mind they provide all of us. Quite simply, 
they lay their lives on the line in the protection of ours and 
others, and we’re thankful for this. So we had a chance to meet 
here today. We look forward to meetings later today. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3265 

As well I’ve also had the special opportunity of late to join with 
the member from Riversdale in the Fire Ops day up with Local 
80 in Saskatoon where they put us through drills and training; 
extrication of a vehicle, tore the side off of a vehicle with the 
biggest power tools I’ve ever utilized with Trevor Warren up 
there; and learned some of the leadership that they’re taking as 
well with pit crew CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation], 
leadership that they’re taking that’s saving lives all through 
Saskatoon. 

Of course we have strong relationship with firefighters across 
this province, regularly join folks over at 4 hall here in Regina 
for graduation ceremonies. And quite simply, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
just very thankful for all these members do in serving our 
province and am very thankful for their commitment to work 
together to build a province that works for everyone. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to 
introduce, seated in your gallery, some special guests from the 
All Nations Hope Network and SISHA [Saskatchewan 
Indigenous Strategy on HIV and AIDS]. We have Margaret 
Kisikaw Piyesis who is the CEO [chief executive officer] of All 
Nations Hope Network. We have Lana Holinaty who is their 
director of operations. 

[13:45] 

Now, Margaret’s been with the organization for nearly 20 years. 
Lana’s been there for 14 years. We have a recent arrival from 
Manitoba, Jann Ticknor, who is the coordinator of the 
Saskatchewan indigenous strategy for HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome]. 

And All Nations Hope, for those who don’t know, is the longest 
serving indigenous-specific organization for HIV in the 
country. They do incredible work advocating for people living 
with or at risk of HIV, not just here in Regina but for the whole 
province. I’ve been very proud to get to know them through my 
work with research and advocacy around that issue, and I can 
tell you from experience that the respect for their knowledge 
and their commitment is province- and nationwide. 

So I’d just like to say ninanāskoman for your work and tawāw. 

Welcome to your legislature. Thank you for being here today. I 
ask you to join me in welcoming them. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition calling on the Sask Party government 
to support mental health emergency units. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that Saskatchewan’s mental health funding 
is among the lowest in Canada. 

It also grew out of the issue this summer when the government 
wouldn’t fund the mental health assessment unit at RUH [Royal 
University Hospital], despite the fact that a generous donor had 
committed a million dollars of capital for that. It was very good 
to see in the last month or so that the government did come on 
board to fund that single mental health emergency unit at RUH, 
but I do know that I talk to people from across the province who 
think that we need to do better by people with mental health 
issues when they have acute incidents, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to support mental health 
emergency units across the province and commit to 
supporting the otherwise funded mental health emergency 
unit in Saskatoon. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from across 
Saskatchewan. Today there are folks from Yorkton, Melfort, 
Saskatoon, and Regina, Outlook, just to name a few. I so 
present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens of Spiritwood, 
Leoville, and Medstead. I do so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in my place to present yet another petition as it 
pertains to the community of Balgonie, the town of Balgonie, 
because someone has to, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 
that have signed this petition pray as follows: 

To ask the Sask Party government to take the necessary 
steps and actions to leave in the west-in, west-out driving 
access for vehicles into and out of Balgonie at the 
intersection of Highway No. 1 and their Main Street. 

They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 



3266 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

Now, Mr. Speaker, attending that meeting, we were aware of 
this petition. The people that have signed this petition are all 
from throughout Saskatchewan, and especially around the 
community of Balgonie. They have hundreds and thousands of 
names that they’ve attached to this petition. And the people that 
have signed these two pages are primarily from Balgonie. 
They’re from Regina. They’re from Pilot Butte, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who’ve signed this petition wish to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
highest rates of intimate partner violence amongst the 
provinces; employers should be obligated to reasonably 
accommodate survivors of domestic violence in the workplace; 
and employees who are survivors of domestic violence should 
be able to take a leave of absence from their employment 
without penalty. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Those signing this petition today come from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals who have signed this petition 
wish to bring to your attention the following: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is a primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that municipal governments have limited 
resources and require a second bridge to be funded through 
federal and provincial governments and not a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition come from the 
city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens in Buffalo Narrows calling for 
the reopening of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. 
Speaker, they point out that the abrupt and harsh closure of the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre in last spring’s budget left 
15 individuals out of work. They point out the financial 
hardship that that poses for the beautiful community of Buffalo 
Narrows. 
 
They also point out that the damage that that does to the 
chances for correction and rehabilitation for those that came 
through the correctional centre as inmates, Mr. Speaker, that 
they might get the life skills, that they might get the training, 
that they might get the understanding that would work against 
them reoffending, Mr. Speaker, and benefiting all of us. And 
they’re also well aware that that decision on the part of that 
government came in a time when we should be looking to 
respond to the calls to action from the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, and that this decision on the part of that 
government is precisely in the wrong direction that those calls 
to action point out. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present this petition: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre to better our community for future 
generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the Buffalo 
Narrows community. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year 10 
exceptional individuals were awarded the Saskatchewan Order 
of Merit, which is the province’s highest honour. I had the 
pleasure of attending the ceremony last Wednesday, hosting my 
constituent and recipient, June Avivi. 
 
This year being the 150th anniversary of the Canadian 
federation, it was a special day to celebrate and reflect on those 
remarkable people who live in our constituencies. Mr. Speaker, 
the recipients were June, Murad Al-Katib, Martha Cole, Roland 
Crowe, Rod Gantefoer, Paul J. Hill, Robert Laing, Dr. Roberta 
McKay, Robert Mitchell, and Brigadier General Clifford 
Walker. 
 
These recipients have made substantial contributions to 
Saskatchewan and are leaders in their communities. Their 
passion and care for the social, cultural, and economic 
well-being in this province is now part of our history. We thank 
them for their success and their achievements. Mr. Speaker, the 
impact these individuals have made is immeasurable. The 
recipients truly embody what it means to be a Saskatchewanian. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3267 

Their hard work and passion has been driven by their generosity 
and care for the communities that they serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating the 2017 Saskatchewan Order of Merit recipients 
and thank them for their tremendous contributions to our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Artist is Finalist in Canadian Painting Competition 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House to 
recognize Laura Payne, an accomplished Saskatoon artist who 
was a finalist in the 2017 RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] 
Canadian Painting Competition. The RBC competition seeks to 
bridge the gap between emerging and experienced artists. They 
highlight just 15 artists every year from across Canada, and 
Laura was among them. 
 
Laura received her Bachelor of Fine Arts from The University 
of Western Ontario and her masters from the Maryland Institute 
College of Art. She has since moved to Saskatoon and this 
spring hosted her first solo show in Saskatoon at the Darrell 
Bell Gallery. 
 
Laura’s work is part of the optical art movement, which stems 
from her interest in investigating the qualities of simulated light 
and colour. Using acrylic paint and irregularly cut but flat 
panel, she played with light and patterning to create the illusion 
of three-dimensional folds and bends. Unless one sees it in 
person, it’s hard to believe the surface is flat and painted. 
 
Canadian Art magazine called the finalists, painters to watch, 
and RBC called them the 15 artists redefining Canadian art. I’m 
happy that Laura was recognized to be part of this group. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me in congratulating 
Saskatoon artist Laura Payne. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Local Company Has Global Presence 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to share a story about homegrown success. 
sMedia is a local company with a global presence. Based in 
Regina, sMedia is a digital tech firm providing 
artificial-intelligence-based online advertising solutions. 
 
The start-up team of Regan Hinchcliffe, Marshal Finch, Tayler 
Ursu, and Tommy Douglass were all born and raised here in 
Saskatchewan. They employ 10 people locally, with roughly 30 
more spread around the world. Mr. Speaker, their five-year 
projected growth rate is around 4,800 per cent, an impressive 
display of their early success. 
 
This has not gone unnoticed in their industry. Google has 
hand-picked sMedia from hundreds of Google Partners to 
become a Google channel SMB Premier Partner. This 
recognition means Google actively invests time and resources 
into helping sMedia scale and develop their product. The 

company’s also received two invitations to Googleplex based 
on their performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sharing their success is of utmost importance to 
the crew of sMedia. Their advertising savvy has helped raise 
more than $100,000 for non-profits and charities in 
Saskatchewan. sMedia is another Saskatchewan success story 
where our business owners haven’t forgotten to give back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I want to 
thank sMedia for all they’ve done for their community and wish 
them the best as they continue to grow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in this House today to honour the hard-working men and 
women of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 
Association. The SPFFA represents 950 paramedics, 
community dispatchers, and firefighters across eight cities in 
Saskatchewan, working to keep our communities safe. 
 
Members of the SPFFA are here today as part of their 20th 
annual lobby of the Saskatchewan government. This year they 
continue to bring forward important issues such as occupational 
disease, including expanding the list of cancers covered under 
The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our firefighters and first responders put their lives 
on the line every day to protect our families and communities. 
They serve and protect us daily; we need to do our job as 
legislators and protect them. Unlike other occupations, 
firefighters are unable to refuse to work in dangerous 
conditions. These conditions are simply the reality of their job. 
 
Firefighters are also active in the communities in which they 
live. The SPFFA has a long history in working to improve 
health care, annually granting to hospital foundations across the 
province. Their recent donation of $60,000 to the Royal 
University Hospital Foundation in Saskatoon helped support an 
MRI-compatible [magnetic resonance imaging] patient 
monitoring system that provides faster and safer access for 
critically injured intensive care patients that require an MRI. 
 
Through the SPFFA’s Burn Fund, they also support training 
and education for trauma nurses for wound and burn care. In 
fact, since 1978, over a million dollars from SPFFA has 
supported patient care and education for burns, respiratory care, 
and trauma at Saskatchewan’s critical care and trauma hospital, 
RUH. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want 
to again recognize the brave and selfless work of firefighters 
across our province and wish the SPFFA all the best during 
their 20th annual lobby days. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Regina School of Rock 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 



3268 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

of us were fortunate to have had the opportunity to take music 
lessons when we were growing up. But we can also attest to the 
struggle of practising the classics when the hits of the day were 
so much more appealing. Well, Mr. Speaker, on that note I am 
pleased to say Saskatchewan’s first ever School of Rock is now 
open in Regina. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The School of Rock brings a different type of music instruction 
to eager students in the Regina area. Local and travelling 
musicians are hired to teach kids rock ’n’ roll classics. Instead 
of learning with Beethoven and Bach — not that that is bad — 
they’ll practise their skills with the edgy tracks of AC/DC or the 
vibrant sounds of the Beatles. 
 
Roland and Laurie Schulz, along with Greg Mildenberger, saw 
an opportunity for something different, and the School of Rock 
focuses on band performance in addition to music instruction. 
With their bandmates relying on them, students are more likely 
to practise. The goal is playing actual gigs around town, part of 
show coordinator Greg’s role. If their opening weekend is any 
indication of future success, it could be a future training ground 
of inductees of the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all of my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Roland, Laurie, and Greg on their new musical 
adventure right here, and wish them every success for the 
future. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 

Announcement of Heavy Oil Extraction Plants 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday Husky 
Energy announced they’re approving two brand new 
steam-assisted heavy oil extraction plants here in 
Saskatchewan. This news comes a year after the company 
committed to build three initial units, two of which are in my 
constituency of Meadow Lake. All told, this represents a $1.7 
billion investment in our province. And these investments are 
just the beginning, as Husky Energy has a broad strategy to 
approve two additional plants per year for the foreseeable 
future. 
 
Our government has worked hard to create the environment for 
the energy sector to grow and prosper, and not only that, but 
we’ve defended the sector from attacks by the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] and the left over the past decade. The NDP 
don’t particularly like the energy sector. We know that and 
Saskatchewan people know that. And I give credit to the Leap 
Manifesto-supporting member from Meewasin for at least being 
honest about it when he yesterday once again confirmed his 
support for a carbon tax in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve also been clear, Mr. Speaker. As long as we’re the 
government of Saskatchewan, we will fight a carbon tax with 
every tool that we have. Even the Trudeau Liberals have gotten 
the picture and have seemingly backed off their threatened 
imposition of a carbon tax this year. 
 
Standing up for the interests of this province and people is what 
we do and it’s getting results. Caving to the Trudeau Liberals is 

what the NDP want to do. I think I know which approach the 
people of this province prefer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Enhanced Communications Access for 
Rural Communities 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to announce that our government is in the process of 
launching a four-phase initiative that will provide rural 
communities with enhanced access to their communication 
services. The first phase begins with a SaskTel lead investment 
of $4.2 million to expand its high-speed fusion Internet service 
to 34 additional tower sites. Mr. Speaker, this work is already 
under way and the first six towers will be online by the end of 
January 2018. 
 
The second phase will see SaskTel deploy small cellular sites 
that will improve the level of service available in 100 rural 
communities. The public can expect this government to begin 
announcing the locations early in the new year. 
 
As part of phase three, this government will continue to explore 
ways that SaskTel can enhance its co-operation with the private 
sector to look for additional opportunities to improve rural 
wireless services. 
 
And the fourth phase will involve research gathered to identify 
coverage gaps in both mobility and Internet service. That data 
will be used by SaskTel to formulate a broad expansion plan to 
improve those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands the importance that 
rural high-speed Internet and cellular connections have both in 
business and our personal lives. The initiatives being announced 
today show that our government is committed to making sure 
that as technology advances, rural communities won’t be left 
behind. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, when answering a question 
about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
scandal, the Premier’s deputy minister, who is currently on 
leave to run for their leadership, said, “If elected leader, I will 
ensure the integrity of government by implementing the highest 
standards for ethics and conflict of interest rules that reflect best 
practices. Simply put, [she said] this would not happen under 
my leadership.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with his deputy minister? 
And if her leadership would be strong enough to stop a scandal 
like this, will the Premier tell us what he thinks went wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3269 

Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has already shared with the 
people of the province and members of the House what went 
wrong. She’s highlighted a number of mistakes that were made 
in an environment where land prices were very inflationary at 
the time, and we have implemented all of those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition likes to get 
into our leadership race on this side of the House. Fair enough, 
Mr. Speaker, I guess, especially if she’s prepared to answer 
questions then with respect to the leadership on her side of the 
House. Because this morning after this side of the House, the 
Minister of the Environment, announced for the province a 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change plan that’ll actually 
deliver results, the critic over there said that they would be 
opposing and it wasn’t stringent enough, was clearly the 
message. And then today, in a very enlightening moment for all 
of us, the leading leadership candidate over there, the member 
for Saskatoon Meewasin, doubled down and said no, if he’s the 
premier, there’s going to be a made-in-Saskatchewan carbon 
price. 
 
That’s what they said in Alberta before the last election. What 
they got was an Alberta carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, just like Mr. 
Trudeau’s federally imposed tax. Is that now the position of the 
NDP? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, in a move that surprises nobody, 
the Premier tries to deflect from the GTH. Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Saskatoon Willowgrove joined the Premier’s 
Deputy House Leader in committee to “. . . immediately begin 
action to sell the GTH to the private sector” if he becomes 
leader. Mr. Speaker, does the Premier think the Sask Party 
government should sell the GTH to the private sector? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s another question 
about our leadership campaign on this side of the House. I just 
want to say with respect to the GTH, the minister responsible 
isn’t focused on its sale or continued ownership. He’s focused 
though on the fact that this is a logistics story that’s good for the 
province. Over 500 permanent, new jobs created. We’ve been 
talking a lot about jobs this week, quite appropriately, and 
significant private sector investment, Mr. Speaker, as we seek 
to continue to improve logistics and expand exports across the 
world, as we have seen for the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but here again we’re talking about our leadership 
candidates and what they might be saying on this side of the 
House. I wonder if she has a comment for what the leadership 
candidate, the member from Meewasin, told a group that was 
gathered at Louis’ at the University of Saskatchewan just earlier 
this month, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a direct quote from her 
leadership candidate from Meewasin, the prohibitive favourite 
in their campaign. He said, “And too often as a party, plain and 
simple, we’ve hidden what we really believe in and thought that 
Saskatchewan wasn’t ready for us.” 
 
Wasn’t ready for what, Mr. Speaker? The Leap Manifesto that 
the Finance critic supports? Wasn’t ready for what, Mr. 

Speaker? A Trudeau-like carbon tax that that member from 
Meewasin would implement as a premier, Mr. Speaker, if he 
ever got there? The good news is that because of this leadership 
renewal on this side of the House, that will never happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Wow, Mr. Speaker, it’s the greatest hits of 
deflection attempts from the Premier today. Maybe eventually 
he’ll stop trying to deflect and actually answer the questions the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during his guest appearance in the Sask Party 
leadership race, the Premier’s Deputy House Leader said that 
land development is problematic for governments because 
“Inevitably, it leads to questions of conflict of interest.” Mr. 
Speaker, does the Premier agree that the questions of conflict of 
interest were inevitable, or is this a scandal of the Sask Party’s 
own making? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I disagree with the 
premise of the hon. member’s question. And she keeps saying, 
well are you going to answer the . . . The fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Speaker, these questions have been canvassed in this House 
and by the independent officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
The Provincial Auditor asked these questions, Mr. Speaker, and 
let’s remember the Provincial Auditor isn’t hired by the 
government. The Provincial Auditor works for the Assembly, 
an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly who looked 
at this, Mr. Speaker, who was afforded all of the documents. 
 
I’ve heard recent media commentary that, well if only all the 
documents were accessed. Well the Provincial Auditor had 
access to all the documents, came up with the recommendations 
which related to government policy, the . . . Well they don’t like 
the answer, Mr. Speaker. They ask the question and then they 
say, why won’t you answer? Then they don’t listen to the 
answer, Mr. Speaker. But the issue has been dealt with by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now there might be more work done on behalf of the 
government, pending the existing review that’s under way and 
after that review’s complete. That’s something we’ve also said 
already on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, I think it’s worth noting that she stayed a 
thousand miles away and deflected from what the prohibitive 
favourite for the NDP leadership said over there to some 
students that were gathered at the University of Saskatchewan 
earlier this month. What did he mean when he said, “Too often 
as a party, plain and simple, we’ve hidden what we really 
believe in and thought that Saskatchewan people weren’t ready 
for us”? 
 
What does he believe? The elements of the Leap Manifesto that 
the member for Nutana supports? Is that one of the things that 
they’ve hidden from the people of the province? Well they 
haven’t hidden it very well. We kind of know what they think 
of that. Or is it, Mr. Speaker, a carbon tax that we know would 
hurt exposed industries in this province, cost consumers 



3270 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

money? Or maybe it’s the fact that they oppose a tax reduction 
for small business, but that’s not hidden anymore either because 
that’s how they voted last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for members opposite, their leadership 
candidates to start answering questions, including what’s the 
hidden agenda the member talks about. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Wow, Mr. Speaker, nothing but deflections 
and tired old lines today, I guess, from the Premier. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s try one more time. The member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove also said, “I believe that we owe the people of 
Saskatchewan answers to questions around the Global 
Transportation Hub.” Well we agree, and I hope the Premier 
also agrees. So if after he quits serving as an MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] the Premier is called to testify at 
committee or another public forum, will the Premier commit 
today to providing testimony? Or will he refuse like Bill Boyd 
and Laurie Pushor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as we have indicated on this side of the House, when 
matters were, concerns were raised, the Government of 
Saskatchewan under the leadership on this side of the House 
worked with the Provincial Auditor to provide the Provincial 
Auditor with access to any questions that she had. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
provided information to the satisfaction of the Provincial 
Auditor, any information that the Provincial Auditor . . . 
including cabinet documents which is, Mr. Speaker, not a usual 
practice of government. Certainly it wasn’t the usual practice 
when the members opposite were in government and there were 
concerns raised around all sorts of business dealings that the 
NDP government were involved in. 
 
And what the Premier hasn’t ruled out is further action being 
taken by the government to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan have answers to the questions that they may have 
around this. But in the meantime we’re going to work hard to 
ensure that the Global Transportation Hub continues to grow 
jobs and grow investment in the province of Saskatchewan and 
outside of our capital city. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

HIV Testing and Treatment 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been interesting 
to hear all the questions from that side. I think that’s great 
practice for when they’re in opposition. 
 
But let’s get to a serious topic, Mr. Speaker, 170 new cases of 
HIV in Saskatchewan last year. One in four of the people 

diagnosed with HIV in the last 10 years in the Saskatoon Health 
Region have already died. It’s a serious problem and this 
government has not responded with enough seriousness. There 
are gaps in access to services, including coverage for 
antiretroviral medications, despite repeated calls from front-line 
workers who recognize how needed those are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, full coverage of these medications would prevent 
new cases of HIV, would save money, and most importantly, 
would save lives. Will the minister commit to fully funding 
HIV antiretroviral medications? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the member opposite has said, this is a very serious concern for 
our government. We have increased the amount of testing that 
we do; that of course has led to an increased number of 
diagnoses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also acknowledge the All Nations Hope 
people here who the member opposite introduced earlier. 
During HIV Awareness Day this past summer, I was tested 
there. Mr. Speaker, again we take this very seriously but we 
have taken action. We have increased by 443 per cent the 
amount spent on HIV testing, by 45 per cent in prevention 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the specific question the member opposite 
asked: we are considering where we should go from here. We 
certainly want to do everything we can to help, but it should be 
clearly stated that as of right now, 93 per cent of the cost of 
HIV medication is covered by the government. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well it’s good to know that that’s being 
considered. It would be an addition of less than half a million 
dollars to fully cover those medications. We know how much 
each new case costs. It would be a very good step to take. 
 
An increase in testing is good and that is a good thing. But you 
cannot say that the increased number of cases come from 
increased testing. These are new cases, new outbreaks — 170 
more people with the disease. The virus continues to spread and 
people continue to suffer under this minister’s watch. 
 
Last week the Minister of Social Services said “. . . we’re very 
supportive of all the programs that our community-based 
organizations do . . . to serve the clients with AIDS.” Mr. 
Speaker, key organizations like AIDS Saskatoon and All 
Nations Hope Network have learned that next year they’ll be 
losing all of their federal funding. Will the Minister of Health 
step up, help them to fight for funding for these vital 
organizations, and commit to making absolutely certain that 
they can continue to do their essential front-line work in 
response to this very real crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3271 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the question, 
just for clarity, if the member was asking would we advocate 
for funding on behalf of them with the federal minister, I’d be 
pleased to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also, I guess, respectfully disagree with 
the point that the member made in his preamble earlier on the 
point of testing. The deputy chief medical health officer for the 
province, Dr. Denise Werker, has confirmed in the past that the 
recent increases in the number of HIV cases isn’t a surprise and 
is the result of increased opportunities for testing. Mr. Speaker, 
testing is very important. We need to know people who are HIV 
positive so that they can get the appropriate medication and the 
appropriate medical treatment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Health Services for Northern Youth 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Advocate for 
Children and Youth’s report on our northern youth suicide crisis 
is out. As the report says, “. . . the picture is appalling.” For 
young people in Saskatchewan, suicide rates are six times 
higher for First Nations boys and 26 times higher for First 
Nations girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard the kind words from the 
government, but our kids need action. Jordan’s principle is a 
standard that puts the needs of children ahead of federal and 
provincial fighting. Will they listen to the advocate, adopt 
Jordan’s principle in full, and start giving the same access 
service for all children in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a parent 
or a grandparent, one could only imagine the hardship and what 
families go through when there is a loss of a child, especially 
due to suicide, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spoken with the advocate prior 
to the release of his report from time to time, and we want to 
thank the advocate of course for the work that he’s done over 
the last year on this report, Mr. Speaker. But more importantly, 
we want to thank the many children, youth, elders, community 
members that contributed to the report. And if one takes the 
time to read the report, it’s very evident that their voice was 
heard in the advocate’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We accept all the advocate’s recommendations as they pertain 
to health, Mr. Speaker. I can report to the Assembly that we 
remain committed to ensuring that jurisdiction and the 
background of the individual does not get in the way of children 
and youth getting the care that they need. That’s been a policy 
of this government and this health organization, this Ministry of 
Health, and will continue to be. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to quote the Child Advocate’s 
document, “Our children deserve better.” Mr. Speaker, they 
deserve better than governments playing hot potato with the 
lives of our children. And that’s the point behind Jordan’s 
principle, that the health, well-being, and education of our kids 

is more important than governments fighting about jurisdiction. 
 
As one young person quoted in the report said, “Suicide is not 
the problem. It is the backlash of the problem.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the advocate also called on the government to 
support the development of FSIN’s [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations] suicide strategy, the continued 
implementation of the Métis Nation’s Métis suicide prevention 
strategy, and to implement the mental health and addictions 
action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally will the government support the FSIN and 
the Métis Nation in this important work? And will they finally 
fund, will they finally fund and implement their own plan that 
they announced three years ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, this 
government, this province does not let jurisdiction get in the 
way of treating those that need health care. From time to time 
rural and remote situations do stretch the system a bit thin. That 
does pose challenges from time to time, Mr. Speaker, but it is 
not impacted by the background of any individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the recommendations do lay out, we are fully 
committed to working with the FSIN, the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, as well as the federal government, to implement 
changes that are so desperately needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Suicide prevention demonstration project in La Ronge is being 
developed with Mental Health Commission of Canada to 
engage community partners in implementing sustainable, 
culturally appropriate suicide prevention initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker, and that includes recommendations made in the mental 
health addictions and action plan impacting northern rural and 
remote areas, Mr. Speaker. As it stands today, approximately 42 
of the 46 recommendations of the mental health addictions 
action plan have been either implemented or being worked on, 
and we continue on that work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Presumptive Coverage for Workers 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, representatives from 
Saskatchewan’s Professional Fire Fighters Association are with 
us today. Last year we questioned the minister about changes to 
presumptive coverage under WCB [Workers’ Compensation 
Board] for firefighters who risk their health every day just 
doing their jobs. 
 
Other provinces are moving forward in providing the coverage, 
but here in Saskatchewan, cancers they contract while at work 
including breast, prostate, skin, and myeloma cancers are still 
not presumptive diseases under workers’ compensation for 
firefighters. Last year when we asked the minister, he said, “If 
there is valid information we’ll certainly want to review and 
assess it, and we’ll be asking the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and the people in the ministry to look at this issue as 



3272 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

well.” 
 
Well the minister has had a year — plenty of time to consult 
with WCB and get it done — so what is the minister waiting 
for? Why won’t he extend the same support to Saskatchewan 
fighters as have British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta, and 
Manitoba? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been in 
government, we’ve provided presumptive coverage for PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder], one of the most broad, 
all-encompassing coverages in all of Canada — not limited just 
to specific vocations but all the way across the working 
spectrum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also, twice since we’ve been in 
government, increased the number of presumptive coverages for 
cancer. We’ve asked the people at Workers’ Compensation 
Board to continue to look at, continue to analyze the statistics 
that they’ve been provided with, do interjurisdictional 
comparisons, and to make sure that we’re using the best science 
to provide the best coverage that possibly can be done. 
 
Since we’ve been in government as well, we have the only 
asbestos registry in all of Canada to ensure that we’ve got 
something that’s workable, something that . . . [inaudible] . . . a 
database can be located so that anybody, firefighter or 
otherwise, can access that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Pricing Strategy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment 
rolled out their so-called plan to deal with carbon emissions 
yesterday. And like the emperor’s new clothes, many are 
already seeing through the minister’s sales pitch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s start with their revival of the green tech fund. 
It would have been a great first step when they passed it in 
2009. But it sure brings into question their claim that this new 
plan is neither a carbon price nor a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. 
The options laid out in this new plan for heavy emitters include 
paying into the provincial technology fund or buying offsets. 
 
Now I hate to quibble with the minister, but he, the Deputy 
House Leader, the former Finance minister, the Premier, and so 
many more of them have said that the technology fund is a tax. 
So were they all wrong? Or is he wrong now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I want to thank the member for the question. Mr. Speaker, this 
is a made-in-Saskatchewan plan, something that the members 
opposite have been calling for, including the member from 
Nutana. It includes the ability as one option, as a flexible 
approach to ensure compliance. It does include a technology 
fund, which the members opposite — including the member 
from Nutana — have called for, Mr. Speaker. The federal 

government have given all jurisdictions two choices: a carbon 
tax or cap and trade. We reject both for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the members opposite very soon will have the ability to 
weigh in on where they stand on this, whether they want to 
stand with the federal government and see a carbon tax 
imposed, which we hear from some members, including the 
presumptive leader, the candidate leading the leadership for the 
NDP race at this point. Or do they accept a cap and trade, which 
we don’t think is the right approach for our province as well? 
So the members opposite have the ability to support this plan 
and to help us ensure that the federal government does not 
impose a carbon tax on this province. Where do they stand on 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last year we brought in a motion 
to enact the green tech fund law, and every single one of them 
voted against it. Now the minister calls their new document 
comprehensive. Well it does cover a lot. As a solution to carbon 
emissions, they include highways and culverts and even 
drainage, which they are failing on. I’m surprised the GTH isn’t 
in there somewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t know if they were trying to sound bold or what, 
but they even say they will “Introduce regulations governing 
emissions from electricity generation by SaskPower and 
Independent Power Producers.” Mr. Speaker, Stephen Harper 
already did that. 
 
And then there’s the small matter of the federal carbon tax we 
don’t want Ottawa to impose it on us. The Sask Party says they 
agree. So before rolling out this new plan, why not check with 
the feds to make sure that it will protect Saskatchewan people 
from having a carbon tax imposed on us? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 
the member from Nutana just basically put . . . The position of 
the NDP is for this province to wave the white flag, to check 
with the feds, to negotiate with the feds to see whether or not a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan is going to be acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. With respect, Mr. Speaker, to that member, we 
developed the plan, a made-in-Saskatchewan plan, made by 
Saskatchewan people for Saskatchewan people, that we will 
defend when it comes to the federal government ever imposing 
a carbon tax on this province. 
 
And the members opposite have a very clear choice. They can 
agree with the federal government that it’s either cap and trade 
or a carbon tax, or they can agree with the Government of 
Saskatchewan to say that those options do not work for this 
province. And they can agree with the Government of 
Saskatchewan to say to the federal government that we stand up 
for the people of Saskatchewan; we stand with the Government 
of Saskatchewan, and we will not allow the federal government 
to impose a carbon tax. 
 
It’s very simple. Do you agree with the federal government that 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3273 

it’s either cap and trade or a carbon tax, or do you agree with 
the Government of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan that it should be a made-in-Saskatchewan 
approach? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’ve been calling 
for is a made-in-Saskatchewan approach. But we know that the 
federal government already is concerned about the plan that was 
brought out yesterday and that we’re still stuck with the feds 
imposing their will on us. So now . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Check Facebook. That’s exactly what she says on the 
Facebook page. It doesn’t go far enough. 
 
So the plan also says, “The Government of Saskatchewan will 
use existing legislation, such as The Management and 
Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, to proclaim and/or amend 
necessary sections to provide legislative authority for provincial 
regulation.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is back to the future. In case you forget, that’s 
the green tech fund that they passed through the House in 2009 
but never made it law, when we’ve been calling for that, Mr. 
Speaker. Now the former Finance minister said, “It’s a carbon 
tax.” The Premier said, “A carbon levy is a carbon tax by 
definition.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, forget what the headlines tell you. The Sask Party 
has introduced their own carbon tax, but what they haven’t 
introduced are any targets. In 2009 they said they were going to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions 20 per cent by 2020. Now 
that’s not going to happen, Mr. Speaker. So what are their new 
targets and how will this plan get us there? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would offer to the 
member of Nutana and the members opposite, where this plan 
will get us — with their support I would hope — is the ability 
for Saskatchewan to have our own plan, without the federal 
government imposing a carbon tax on the province of 
Saskatchewan, one that almost all, except for members 
opposite, agree would be harmful to the economy, would slow 
growth in our province, would slow investment, and would put 
our industries at a competitive disadvantage with industry 
around the world in which we compete in. We are world leaders 
in agriculture, in potash, in uranium, and oil, Mr. Speaker, to 
name just a few sectors, and a carbon tax imposed by the 
federal government will do nothing but harm those industries 
and harm employment and harm jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the choice is very clear. The members opposite have already 
said that they would check with the feds. Mr. Speaker, here’s a 
check-in moment for them. They can decide either to accept a 
cap and trade or carbon tax by the federal government, or agree 
with the Government of Saskatchewan on a 
made-in-Saskatchewan choice, made-in-Saskatchewan 
approach on climate change. The question is very easy. Do you 
stand with Saskatchewan or do you stand with the federal 
government? 
 

[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Question period is over. We’ll do it all 
again tomorrow. 
 
[14:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 115, 
The Residential Tenancies Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved first reading 
of Bill No. 115. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will we hear second reading? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Concurrent 
motion, fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report that it has 
considered a certain supplementary estimate and to present its 
fourth report. I move: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Regina Rochdale: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be concurred in. 

 



3274 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Westview. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain supplementary estimates and to present its 
fourth report. 
 
I move: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Saskatoon Westview: 
 

That the fourth report on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 100, 
The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole and that this bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. Order. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 75 through 82. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having difficulties hearing the member 
from Estevan. I believe she said that she’s tabled the questions 
from 75 to 82. 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 85 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to give my remarks with regards to The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reading some of the notes that were 
presented here with regards to this Act. And my understanding 
was that this current Act was approved in 2007, and so it’s been 
about 10 years old now. And I think it’s a really important bill 
to have because, with the advancement of our resource revenue 
and the resource economy, we’ve had a lot of industrial sites 
that have come across in our province, and some that were here, 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3275 

of course, way before that, you know. And it’s important that 
we have proper legislation that manages these sites when it’s 
time to address the potential environmental concerns with 
regards to it and the future of handling what these sites are 
going to look like. It’s really important to have a good 
framework with regards to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember talking about a bill, one of the first bills I talked 
about, well since being elected in this Assembly here. And it 
was with regards to abandoned orphan wells, Mr. Speaker, and 
talking about the importance of having good structure with 
regards to abandoned wells, and to the issue that a lot of 
landowners here are feeling that . . . are not being met because 
companies will come and they create these wells, and once the 
market is depleted or the company is no longer resourceful, that 
they leave and they leave these wells there. And they’re 
supposed to have an obligation to clean them up, but sometimes 
the company’s either bankrupt or they leave and the people who 
own the land are responsible for that. And the cleanup for those 
are really costly and oftentimes landowners are upset with the 
fact that they’re left to manage these sites, you know, and 
they’re looking for the government to incorporate some 
legislation that would help manage those issues. 
 
I know there’s some states that have had this issue before and 
they’ve implemented some legislation that helps. I’m thinking 
of North Dakota as being one of them. They have a really 
well-managed oil sector there, Mr. Speaker, and the amount of 
orphan wells that they have in that state are minimal for the 
amount that are created. And that’s because they have good 
legislation. They hold those organizations accountable and they 
have a way to assure that these companies clean up these sites 
before they are leaving the area. And so it seems like maybe we 
need to look at some of these other areas to develop these sites. 
 
But with regards to this bill, Mr. Speaker, I think this bill also is 
talking about how they’ve made regulations with regards to this 
bill that they need to re-evaluate the effectiveness of it every 
five years. And so my understanding is that when the five-year 
mark came along, the minister conducted a review and 
consulted with some of the stakeholders, and some of the points 
that they are bringing forward with regards to amendments to 
this bill come from that review. 
 
And so there are some specifics here, and one of them being 
that there be a requirement to review that the money in the fund 
is sufficient enough to meet the needs of the sites accepted into 
the program and that the ICP [institutional control program] 
require that a site holder post an assurance fund, which is 
commonly known as financial assurance. And with regards to 
that, that could be in the form of cash. It could be cheque, or it 
could be another financial instrument or security, Mr. Speaker. 
And that fund would help to oversee the maintenance of dealing 
with the industrial sites or any unforeseen events. 
 
So there’s a new section, Mr. Speaker, that allows the minister 
to appoint a fund advisory committee to advise on the 
Institutional Control Monitoring and Maintenance Fund and 
Institutional Control Unforeseen Events Fund, which is mostly 
on long-term investments of the funds. And this committee is 
exempt from liability for these investment decisions. And it 
seems that this committee will likely be composed of 
employees from the Ministry of Economy, I believe. And so I 

wonder because of that and because this committee then is 
exempt from liability, does the minister accept liability then? 
Like who is responsible if something happens? 
 
And I think . . . When I reviewed that, I feel that there should be 
a little bit more clarity with regards to that, Mr. Speaker, 
because it doesn’t seem to be very specific. And I wonder with 
the fact that most of these . . . The committee, if it in fact is 
employees from the Ministry of Economy, it seems interesting 
that it isn’t a committee that’s based on a variety of people who 
could be appointed for different reasons. And where’s the 
transparency and accountability for that? How is that going to 
flow? And so I think that’s really something that will be really 
important. 
 
I’m sure the critic will have lots of questions with regards to the 
committee and how that’s going to be established, and who is 
going to make the decisions on who is going to be on that 
committee, and what’s going to happen with regards to liability 
and accountability and transparency, and how they’re going to 
manage that. And so I’m fully confident that the critic will have 
those questions when this comes to the chance of going to 
committee and having those discussions. 
 
There’s also a new section that outlines that the minister can 
transfer a closed site from the institutional control program to a 
responsible person. And again, Mr. Speaker, I have some 
questions with regards to what that looks like, the institutional 
control program. What’s that going to entail? How’s that going 
to look? What’s the description a little bit more and who that 
responsible person will look like? I wonder how that’s going to 
have more accountability then with the minister transferring 
that. And again I think the critic will have a lot of questions 
with regards to that as well. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s some serious concerns about 
removing specific agencies or entities within this bill. I would 
be also really interested to hear who those stakeholders were 
that they said that the minister consulted with and who that’s 
going to look like coming forward. My understanding is that 
this bill will continue to be reviewed every five years, and so 
once this is passed, this will be in continuous review. And so I 
think those are questions that’ll need to be discussed.  
 
But with saying that, Mr. Speaker, I know I have colleagues 
that will have a lot more to add to this with regards to the 
discussion of this bill. And like I said, I have great confidence 
that the critic will do her due diligence and ask the appropriate 
questions when this comes to committee. But with saying that, I 
am going to move to adjourn debate on Bill 85, The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



3276 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter the discussion today about Bill No. 86, The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. It’s always good to look 
at the minister’s second reading speech to get a sense of where 
the government wants to go with a bill. It doesn’t necessarily 
tell the whole story, but it does tell the government’s reasoning 
and rationale on a particular bill, Mr. Speaker. And then there’s 
always the opportunity to take that bill to committee and ask 
questions. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 86 on this very important topic, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, the minister in his 
second reading speech said: 
 

The amendments in Bill 86 are generally administrative in 
nature. They set the stage for us to move forward in a more 
substantive change in the future that we require additional 
policy development, stakeholder consultation, and 
financial analysis prior to introduction. 

 
So I will in a few moments here go through some of those 
administrative changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is an area in which we always want to ensure that we’re 
working to do better, Mr. Speaker. Our children are, to be a bit 
trite, are really our future, Mr. Speaker. And to make sure that 
children have all the opportunity and support and guidance and 
to be connected to their families, to their biological family, and 
that their biological family has the support that they need to be 
able to parent and raise that child, I think is a really important 
first goal. And when that can’t happen, putting in place the 
supports — but I know that even in the most difficult situation, 
children ultimately love their parents, Mr. Speaker, and want to 
be with their parents — and to try to put those supports around 
family to ensure that families are strong. Because you can’t talk 
about a child without talking about the context of the family. 
When we talk about child poverty, we’re actually talking about 
poverty in a family. They’re not independent of one another, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to this particular bill, some of the things that it 
does, it adds the definition. As the minister said, they were 
administrative in nature. Actually before I go there, he had 
pointed out that this lays the change for substantive change in 
the future, which as I said just a moment ago, it’s important to 
always be looking at legislation and policy and programming 
and how we do things better. 
 
But that’s always a red flag with me with respect to this 
government around substantive change. Just over a year and a 
half ago at the last election, the government, following that 
election and leading up to a tight budget, talked about 
transformative change when it came to health care. And I would 
certainly argue that we need to make changes, serious changes, 
around health care, particularly ensuring that the people stay 
well and don’t . . . Some of the things that cause ill health like 

poverty, Mr. Speaker, we need to address those front-end 
pieces. So I would be the first to say that transformative change 
is one thing, but changing administration isn’t necessarily 
transformative. 
 
And I have concerns as we’ve just moved to one health region 
what that all looks like for front line, not just the service care 
providers but the patients really. The system exists because 
patients and residents in health care need the best possible 
services. 
 
So with respect to this comment around substantive change, I 
worry with this government that there isn’t the necessary 
consultation, real and meaningful consultation that digs down 
and connects with people, with where they’re at and finds out 
what it is people — families who are struggling — what they 
really need. We know that here in Saskatchewan . . . I believe, 
just recalling off the top of my head, I think the national 
average of when it comes to children in care, 48 per cent 
nationally are indigenous children, but here in Saskatchewan 
it’s close to 80 per cent I believe, but I could stand to be 
corrected. But I do know we’re well above the national average. 
 
That enters into a whole discussion about truth and 
reconciliation, and you need to accept truth to be able to move 
on to reconciliation. And we have some calls to action as a 
province and as legislators that we can move to better support 
families. And I think that that would go a long way to helping 
support families who have struggled because of 
intergenerational trauma, because of residential schools, Mr. 
Speaker. That is really I think . . . Intergenerational trauma, 
poverty, lack of housing, all those kinds of things are the things 
that send families into care. 
 
I know in our own offices, in my office in Saskatoon 
Riversdale, when people come in with a child and family 
service issue it’s the most difficult thing. I have a Bachelor of 
Social Work degree. I’ve been a registered social worker. I’m 
not currently a registered social worker and I’ve never worked 
on the front lines in this particular area, but I do know that it’s a 
very difficult situation. And folks come to our offices to ask for 
help, and that’s one of the most difficult things. I’m not, I am 
not a professional. I don’t have first-hand knowledge of the 
families usually and so trying to guide them and support them 
in the best way possible to resolve some of their issues can be a 
big challenge. And it’s heartbreaking for children, but it’s 
heartbreaking for families who want to be with their children 
and do the very best they can for their children. 
 
But the reality is we are faced with a situation in many cases 
where there are families that have been damaged generation 
after generation because of residential school and because of 
poverty. I’ve talked to families who’ve been in . . . well families 
who have children with disabilities who have been told that 
they will get better supports if they put their child into care. 
And I can’t even imagine being placed in that position, Mr. 
Speaker, where you know that as a loving, caring parent that 
you have the best interests of your child at heart and want to 
ensure that they have what they need, but financially you can’t 
afford to meet their needs if they have some particular concerns, 
Mr. Speaker. And being told by folks that the best place for 
their child and the best access to supports will be if you put 
your child in care is not acceptable. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3277 

With respect to this Bill No. 86, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, some of the things that this particular bill does 
again, as the minister says, it lays the ground for substantive 
changes which I know in committee the critic will dig down 
into and try to get a sense of what that’s going to look like in 
the future, that substantive change — what the minister has in 
mind and what that’s going to look like. 
 
This Bill No. 86, there are added definitions for “business day,” 
“dispute resolution,” and “peace officer.” It redefines “parent” 
to clarify that it “does not include the minister or a person 
providing out-of-home care services on behalf of the minister.” 
It updates the section referencing child’s best interests; changes 
“the child’s physical, mental, and emotional level of 
development” to “the mental, emotional, physical and 
educational needs of the child and the appropriate care or 
treatment, or both to meet those needs.” It changes “the child’s 
emotional, cultural, physical, psychological and spiritual needs” 
to “the child’s cultural and spiritual heritage and upbringing.” 
 
And it eliminates family review panels and boards. Previously 
the minister could appoint for any region a family review panel 
consisting of members of that community or region to help 
make decisions around appeals. Similarly the Family Services 
Board could also be established to review cases. This bill also 
makes a change from dispute resolution. It’s being offered in 
place of mediation services. So I’m curious what that will look 
like, dispute resolution, how that looks different from 
mediation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Section 83 and 56 are being repealed after they were never 
proclaimed. And First Nations authorities and the government 
were never able to come to an agreement on implementation. 
These sections relate to transfer of guardianship, financial 
assistance, transfer of custody, etc. 
 
So I know that I have colleagues who actually work in this area. 
Some of them have put comments on the record already. And I 
know our critic, who is in fact a social worker and has worked 
in addictions a good chunk of her career and is very 
knowledgeable about this area, will have some comments on 
this particular bill, but many questions in committee. This is 
hugely important. Again this is just an administrative bill at this 
point it sounds like, by and large, but there’s still always 
questions to ask. And I guess the goal will be in committee to 
find out what those more substantive changes will look like 
down the road because we do need to do better by children here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But with that, for now I 
think I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
86, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 

Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise into the debate on Bill No. 87, An Act 
respecting Data Matching Agreements and making 
consequential amendments to The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
And I take particular interest in this, first as an MLA, as we do 
any kind of law making in this Chamber, but also as the critic 
for ethics for our side of the House and the questions I have 
raised, particularly around the serious matter of the issues 
around this government’s attitude towards the proper use of 
data and that type of thing here in Saskatchewan, but also as 
Labour critic. And I’ll speak more to that in a minute. 
 
But I think that this is one that creates a lot of questions, creates 
a lot of questions and doesn’t provide the answers. And it’s one 
that of course many of us would not have been familiar with the 
term “data matching.” And I’ll read the definition if people are 
at home wondering what in fact is data matching. Well this is 
the definition that they are proposing that we pass. It means: 
 

the matching or linking of information in one database in 
the possession and control of an initiating organization 
with information in one or more other databases in the 
possession and control of a participating organization 
without the consent of individuals who are the subjects of 
the information. 

 
And that’s the key phrase that we’re looking at: “without the 
consent of individuals who are the subjects of the information.” 
 
And so this is a pretty big deal. This is a pretty big deal and it’s 
one that I think we’ll take a lot of time and talk to the Privacy 
Commissioner about his interests, his thoughts around this piece 
of legislation, and where does he stand. What are some of the 
concerns he has? As we pass any kind of legislation, 
particularly when we’re talking about going into areas we’ve 
not gone into before, what are the unintended consequences of 
putting ourselves into that realm? We want to make sure that we 
get it right and we get it right as much as we can the first time 
because often we see that we’re often coming back. And this is 
the thing with this government, that they come back with the 
corrections that they’ve made. 
 
So we’ve not heard the reason why. What were the issues that 
caused this to come forward? Were there some breaches of 
privacy that, of course, did not make it into the public eye? Is 
that the case? We don’t know why this is all of a sudden the 
issue. We don’t know who the organizations are. Who were the 
participating organization? Who was the initiating 
organization? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Who are these partners that have been working together without 
the consent? Because we are talking about limiting liability, and 
if this means that there has been significant breaches of trust in 
terms of privacy within government and this is one way of 



3278 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

limiting that liability, this would be an unfortunate way of doing 
this without full disclosure to those whose information has been 
breached. And I think this is a major, major concern. 
 
On one hand, and it’s quite lighthearted, we joke about the 
Ministry of Highways winning the cone of silence award in 
Canada, and that is humorous. And that is significant because 
clearly that is a sign of what people think across Canada when it 
comes to our transparency and accountability of this 
government. And it’s not one that, while we can chuckle a bit, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not one that we should let pass by 
without saying, hey, is there a message in that award? Is there 
something we should be thinking about? 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have on numerous 
occasions stood in the House and during question period raised 
questions about the integrity of our email system, our 
government email system. The Premier has from time to time 
used his own private email server or their email server. And he 
said, well for example, this past fall for a few weeks in 
September the government email server was down. But there 
was no record of it being down. There was no ticket, no point in 
time where there was in fact proof that that was the case. 
 
And when we asked the minister responsible, I mean . . . And 
it’s a question that happens often in question period where we 
see the minister actually not paying attention, or intentionally 
not answering the question at hand. She actually answered a 
question that needs to be asked, and that is the quality of the 
storage of emails and the fact that we are concerned that they 
could deteriorate over the course of time. And it’s important 
that we are able to keep those records. 
 
But the question was, how do we feel about a provincial system 
that may or may not be working, that may or may not be able to 
serve when needed to serve? Particularly when government 
ministers are carrying out Executive Council work, it’s critical 
that they can . . . [inaudible] . . . count on their servers to be 
working. And it’s something that the government needs to, and 
particularly the minister needs to take very seriously, not just 
sort of pass off and say, it sort of comes and goes; it was kind of 
a tough month; we were aware that there were moments when 
there was high traffic and it just didn’t seem to be meeting the 
demand. That’s not good enough. That’s simply, simply not 
good enough. In this day and age when we’re dealing with 
issues around the world and, you know, the kind of the bills 
we’re talking about that have international impact, and perhaps 
this is one, that we’re saying, well we’re just not sure whether 
or not the government infrastructure can handle the load. 
 
And here we have a question about data matching at the 
government level and whether or not the machines will even be 
able to handle it. Can the infrastructure handle this? And the 
minister of the day is saying, well you know, we’re not too 
worried about it. So I’m wondering if . . . That would be a very 
good question in committee. I mean, is the Minister of Central 
Services able to guarantee that the infrastructure of the 
government of the day can actually cope with this? And if it 
can’t cope with this, then what are they going to do about this? 
 
And so as the critic for ethics, I think this is one that’s hugely, 
hugely important because privacy is one . . . In this day and age 
of the Internet and the difficulty in protecting your privacy, that 

there’s so many places where we know we are vulnerable, that 
this is a big matter. This is an important matter before us, and so 
I’ll be watching very carefully on this. 
 
The other one that I want to raise . . . [inaudible] . . . I go 
through this, and it’s just a flag I always think of, I always think 
of as the critic of Labour around the issues of privacy, and that 
is around WCB, Workers’ Comp. Because they have an unusual 
approach to privacy, and that is one that I think is not good at 
all. It’s not good at all. In fact I think it’s one that is bordering 
on, that it needs serious attention. Because for many years, the 
government or the WCB folks from the highest levels have 
really thought they are above and beyond the Privacy 
Commissioner and The Privacy Act in legislation. 
 
And this is really, really concerning. Because we hear stories on 
this side of the House of employers going into workers’ files 
and just going in there on fishing trips. And I raised this issue in 
the last committee of review, that they can go in and they feel if 
a worker has been injured and there’s been a claim, that that 
action, that file now is an open field, an open field for the 
employer and doesn’t actually need, they don’t actually need a 
good reason and they don’t need a specific reason to look in 
that file. They can just say, hey, that employee was working for 
me and I want to look at their whole file. And really what 
they’re doing is they’re looking for any kind of sign, any kind 
of sign that might disqualify that worker from their claim. And 
that worker doesn’t even know that they’re in there looking. 
 
And this is really, I think, a breach of trust, a breach of trust for 
the WCB who’s supposed to be there protecting both the 
employer and the employee’s interests. And clearly it looks like 
they’re favouring the employer’s interests who says, well I have 
an interest. Well the question would be, what is that interest? 
Specifically tell us, what is that interest? What leads you to 
believe that there’s something in that file? They don’t have to 
say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They just have to say, you know 
what? I think I need to satisfy my curiosity about what might be 
in that file. And yet on the other hand, boy, is it ever hard for a 
worker to get information on their file. 
 
So when I look at this data-matching situation, I go, so how 
big? When they talk about wired pieces of information, how big 
does that have to be? Is there a threshold? Is there a size? Like, 
you know, 50,000 people are involved. Is that what the size of 
this large information piece is? Is it 5,000 or is it 50? Is it the 
size of a company? How big is this . . . search parameters do 
they have? And this is really, really problematic. 
 
And then the other part of this which particularly relates to 
workers is the fact that we’re one of the few provinces that does 
not have privacy legislation that covers workers who work in 
the private sector. Our legislation covers workers who work in 
the public sector but does not cover workers who work in the 
private sector. So would this be out of that realm of workers 
who might be having issues or concerns or are connected in 
some form with WCB, and because they’re in the private sector, 
that doesn’t count? 
 
And so this is really problematic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’ll 
have many, many questions about this when we get to the 
committee, you know. Because here we have a situation where 
we have the minister playing both roles, as Minister of Justice 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3279 

but also Minister of Labour. And he should know, he should be 
very well versed in the issues that . . . And this has been brought 
up for many years by many unions, many groups who are 
deeply concerned, and also the Privacy Commissioner, in terms 
of the exemptions that WCB has sought or continued to seek 
out. 
 
And so this is one that I think we cannot just say, okay well this 
is a bright new shiny thing and we’re just going to let it go, and 
what could be wrong with this? First we know, what was the 
cause? What caused this to come forward? Was there a breach? 
Was there a breach in managing information? And this 
government needs to come clean with the people impacted on it. 
And if that was the reason that this came forward, or if it’s from 
the uniform law commission that we see things from across 
Canada . . . It might be that. Nothing’s ever happened in 
Saskatchewan. Nothing’s ever happened in Saskatchewan. But I 
don’t see, when I looked at the minister’s comments, I don’t see 
anything like that at all in his comments about that. 
 
And so I want to talk a little bit about this, you know, and what 
he talked about. Now he talked about, this was a 
recommendation made by the Office of the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. So it will be interesting to see where did 
. . . and I hope, I hope . . . often what happens . . . and so we’ll 
have to have a meeting here. I think that we’ll have to get 
together and meet with the Office of the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. What was the driving force behind this? 
Because you know, I mean it’s a case of where there’s smoke, 
there’s probably fire, eh? And something’s burning underneath 
the house. And so we need to take a look and say, so if it 
doesn’t smell quite right, what is the cause? And I’d be very 
unhappy and very concerned if it’s because it’s coming out of 
issues around the workforce, labour, workers’ comp, that this is 
really where it’s coming from. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, just on a side note — and I know our 
time is limited — but I was very disappointed, very 
disappointed that we aren’t seeing amendments to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act. Today we had presentations by the 
firefighters talking about how they would like to see other 
cancers covered by workers’ comp. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we are now two years past the committee of review 
that was struck by Workers’ Compensation Board, which is 
mandated that they do it every five years. Now we’re two years 
past. 
 
We’ve got two days left before we break for the Christmas 
holidays, and we have not heard a peep from the Minister of 
Labour around this. Where is that legislation? And that 
legislation should contain some information or some 
amendments concerning privacy. And I would not be surprised 
if that’s one of the big holdups right now, because I know the 
bureaucracy of the Workers’ Compensation Board is very 
reluctant to move forward on that area. And they need to. They 
need to. 
 
As I have said, we are deeply, deeply concerned around what 
has been perceived and raised to me as fishing trips — workers 
who feel and who have heard after the fact, or as a result of 
some consultant actually getting access to their information 
working on behalf of the employer . . . but workers who have 
actually completed and quite successfully returned to work and 

thought their injury and their time off was all done. And now 
they’re back at work and everything’s going along fine. And all 
of a sudden they’re in some sort of trouble because of what, I 
would think, was a breach of privacy, where a consultant went 
into a file on behalf of an employer and had no real issue or 
claim or any specific reason they were looking into the file, but 
just thought they’d take a look and see what was what. 
 
And so we have a problem here. And so we have some really, 
you know . . . And I have to chuckle just a bit because when we 
read the minister’s comments, and here he goes, he talks about 
oversight, and the “Oversight will be provided by the 
government access coordinator where the initiating organization 
is a government institution, and the Office of the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner generally.” Now he says, “The 
government access coordinator and the Privacy Commissioner 
will review . . . and provide comment.” 
 
Now we should just be clear, we should be clear the legislation 
doesn’t use the word “will.” The legislation uses the word 
“may.” And that’s a big difference. That’s a big difference. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could find, and I’ll read into 
the record some of these things here that talks about this. Here’s 
what I’m talking about. This is section 11: “The commissioner 
may do all or any of the following.” He might not do anything. 
He’s not required to do a single thing. Nobody’s going to force 
him or her to do a single thing, but this is what they may do, not 
will do. And the minister was leading the House to believe they 
will do it, because he used very much the word “will.” But it’s 
actually section 11, under Commissioner: 
 

The commissioner may do all or any of the following: 
 

(a) offer comment on the implications for privacy 
protection of a proposed data matching project;  

 
(b) after hearing from the initiating organization, make 
recommendations . . . 
 

Now remember, that’s “may” do that, or may not do that. And: 
 

(c) after hearing from the initiating organization, 
recommend that the initiating organization: 
 

(i) cease or modify data matching that contravenes this 
Act . . .  
 
(ii) destroy collections of information collected in 
contravention of this Act . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would feel a lot better if it was a little 
stronger instead of “may recommend.” “Shall require” would be 
better language. “Shall require” would cause some confidence 
in this piece of legislation. But “may recommend,” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is, to say the least, really wishy-washy. You know, I’m 
not sure if this is really changing anything when you have such 
a thing. 
 
And then it only gets a little bit more bizarre, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in regulations, which we always look at, which we 



3280 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

always look at. The Lieutenant Governor in Council — which 
really means executive council and cabinet — may make 
regulations. They may define, enlarge, or restrict the meaning of 
any word or expression used in this Act but not defined in this 
Act. So they can really change the definition on the go here.  
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I feel like this is . . . And then they go on, 
next . . . [inaudible] . . . prescribing the requirements of the 
agreement and then defining who the initiating organization or 
participation organization is and prescribing the organizations. 
And then the other one — and this is in section 15 if you’re 
following along here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — section 15(f), and 
this is what I talked about for the individual: 
 

(f) for the purposes of section 9, respecting an individual’s 
access to his or her information. 

 
So they may make regulations in respect to how an individual 
has access to his or her own information. So there’s no “shall 
require,” this is “may,” so we’re all kind of at the mercy of big 
brother. So I don’t know what this really, really changes. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I think for many of us, many folks in 
Saskatchewan while we think when the minister uses the word 
“will,” it’s not really “will,” and as a lawyer, he should be more 
careful when he’s talking in terms like that. And make sure we 
understand that it’s a “may” and “recommend” and there is a lot 
here that I think leaves a lot of questions unanswered. And so I 
have a lot of concerns with this. And the big issue is of course 
being relatively new, we’re not really sure what this all . . . what 
the impact will mean. What will it mean for us? 
 
You know, and this is what . . . When I talked about the 
regulations, I should go back and talk about the access to 
information by the data subject or by the person, just to be sure 
we’re understanding that. Section 9 says: 
 

Subject to the regulations, any individual has the right to 
obtain from the initiating organization confirmation as to 
whether information concerning him or her is or was being 
used in the data matching project, and, if that is the case, 
access to that information and the details of the data 
matching agreement that are posted in accordance with 
clause 5(2)(d). 

 
And then we go to section 15, because that’s regulations and 
that’s where it says that they have the ability to make 
regulations around that. So we really don’t know. While on one 
hand it talks tough, but on the other hand, we have the 
regulations that say, but trust us; we are going to make sure that 
it’s going to be okay. It’s going to be okay. But we don’t really 
know what that means. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, forgive us if we seem a little cynical. This 
government that has . . . And this Premier and his legacy after 
10 years, the outgoing Premier who came in, who came in 
saying he’s going to be the most transparent and accountable 
government, but in the next couple of days he’s leaving as the 
worst, the worst government for transparency and 
accountability, and in fact getting highway awards for this. This 
is his legacy. 
 
They won an award. The Highways . . . the code . . . cone of 
silence. The cone of silence — that is his legacy. That is the 

legacy of this outgoing Premier. And this is the kind of 
legislation we’re looking at that creates I think many more 
questions. 
 
And in fact if we look at the cover-ups, the kind of . . . When 
we’ve asked for information, for example, around GTH, just 
yesterday we asked about land sales involving a trucking 
company, I believe it was, and a grocery store and what 
happened there with the kind of land sales. It was total 
reluctance to share that kind of information, which they should 
have. We see the binders; they come in. They come walking in 
with binders that have got to be 4 inches, 6 inches thick. Some 
of them I think are 8. I see some on the desks right now. You 
would think they would have that kind of information in those 
binders. I don’t know what they have in their binders. Maybe 
it’s a daily cartoon, I don’t know, to help them get through the 
day. I think that’s what it is. 
 
I know what the . . . The member from Moose Jaw, he has his 
binder. He has a half-inch binder that says, the GTH is not a 
scandal. It’s a scandal. I know the member from Moose Jaw 
keeps correcting us. I know the GTH is a scandal. And he keeps 
reminding people at home every day, no matter what. And I 
think at home they try to avoid those three letters because he’s 
got it burned in his brain that it’s not a scandal. It’s a scandal, 
you know. 
 
I don’t know, I know our former premier, Premier Calvert, 
always said scandal, so maybe it’s something in Moose Jaw 
they say. I don’t know. You know, I come from around there. 
We call a scandal a scandal. And definitely the GTH is a 
scandal. But I digress here. I’m talking about data management. 
 
And so at any rate I was just talking about the size of binders 
they have over there and lack of information. I don’t know what 
it is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not a scandal. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — It’s not a scandal. I don’t know what it is. 
Maybe that’s what they’re really after, the data management 
here. Matching, matching, that’s what we’re talking, and the 
size of binders. And yet they have no information, nothing that 
they can share. 
 
And this is the legacy of this Premier that we have on his last 
few days, the outgoing Premier who unfortunately can’t turn 
this ship around. We are in a fog, and I think we’re in a deep, 
deep fog. And no matter what they say, we’re not going to get 
anything much better from this government. And we have a 
whole host of candidates seeking leadership over there who 
themselves say we need better answers. We need . . . There are 
questions to be asked. 
 
Now maybe it’s a question of data matching. That’s the issue. 
And we don’t know how . . . what the size of that data is, but 
we know five want some data matched around the GTH. Pretty 
simple. And even the member from Meadow Lake, one wanted 
some answers about GTH. Bad data matching, if I ever saw. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I digress, not a lot but a bit. Because it’s all 
about information and sharing that information, and we have a 
lot of concerns. We have a lot of concerns about what this 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3281 

means for the individuals. And we’ll be talking to the Privacy 
Commissioner; definitely on my list of things to do, particularly 
when it comes to workers. And what are the implications to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board? Because I have seen the 
damage done by the inappropriate use or misuse of privacy 
when we should be so much better in this province, so much 
better. And we should be doing that. My disappointment, that 
we haven’t seen a workers’ compensation amendment Act come 
forward, just because it’s critically important. And that is where 
we could be talking about data and privacy and that type of 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there’ll be many people 
who want to get up today. I hope I’ve said a few things that 
have enlightened the issue around this bill because it is an 
important one. And so with that, I would move adjournment of 
Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 87, 
The Data Matching Agreements Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 88 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 
88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017, 
just I guess to go over a few comments. 
 
And I’ve heard different people raise concern. We have 
legislation that, you know, through this House we pass and it 
gives it some teeth, strength, I think people say. It’s the law of 
the land.  
 
But every time we have, I guess, a bill come forward that wants 
to change it and take it out of legislation into regulations, you 
wonder about why and what’s the reasoning and what’s the 
concern and why are you taking that away. To allow, I guess, it 
allows the minister the power, and we’ve heard that. I’ve heard 
some people back home when you explain that to them. 
 
And you know, I’ve been in some meetings where these 
changes have happened and you get some of them saying, well 
oh, they have the powers just to change — and then they call 
them super powers — to change, to change the rules in the way 
legislation or the way, you know, the practice has been done 
where you have a minister who now with a stroke of a pen can 
just change, can change whatever they want. And that’s very 
convenient. And sometimes, I guess, at the end of the day, you 
know, sometimes we have to ask why. Why are we doing these 
changes? Why are we taking . . . We want to strengthen the 
rules and we want to make sure. And the reason why, a lot of 

people are concerned at the way this government operates. 
 
And my colleague before me, you know, that was just talking 
about the data-matching amendments they were making to that 
legislation, you see that going on and the concerns when the 
government, the government takes over and just decides and 
doesn’t want to release information. So he did a great job of 
explaining the process.  
 
And any time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have the government 
on the other side deciding they just want to make the changes 
and put something in regulations, it gives that minister and that 
government a lot of power. And I think they’ve had too much 
power, and a lot of people are not happy with the way this 
government’s been operating. And they can sit there day after 
day and pat themselves on the back, and that’s fine. The good 
people of this province know different. And we look at many 
areas of that.  
 
But that is the concern when you’re changing over, again like I 
said, going from legislation, you take and you put it into 
regulations where the government will have or the minister will 
have powers. And sometimes, you know, is it the best for 
residents or maybe somebody who has an issue with the way 
government is operating? And all of a sudden it’s not 
legislation. It’s through the regulations. So we want to be clear 
on that. 
 
But having said that, that’s an issue I know some will argue 
back and forth our concern when you have that. So for those 
that I guess maybe have not been on the best side of that 
argument, it’s not good. But for those that benefit, like I’ve said 
to the minister, with the power just to change the regulations, 
the stroke of a pen can say, this is going to be changed and 
we’re no longer going to do this. And maybe it’s fine. Maybe 
there’s a reason why. There might be a reason why somebody’s 
asked for that. But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll 
leave that where it is, and we’ll continue to disagree on that 
side, or to agree on maybe there’s changes where it has to 
happen. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now I’m going to talk about . . . Everyone has . . . This piece of 
legislation, amendments they’re making, everybody has a 
certain . . . You have a point system on with SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] on your driver’s. Some people, you’re 
in the plus, some are in the minus. 
 
And you can go through, and every now and then you’ll get in 
the mail, you’ll get to renew your driver’s if it’s renewed once a 
year, or you get your notice that your driver’s has been 
renewed. But in that driver’s, in that package that you get from 
SGI, it talks about a point system. So if you’ve had any 
infractions or any tickets for some reason that come back to you 
that say, well because it was speeding. It might be seat belt; 
there could be different reasons why. It’s on a point system and 
I guess, you know, SGI has come up with a process on how 
they weigh in on some of the fines that are handed out to 
people. 
 
So there is a way that they put that, and some people get a 
discount. So if you have, you’re a minus, you might get a 



3282 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

discount. If you’re a plus . . . Either way. Like I’m saying, you 
know, if you’re in the negative . . . You want to be in the plus, I 
would think, and you would get some benefits. If you’re in the 
minus, then I guess you’ve got some infractions or some tickets 
that are going to cause you maybe to lose a rebate and maybe to 
pay more for your driver’s. 
 
But having said that, there used to be a process. If you 
disagreed with that, with any fees or you were concerned about 
the point system, you had a process to appeal and you could 
appeal that. You could actually appeal that to the Highway 
Traffic Board. You could go and submit your appeal saying, I 
disagree with what’s going on here and that’s not what 
happened. So you could have a chance, an appeal to have that 
heard. So that is a process they talked about and they’re talking 
about in here. Having said that, you can appeal. 
 
Now they’re taking that away. That process . . . [inaudible] . . . 
require documents, they’re moving that from the legislation 
again, as we talked about, to regulations where they can do that. 
So you would no longer have to go to the Highways. 
 
The other part of this amendment they’re making, and there’s a 
number of different ones, but this one here where they’re 
making . . . They’re taking a new section and a clarification 
when it comes to the insured. So if you have I guess an 
insurance company, from my understanding, and I know in 
committee we’re going to have to, you know, work this out and 
make sure . . . My colleagues and the critic will ask some 
questions and we’ll get exactly what the meaning of it and why 
the proposed changes. 
 
But here’s what happened. I believe some legislation was 
introduced prior, a year ago maybe, and they’re making some 
amendments. And what those amendments are, if for instance, 
if somebody was in a motor vehicle accident and I guess the 
person was charged with an offence and they’ve caused damage 
to another vehicle or injuries or death to someone else that was 
not in their vehicle with them, the insurance pays the family or 
pays the person that, you know, suffered damage to the vehicle 
or . . . [inaudible] . . . injuries or life. So the insurance will pay 
that; they pay that out. 
 
Now from what I get from this is now the insurance of the 
individual, of the individual that would be driving and that was 
found guilty of an offence . . . And it has a certain offence, and I 
think in this case it might be impaired driving or something like 
that. If you were to, you know, cause death, injury to someone 
else and you were found guilty — maybe from my 
understanding you were impaired driving; there’s certain 
offences that they’re talking about but I’m assuming maybe it’s 
impaired driving — and you caused that damage, the insurer 
can now come out and sue you for their portion of what they’ve 
paid out because of the damage and hold you accountable. I 
guess the insurance can hold you accountable because you’ve 
been found guilty of an offence, so they can try to recoup what 
they’ve paid out to that individual. 
 
And that’s one of the other areas where I see that they’ve gone 
with this. So it’s going to . . . And I know that when we’re in 
committee we’re going to have, you know, we’ll have a lot 
more questions and clarification on some. But from what I can 
see, that’s where we’re going, where they will hold you 

accountable for I guess for whatever reason you’ve caused 
injuries, as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve caused injuries, 
damage to a vehicle, I guess a death that another insurance 
company has paid out. They now can try to get those dollars, 
recoup some of the losses because of, you know, the individual 
has caused this because for whatever they were found guilty of 
an offence that would trigger the insurance company to be able 
to get those dollars back. So now they’ve put that in 
clarification. They’ve put that in there. 
 
Now also in part of that is if you’re getting, I think it’s 
payments, instalments, if you’re somebody who . . . They can 
now recoup that. But because you’re getting a monthly 
allotment of money from somewhere, they can also go after that 
and go after, my understanding, the instalments that you’re 
getting. They can be granted a way to retrieve some of those 
dollars from your instalments. So again it’s clarifying some of 
the legislation that was passed, but it’s just clarifying it. 
 
So I just wanted to go a little bit over this bill. And like I know 
my colleagues will have more questions, the critic will have, to 
clarification in this. So at this time I have no further comments 
on Bill No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2017, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Prepared to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 89, The 
School Choice Protection Act. This Act makes changes to The 
Education Act of 1995. Some of the key amendments in the bill, 
Mr. Speaker, are adding new sections to invoke the 
notwithstanding clause, so new sections 2.1 and 2.2. Some of 
this reads: 
 

2.1(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act and 
notwithstanding any other Act or law, grants must be paid 
by the minister to a board of education without regard to 
the religious affiliation of parents or guardians of pupils 
registered with the board of education or of pupils 
registered with the board of education. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act and 
notwithstanding any other Act or law, if regulations are 
made pursuant to this Act respecting grants that must be 
paid to a board of education, the regulations must provide 
for grants without regard to the religious affiliation of 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3283 

parents or guardians of pupils registered with the board of 
education or of pupils registered with the board of 
education [and so on]. 

 
There are also sections that secure the minister’s authorization 
to provide grants without regard to religious affiliation of 
parents or pupils themselves. And then specifically section 
2.2(1): “Pursuant to subsection 33(1) of the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms, section 2.1 is declared to operate 
notwithstanding sections 2 and 15 of the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms.” And then the second subsection, Mr. 
Speaker, is invoking the notwithstanding clause with respect to 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code as well. 
 
So these are the pieces that we are discussing in this particular 
amendment to The Education Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
According to the explanatory notes, these provisions will allow 
for the Ministry of Education to continue its current funding 
practices, and school divisions will continue to have the 
authority to apply their own attendance and admittance policies. 
When the minister gave her second reading speech on this bill, 
she identified that these changes are being proposed, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . to provide certainty to parents and students that the 
government can continue funding students who attend 
Catholic separate schools regardless of their religious 
affiliation. 

 
She goes on to state: 
 

These amendments are in response to the April 2017 Court 
of Queen’s Bench decision on the legal challenge brought 
forward by the Good Spirit School Division known as the 
Theodore . . . case. The decision found the funding of 
non-Catholics who attend Catholic separate schools to be 
unconstitutional. While the court found that non-Catholic 
students could be admitted to Catholic separate schools, 
the court also found that government funding for the 
attendance of . . . [these schools] violates sections 2(a) and 
15 of the Charter, which violates the state’s duty of 
religious neutrality. If the Court of Queen’s Bench decision 
were to come into force, there would likely be a significant 
shift in funding between the public and Catholic separate 
school divisions, which in turn would cause significant 
disruption in the education sector. 

 
The minister knows well that both the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Christ the Teacher Roman Catholic Separate 
School Division have filed appeals to the Theodore ruling, and 
between 6 and 18 months from now a decision will be 
delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this decision regards the future of non-Catholic 
students and their ability to attend Catholic schools. In no way 
is the decision implying that Catholic students’ education is in 
danger. 
 
I was raised as a Catholic and attended Catholic school, 
graduated from E.D. Feehan Catholic High School in 
Saskatoon. I understand the desire of some parents to want their 
children raised in a Catholic environment, to pass along 

religious values of the family. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I 
suspect that this is not why the government is suggesting 
invoking the notwithstanding clause here, and in fact not 
directly related in many ways. 
 
I took some political studies classes so I know a little bit from 
the academic perspective about use of the notwithstanding 
clause or lack of use of the notwithstanding clause as it may be. 
I’m not opposed to it outright, but I think there should be a 
compelling argument for making legislation notwithstanding to 
certain rights that are protected by the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
It’s disappointing that this is very much a politicized decision, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that the Sask Party has cut funding by 
$674 per student across the province. It hiked education 
property tax by 67 million, but cut total government funding for 
education by 121 million. 
 
There is no doubt that we are paying more for our education 
and getting less. Kids are losing classroom supports that they 
critically need for their success. This includes funding for buses 
for kindergarten kids. And I spoke with some constituents in 
Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. Speaker. Throughout the summer I 
was out door knocking for the by-election. So many 
constituents raised concerns about the cuts to education that this 
government has brought forward with the most recent budget. 
 
One of these cuts was the concern about the buses for 
kindergarten children. I had parents talking to me, being 
concerned that their five-year-old child was being asked to walk 
alone to school, that their work schedule wouldn’t allow for 
this. They were just getting into figuring out a groove with the 
other kids and how to make things work, and now these burdens 
really negatively impacted families. 
 
I also heard from parents who were concerned about cuts to 
speech-language pathologists, one family in particular where 
the daughter had undergone surgery. She was quite concerned 
about her ability to access speech-language pathology — is she 
even going to be able to talk? — and the exorbitant cost that 
this would place on the family as a result of these cuts. 
 
I also talked to a family, some constituents in Saskatoon 
Fairview who are concerned with the fact that there were cuts to 
pre-school for their child that had disabilities and, you know, 
what quality of education their child was going to have as a 
result of these cuts. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know about these realities and 
many have signed petitions calling on the government to restore 
funding. We’ve presented these petitions several times in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, so it’s no stranger to you. 
 
People are quite frustrated, and I don’t think this government is 
showing that they value the education of our future generations. 
It’s certainly not the message that these cuts are sending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course we support publicly funded education in 
Saskatchewan. This includes public and Catholic systems. 
There’s no question that this ruling would make substantial 
changes in Saskatchewan that would also have an impact across 
Canada. Our position remains unchanged, Mr. Speaker. In order 



3284 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

to move forward, both time and clarity are needed. We support 
the appeal because it provides both. The Sask Party’s 
grandstanding provides neither. 
 
[15:45] 
 
In the spring the Premier himself said, and I quote, “There’s 
time. There’s going to be an appeal, and the ruling is stayed 
because of the appeal.” So it begs the question, Mr. Speaker, of 
why the Sask Party is proposing to pre-emptively throw in the 
notwithstanding clause before the appeal has been decided. It’s 
playing politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll quote from my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre yesterday in something he said, raising 
concerns about the context within which this legislation comes 
forward. He said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, it makes one question the motivation. And is 
this about providing certainty and peace of mind for 
parents that are making decisions about where to send their 
kids for schooling? And what choices are available to them 
accordingly? 
 
Or are we seeing this take place in a time where you’ve got 
a government that has a problem with dealing in good faith 
and in goodwill with teachers, with the sector, and how 
that in turn impacts the education offerings that there are 
for students? Is it about a diversion from that day-to-day 
reality which gets acknowledged in the more honest 
moments of the Sask Party leadership contest? 
 

The Premier has admitted that it is not really necessary. While 
the appeal is being considered, there is no legitimate need to 
jump to the notwithstanding clause. The notwithstanding clause 
is a tool in the tool box, but I’m not convinced that that’s where 
we need to be going right now. I think this bill is all about 
optics and distraction, Mr. Speaker, attempting to distract the 
intelligent people of Saskatchewan, to divert attention away 
from the Sask Party’s cuts to education, deep cuts while people 
are all paying more in property taxes. People will not be fooled 
though, Mr. Speaker. They have closely observed these cuts. 
They have hit them personally and deeply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know we will have more questions about this 
bill, and I will leave that work to several of my other colleagues 
to do. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on 
Bill 89, The School Choice Protection Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 90 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it is my pleasure 
this afternoon to enter into debate on Bill 90, The Heritage 
Property Amendment Act. Some of my colleagues have had 
opportunity already to speak to this bill in adjourned debates 
and it is, as I said, my pleasure to enter some comments on the 
record with regard to this bill. 
 
I’m going to just turn to the minister’s comments during second 
reading of this bill because I think that’s often where we should 
start in seeing if there are some hints about what exactly is 
intended with legislation. As I’ve noted previously, when it’s 
clear, the reasons for a proposed bill, we’ve got a clear 
understanding of why this legislation is necessary, who’s been 
consulted, we are very willing to be reasonable about that, Mr. 
Speaker. But I do have some questions after reading the 
minister’s second reading comments just exactly what is 
intended. And I have some concerns about the impact, whether 
intended or not intended, with regard to The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act. 
 
In the preamble to his comments, Mr. Speaker, the minister did 
nicely outline the Act and some of its intentions: 
 

Under the Act, heritage property is broadly defined as any 
property that is of interest on account of its historical, 
architectural, archaeological, paleontological, and other 
scientific or cultural value. This includes historic 
buildings . . . 

 
I think as comes to mind for many people when they’re talking 
about The Heritage Property Act, but it also includes 
archaeological heritage as well, including “ . . vertebrate and 
invertebrate fossils from the geological past,” and provides for 
the formal designation of heritage property by both 
municipalities and provincially with an intention of the 
conservation, and also allows for the investigation of 
archaeological and paleontological heritage, Mr. Speaker, and 
the operation . . . It also allows for the operation, the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is shared heritage for all of us in this 
province, and it’s important. I think that there is a great deal of 
value in not only preserving these sites but learning from them, 
and not only for our interests, for our own telling of our story as 
a people on this land, our built heritage, but also in uncovering 
truths that perhaps have not been discovered up to this point. 
 
One of the things that I was thinking about when I was reading 
this was a trip that a number of people took this summer along 
Pinkie Road. Not far from the GTH that we hear so often about, 
there’s a much less talked about site that was largely forgotten 
in this province, a site that recently and gratefully and rightly 
was provided with provincial heritage status, and that is the site 
of the Indian Industrial School. It had been designated as a 
municipal heritage site the year previous, largely due to the 
work of a number of small . . . a small group of very dedicated 
volunteers and advocates who were really tireless in their 
seeking of recognition of this site and that those who are laid to 
rest there would not be forgotten. 
 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3285 

I want to single out in that, local artist Janine Windolph, who 
really brought her voice and her talents to bear here to ensure 
that this site was not only recognized but protected. And then 
that is something that is afforded in this Act and is one of the 
reasons that we should pay careful attention to it. 
 
At that site . . . I moved to Regina in 1991. People who have 
lived here their whole lives weren’t aware that Regina even had 
the Indian Industrial School, let alone the fact that there were at 
least 35 children buried there in unmarked graves, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is, in this era of truth and reconciliation again, that’s 
one of those truths that was almost largely forgotten by the 
history books. So having this designation protects that land 
from commercial development, but it also allows us to 
understand our history. If we can imagine here — many of us 
are parents, are grandparents — what our society must have 
been like at a time when you could have 35 children buried in 
unmarked graves and be almost forgotten. 
 
We had a ceremony there. There was a ceremony the day that 
we walked out to that site on the day of the designation, and we 
heard that many, many families didn’t know what happened to 
their children, that this is part of our shared history, Mr. 
Speaker. So often our history is something to celebrate, and 
sometimes it’s not, but we own all facets of our history. And 
again that is one of the reasons why this Act is important and 
that we should pay attention to any amendments to that Act and 
the intentions that are outlined in that Act and any watering 
down of the intentions of that Act. 
 
In Saskatchewan there are approximately 50 provincial heritage 
sites and approximately 750 municipal heritage sites. All of 
these sites enjoy some protection under the Act as well as 
access to the funds that are afforded by the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund, Mr. Speaker. And this Act does propose to 
change how those funds are allocated, and some of the 
oversight of this Act. So again something that we ought to pay 
strong attention to. 
 
One of the things that’s mentioned by the minister here: 
 

The proposed amendments will ensure that the review 
board hearings are handled in an objective, impartial, and 
transparent manner by clearly establishing the review 
board as a body that operates separately and independently 
from the rest of the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what is being proposed here is a separation in 
terms of the “proposed amendment will implement an 
operational separation between the review board and the 
Saskatchewan Heritage . . . [Fund] . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is lacking in the minister’s preamble here is 
any indication that there had been conflicts of interest. Perhaps 
there had been, but that’s not something that he presented any 
details about in his comments. 
 
He talks about, “The review board serves as an impartial 
tribunal that conducts public hearings to consider formal public 
objections to proposed designations of heritage property . . .” 
 
What seems to be suggested here is that there was some conflict 
of those two roles and that perhaps full hearing was not being 

conducted, Mr. Speaker, but there’s no evidence presented of 
that. So that’s something to pay attention to. Who’s raised 
concerns about the conflict? Who is asking for changes? All of 
that is missing from these changes. 
 
There is talk by the minister in the second reading that there are 
some concerns about changes, the ability of designated 
properties, the owners of those properties, to make changes. 
Again the intention of this Act is to preserve built heritage and 
it has some restrictions on changing the architectural 
characteristics that make a site a heritage site. So that is the 
balance right now and what is being proposed here is to make it 
easier for owners of those designated properties to make 
changes to their property. Mr. Speaker, on balance that’s 
something that I have heard from people, but we have to make 
sure that we get the balance right there. 
 
The minister did note that he had consulted with heritage 
property owners in preparation of this bill, but not with those, 
for example, on the Heritage Foundation or those who advocate 
for preserving our built and our archaeological heritage in this 
province. So that would be an important question I think that 
one of my colleagues may have in committee around this, to see 
just who was consulted on this and why is it important. Why is 
this something that we want to preserve, as was the original 
intention of the Act? 
 
It’s good to have other voices come to the table. One such 
voice, this is an article that I’m reading from SUMA’s 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] publication 
from 2016, talking about the Main Street Saskatchewan 
designation. So this was a designation that’s been since cut 
because of budgetary constraints, but this was a very 
well-received program that allocated grants administered by 
SaskCulture to preserve local main streets. And if I could just 
read into the record some of the benefits that were noted at that 
time. Again this is only from 2016 from SUMA. At that point 
there were six designated main streets that had benefited from 
this funding and this preservation being: Humboldt, Melfort, 
Swift Current, Prince Albert, Spiritwood, and Maple Creek. 
 
And I don’t know if people have had the chance to visit these 
refurbished main streets but it really is a draw for tourists. It’s a 
chance to go back in time in many of these communities and 
has provided a great deal of economic impact, a positive 
economic impact. Certainly we can think in the case of Moose 
Jaw, the tunnels. It’s, you know, a place to go. This time of year 
especially, Mr. Speaker, walking down Main Street you see 
visitors from around the world. I’ve also had the opportunity to 
visit the refurbished main street in Maple Creek, and again it is 
a draw for tourists from around the province and around the 
world. In fact there have been numbers placed on this. For 
every dollar put into heritage property restoration, it generates 
$12 in return, Mr. Speaker. So it is an investment. But we’ve 
seen that investment increasingly decline under this 
government, and now they are proposing to change the Act 
entirely. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Reading from that article that I mentioned from SUMA: 
 

In any town or city, an economically dynamic, culturally 



3286 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

vibrant downtown contributes to the prosperity and quality 
of life of the entire community. Downtown has an 
important role as a shopping and service centre, and as a 
generator of jobs. It also represents a large portion of the 
municipality’s tax base, and a huge amount of public and 
private investment in buildings and other infrastructure . . . 
[It] is also a prime location for social and cultural activities 
and can often be a marketable tourist destination, resulting 
in a potential increase in economic activity for the 
community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, often without protection these buildings and these 
sites would find their way into obscurity or, as often is the case, 
in the landfill. 
 
There are a lot of concepts that aren’t mentioned in this second 
reading. The concept of embodied energy. Not only the 
historical and the heritage value of these buildings, but the 
environmental embodied energy that’s contained in these 
buildings, and a full accounting of what the cost is of tearing 
down our built heritage. We have a number of buildings, bricks 
and infrastructure, ductwork, etc. that has made its way to our 
local landfill here in Regina. And that has economic impacts in 
terms of, you know, the demolition costs but also the cost of 
repeatedly having to look for new landfill sites because we have 
filled them up, Mr. Speaker. So where we can, to hold onto that 
shared and our built history, I think has, retains value today in 
fact both for the economic revenue that it generates but also, as 
I said earlier, it improves our ability to understand ourselves as 
a people and understand our history in this place. 
 
Just briefly for my constituents in Regina Lakeview, this is an 
area that is defined literally by its built heritage: the beautiful 
sacred heart cathedral that stands along 13th Avenue; 
Westminster United, another heritage building, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that draws tourist from around the province and often 
from around the world. We have in the summertime, in the fall, 
we have heritage walking tours that are promoted by Sask 
Tourism. So when people go to cities and towns, they’re not 
always going to look at the new shiny buildings. Of course they 
might end up at the hockey rink or the mall but they also . . . 
What’s a real tourist draw is this built heritage, these heritage 
buildings. 
 
Of course we stand in one today, one that very rightfully 
recently received a rather costly restoration. And that 
investment will not only preserve this beautiful building but it 
has economic impact. Any day when you’re out in the rotunda, 
you see school groups, you see visitors from around the world 
coming in and marvelling at this building. And that is 
something that we have had to over the years invest in, and we 
protect, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve decided that that is 
important to us. 
 
And so any weakening of this legislation without a full 
accounting of what’s intended with it by those changes, I think, 
should be met with scrutiny and some further questions. I know 
that my colleagues have written or have put the comments of 
Mr. Merle Massie, a former director with the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund, from Biggar, Saskatchewan, some of his 
concerns into the record, and talking about the money that . . . 
In conjunction with this bill, the pulling out of money from the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund also puts in peril our ability to 

protect, preserve, tell our own stories, as we saw such a drastic 
reduction in the amount of money that was put into the SHF 
[Saskatchewan Heritage Fund], but also that money was clawed 
back in a move that we have seen in other areas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So I guess in summation, this is not a frivolous . . . Our heritage 
is not something to only be interested in in the good times or 
when we have the money. This is something we should 
constantly be looking at, seeing it as an investment — again 
$12 in return for every dollar invested. And it requires constant 
vigilance on our part so that we are not leaving buildings to the 
point or sites to the point that they are irreparable, that we can 
preserve that heritage. 
 
And again this is . . . There are sites. Those 50 provincial sites 
are all over the province. I think of the Bell Barn in Indian 
Head. I think of Cannington Manor, one of my favourite places 
to go as a kid, Mr. Speaker. Every corner of this province. The 
church at Stanley Mission. Literally throughout this province, 
these are destinations for not only people around this province 
to learn about themselves, but also for tourists around the 
world. And if we take care to preserve them to make sure that 
we have the balance right, they will serve us well into the 
future. 
 
I’ll close by a remembered quote, and I will perhaps be 
paraphrasing it a bit, from one of my constituents, Ms. Jeannie 
Mah, who said that we seemed intent in this province and in this 
city in particular, intent on ripping out our built heritage from 
its very short roots, Mr. Speaker. I think that this Act allows for 
the protection of those roots, and I would like to see that 
continue and be strengthened. So we will be watching and we 
will have some questions for this in committee. But to this 
point, I think I will conclude my remarks and move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Lakeview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 90, 
The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 91 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 91 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I’m 
going to speak about the amendments that we see us before us 
to The Snowmobile Act in Saskatchewan. 
 
Preparing for my comments, I recalled the thrill of being a kid 
out on the farm and getting on that snowmobile. And it was a 
lot of fun. As kids we used to do it, and I’m sure you did it 
yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Great winter sport and certainly 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3287 

one that I have many happy memories as a kid, but also as a 
young adult. And my first boyfriend loved to go really fast on a 
snowmobile. So we had a few, you know, carving through the 
river and through the banks there that it was a bit of thrill, shall 
we say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know the importance of the snowmobile in a province like 
Saskatchewan where it is really part of our culture. And 
certainly I remember the prairie trails as being a little different 
than the trails I’ve experienced more recently up the boreal 
forest. Because in the prairie you can be going along and it’s 
soft snow and then you hit a hard snowbank at full speed and 
it’s like the most jarring thing that you ever experienced. And 
the next thing you know, you’re in soft snow again.  
 
Whereas I think in the boreal forest it’s little bit better. There’s 
less wind that sort of hardens the snow and I think the northern 
snowmobilers, any time I’ve gone up there, it’s a little smoother 
of a ride, shall we say. And certainly the beautiful trails that 
exist in the northern boreal forest and in the prairies are 
worthwhile visiting for sure. We know it’s a sport that makes, it 
draws a lot of benefit for the economy. People are enjoying it 
and it brings us into the outdoors which, in a province like 
Saskatchewan, that’s one of the best parts of the year I think, 
Mr. Speaker, is being outdoors in the wintertime. 
 
So a few years ago, we were involved at the Ness Creek site in 
developing some trails and actually became involved with the 
Saskatchewan Trails Association. And they’ve done some 
really, really good work in terms of all kinds of trails in 
Saskatchewan, not just snowmobile trails. And it was our 
pleasure to be able to meet with folks from the snowmobile 
trails association. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, those people 
take their sport very seriously, and they want to ensure that it’s 
being done properly. And of course, you know, things like 
alcohol when it comes to driving, drinking and driving, we’ve 
seen tragic accidents when it comes to snowmobile use and the 
use of alcohol. A lot of dangers out there and I know that the 
snowmobile association of Saskatchewan is very, very diligent 
and dedicated to ensuring the sport is as safe as it can be. 
 
Now when we look at The Snowmobile Act itself, it’s obviously 
an Act regarding the operation of snowmobiles. And there’s a 
lot in the Act about how the trails are managed by the 
association and also when snowmobiles can cross highways. 
You know, of course that’s an important part of being in 
Saskatchewan as well is you have to get across the road 
sometimes to get to the other part of the trail. And over the 
years I think we’ve all noticed the smaller stop signs and yield 
signs in the ditches because those trails are being maintained 
and people are being warned. We all have heard of accidents 
where people hit an approach at high speeds causing serious 
injury or death. So again it’s an exhilarating sport, but it has a 
certain amount of danger associated with it. And so the people 
that are promoting the sport want to make sure that people are 
safe. And that’s a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the minister introduced the bill and gave us some 
introductory comments, and I just want to sort of start there at 
this point in time. There are a number of administrative or 
technical changes to the bill that I’ll go through, Mr. Speaker. 
But he said, “The most significant amendment to this Act 
restricts snowmobile trail use to only snowmobiles and trail 

maintenance equipment between December 1st and April 15th 
of each year.” I find that really interesting because of course 
this is an Act respecting snowmobiles, so at no point to this 
point did anyone ever talk about other vehicles using those 
trails. And particularly, I assume, December 1st to April 15th is 
deemed to be the prime snowmobile time. 
 
So I know in the North, especially at Ness Creek where we have 
a system of trails, there’s often other vehicles that come 
through. And ours are cross-country ski trails, so you can 
imagine the mess that can be made with, you know, 
cross-country ski tracks when people come through with Gators 
and different kinds of . . . with quad runners, and actually make 
a heck of a mess out of the trail. And I think that’s definitely 
what is trying to be addressed here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
ensuring that the trails, the identified snowmobile trails in 
Saskatchewan are really used by snowmobiles. 
 
And we talked about that with the Snowmobile Association 
when we were meeting a few years back because they’re also 
very interested in ensuring that cross-country ski trails are also 
not used by snowmobiles because they know how important it 
is for cross-country ski trails to have the proper tracks. So 
they’re very co-operative and very willing to work with people 
who have those cross-country ski trails. And we all know that 
if, you know, dogs get on the trail or deer can make a heck of a 
mess on a cross-country ski trail as well. And of course we’re 
not going to stop the deer from doing that, but when it’s human 
activity that is something that we can legislate, and I think this 
change is pretty significant obviously for the association.  
 
Now the minister hasn’t indicated who has called for these 
changes or whether there’s been any consultation, so that’s 
certainly something we’ll have questions about for him when 
we are in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we also see changes here, moving responsibilities from the 
Highway Traffic Board to SGI. So this is the second bill in this 
session where I’ve had the opportunity to speak to this, and 
where we see the role of the Highway Traffic Board being 
diminished or basically taken away. And I’m just wondering, 
you know, Mr. Speaker. We saw their sort of panic this spring, 
when a number of operators came forward to operate private 
bus routes, and it looked like the Highway Traffic Board wasn’t 
very happy about having to do that work. And so I’m just 
wondering if maybe this is a move to finally eliminate the 
Highway Traffic Board, or what sort of reasoning, where we 
see moving this from their responsibility over to SGI. 
 
[16:15] 
 
SGI is a Crown, a provincial Crown, and it seems to me 
regulatory authorities are maybe better within a ministry than 
within a Crown. So it’s an interesting move, and I guess I 
would have questions for the minister about that as well in 
committee, in terms of why are we putting more responsibilities 
on the Crown, the SGI, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
when we have the Highway Traffic Board that has the 
regulatory supervision of the ministry. And so I don’t know 
why they’re off-loading this on to SGI, and I think it’s an 
interesting question at least. And you know, I’m sure the 
officials will give their reasoning, but I certainly would like to 
hear that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



3288 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

He goes on to say that the Highway Traffic Board actually 
delegated these authorities to SGI in January of 2016. So it 
sounds that’s what’s de facto happening on the ground, despite 
the fact that the Highway Traffic Board was responsible for it, 
and so this is just really making that clear. 
 
So I’ll just take a few minutes now, Mr. Speaker, to go into 
some of the changes that we find in the Act. So first and 
foremost is a definition change where the definition of “board” 
is actually being removed altogether because it meant the 
Highway Traffic Board under The Traffic Safety Act. So that’s 
being deleted. That’s the first thing that happens in this bill. 
 
Secondly, and I do have a problem with the drafting on this one, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s section . . . of the new Act it’s section 3, and 
what it’s doing is amending the existing Act, section 2(b)(i). 
And what it says is that they’re adding the words “or 
registration permit” after “certificate of registration.” But 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the words “certificate of 
registration” show up in two places in the definition, one as the 
defined term and then further on within the clause itself. So it’s 
not clear from the amendment which certificate of registration 
that those words are supposed to be added afterwards. 
 
And I think that’s a drafting error that probably should be fixed 
in committee. I’m hoping that it will be because I’m not sure. 
And I’m sure the drafters would have a better sense of this, but 
if you have “certificate of registration” twice, and you’re 
amending it to add “registration permit” after one of them, 
which one is it? And I think the drafting needs to be fixed there. 
That’s just an observation, and I’m sure that we can adjust that 
in committee or that can be explained. 
 
There’s also a change to the definition of licence plate. It’s not 
clear from the minister’s comments why these changes are 
being made or what exactly is happening there. But first of all, 
the licence plate definition, they’re striking out a part of it that 
says the licence plate has “. . . an imprint or to which there is 
attached a validation sticker or stickers showing the year and 
month in which the licence period expires.” I think that’s 
because we have now generally moved to licence plates that 
don’t have to have the stickers displayed anymore, so I’m 
assuming that’s why that change is being made. That’s section 
2(e) of the existing Act. 
 
They’ve also . . . Keep going here, I don’t want to lose myself. 
Oh, yes. Section 3(d) of the Act is now changing the definition 
of non-resident. So currently there’s just a definition. It’s 
clearly “. . . a person who is not a resident of the province, and 
for the purpose of this Act a person who resides in the province 
for any period not exceeding ninety days shall with respect to 
that period be deemed to be a nonresident.” So that’s the 
definition. 
 
They’re changing that now and causing us to refer to another 
Act, which I find is always confusing, Mr. Speaker. So we no 
longer find a definition within this Act. We have to go now to 
The Highway Traffic Act to find out how “non-resident” is 
being defined. That annoys me more than putting it in the 
regulations actually, because at least in the regulations, when 
you go in the Queen’s Printer you can click on the Act and find 
the regulations. But now you have to go to another Act 
altogether. And maybe it’s a First World problem, but it’s 

annoying. So I’m not sure why you couldn’t just leave the 
definition be, and there’s no explanation from the minister as to 
why that was necessary to make us flip over to another Act 
rather than just leave it within the Act itself. 
 
I guess the use of non-resident comes up in the Act in a few 
places, basically in terms of who’s allowed to get a licence to 
operate a snowmobile here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the next change is section 3(e) where they’re repealing the 
definition of “snowmobile” and substituting it with a new 
definition. Not a lot of changes here. I think a lot of this is just 
how you describe what a Ski-Doo is, or a snowmobile, sorry. A 
Ski-Doo is not a generic word. But a snowmobile . . . And I 
think what’s happening — and I’m not sure of this — is that we 
see all kinds of different snow-type machines nowadays. It’s 
evolving, obviously. It’s not just, you know, the Ski-Doo that 
we used growing up, or the Bombardier, whatever the different 
brands of Ski-Doos . . . Arctic Cat, that was the one that was 
kind of a fun one when we were kids. And I don’t even know if 
they still make them. I’m sure they do. But anyways, there’s a 
new definition of “snowmobile.” 
 
One of the things that’s still there that hasn’t changed is the 
weight. It can’t be more than 500 kilograms. I bet you didn’t 
know that, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot call it a snowmobile if 
it weighs more than 500 kilograms. Seems like a lot of weight. 
That’s half a tonne. So there must be some big ones out there. I 
don’t know how many pounds that would be. Over a thousand 
anyway, so seems like a lot of weight. I can remember having 
to lift the tail end and move it when we got stuck. But I don’t 
know and would be curious — and I guess I could find out — is 
what a normal, average Ski-Doo would be, how much that 
would weigh. 
 
But anyway, that part of the definition isn’t being changed. We 
are now looking at a definition that includes things like “is 
designed primarily for travel on snow.” Now I don’t know what 
snowmobile wouldn’t be designed primarily for travelling on 
snow, but obviously that’s an important part of the definition. 
 
Secondly, the new definition says “has one or more steering 
skis.” So you still have to have a ski to be considered a 
snowmobile. And then the next definition, “is driven by means 
of an endless track or tracks in contact with the snow.” That 
seems to make a lot of sense. 
 
And these are new, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the definition. 
Clause 3(e)(1)(v) says it has to comply “. . . with the 
requirements of the Canada Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 
existing at the date of manufacture” and (vi) reads “bears a 
Canada Motor Vehicle Safety Standard label of compliance.” 
 
So I think those are solid additions to the definition. We want to 
make sure that anything that is out there and considered to be a 
snowmobile has actually been, has safety standards applied to 
it. So that is interesting. 
 
The next change to the definitions is repealing clause (o) of the 
definitions, which was trail permit. And that’s coming up, Mr. 
Speaker, but trail permits were specifically mentioned in section 
20.1 and that section is being changed. So that’s why they’re 
taking away . . . There will no longer be trail permits, basically. 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3289 

And again the minister didn’t give much background in terms 
of why there will no longer be trail permits. In fact I don’t think 
he has actually talked about that at all, so no. So we’ll have to 
ask questions about that and why these changes are being made. 
It could be in consultation with the Snowmobile Association. It 
could be in consultation with the trail managers. It seems that, 
you know, it’s not a huge burden to have a licence plate so 
maybe that’s going to be the prevailing authority. Maybe back 
in times past, people just had trail permits and didn’t have to get 
licence plates. So those will be interesting questions for the 
minister and his officials. 
 
Now in part 2 of the Act is the registration process. So how do 
we go about registering our snowmobile? There’s some changes 
being made there. In terms of the requirements, there were a lot 
of references to something called The Vehicle Administration 
Act and that’s been changed now to refer to The Traffic Safety 
Act. So again we’re switching from one Act referred to, to 
another, and it’s not clear why that’s necessary. And again I’m 
hoping the minister and his officials will give us some more 
background on that. 
 
But basically the way the new section reads is you cannot 
operate or authorize anyone else to operate a snowmobile unless 
you have a certificate of registration or a registration permit for 
the snowmobile. And notwithstanding now The Traffic Safety 
Act, if you do have a certificate of registration, it has to be 
displayed toward the rear of the snowmobile. Or if you have a 
permit, that has to be carried on the person. So if you don’t have 
the certificate of registration plate, then you can have a permit 
but it has to be carried by the operator — the owner, if the 
owner is operating, or the person in immediate charge of the 
snowmobile. 
 
I mean, again I would like to sort of get some statistics on how 
often people are stopped. I assume this would be more 
conservation officers and they would be out there making sure 
that people are operating snowmobiles appropriately. A lot of 
ground to cover, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the wide, open 
outdoors, but I know that as best they can they would be 
making those efforts to observe and ensure that people are 
operating snowmobiles appropriately. 
 
These are the kind of changes I find interesting. In the current 
clause 3(3) that says an operator who is “not a resident of 
Saskatchewan,” now that’s being amended to say an operator 
who is “a non-resident.” So it kind of says the same thing to me, 
but I guess, because they changed the definition of 
“non-resident,” they felt like they had to change that one as 
well. Perhaps a bit zealous but that’s better than not being, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we go now into expiration of registration certificate, 
expiration of your certificate. And it’s talking about who can 
revoke it, and there are a number of references to the Highway 
Traffic Board, who used to have this responsibility. Now it’s 
being taken out and it’s going over to this administrator. And 
I’m just going to make sure we know who the administrator is. 
Oh yes, now it’s the administrator as defined in The Traffic 
Safety Act. So despite the fact that the board is no longer 
responsible for it, there is still a lot of role for the administrator 
under The Highway Traffic Act. 
 

So going on to other changes. There’s this new clause that I 
talked about earlier, putting in . . . It’s called the designated trail 
clause, 20.01(1). And this says, “Notwithstanding any other Act 
or law, no person shall operate a motor vehicle other than a 
snowmobile on a designated trail between December 1 and 
April 15.” And subsection (2) says, “Subsection (1) does not 
apply to a class or type of vehicle prescribed in the regulations.” 
So here we go again, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know exactly who 
will be allowed to be prescribed to operate on these trails, and 
it’s something we’ll have to wait and see once the regulations 
are passed. But again, I think the intent here is to ensure that the 
integrity of the trails are kept complete and that at least for 
those months, from December 1st to April 15th, there won’t be 
anyone else allowed on it. 
 
Now I’m going to get into enforcement of that a little bit later, 
but at least there’s a change there that says you shall not. And I 
kind of wonder what happens when there’s a big snowfall in 
November or October and why December 1st was chosen and 
why not just keep vehicles off them altogether. But maybe those 
are summer trails for quad runners, or I think other people are 
allowed to access them in summertime. So that’s the big 
change, as indicated by the minister when he made his 
comments. 
 
Section 20.1(1) now is just talking about section 3, which is the 
. . . I’m going to go back to that. Section 3 is the registration 
clause, so rather than . . . They just took out some words that 
were extraneous and just now refers to section 3. That’s the 
change there. 
 
There’s an interesting clause here. 20.3 is what the trail 
manager can do. And I’m not sure how trail managers are 
actually appointed, but I think they are appointed by the 
association. I’m just going to double-check that one too. Trail 
manager means the person designated in 20.11. And 20.11 says 
. . . Oh yes, they’re designated, oh, by Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. So it’s up to the Lieutenant Governor in Council who 
she thinks should be the trail manager. And those are Crown 
appointments, Mr. Speaker, so I assume these names are put 
forward by the Snowmobile Association. It’s a big job and 
hopefully the Trails Association and the particular trail that 
they’re responsible for are making sure that they’re well 
supported in that. 
 
At any rate, section 20.3 allows the trail manager to “. . . 
designate areas of lands as designated trails in Saskatchewan on 
Crown land and privately owned land for the use of 
snowmobiles.” Of course this is subject to restrictions in the 
regulations. 
 
But we’re making a change here now on section 20.4(1) where 
they’re actually taking out any reference to trail permit fees and 
printing and selling trail permits. Now I don’t really understand 
what that means and would be interested to know if this was a 
way to raise funds for the trail maintenance and why the trail 
manager is no longer going to be able to do that. Basically the 
only thing left in that clause is to carry out responsibilities set 
out in the Act or in the regs. So I don’t know if they’re going to 
move that into the regulations section and still allow them to 
print and sell trail permits. It’s like printing and selling paper I 
guess — licence to print. . . I don’t know, licence to sell. 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, those changes, that’s being taken away 



3290 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

from the trail manager. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Section 21.1 is also being amended and this is about the 
operation of a snowmobile at night or under dangerous 
conditions. So it says you can’t operate a snowmobile between 
sunset and sunrise or at any time when atmospheric conditions 
render the operation of a snowmobile dangerous unless the 
snowmobile is equipped with lamps required pursuant to . . . 
Well it used to be pursuant to The Vehicle Administration Act. 
Now that’s being changed to The Traffic Safety Act and the 
regulations made pursuant to the Act. 
 
So this is again a change and I’m not sure . . . There was no 
comments provided by the minister when this was brought into 
the House here in second reading, but I’m sure this is something 
that again, that the officials will have an opportunity to explain 
in committee so that it’s on the record and people understand 
why that’s there. 
 
Next change is to section 21.2 and again this is taking out the 
reference to the board and substituting the administrator, and 
it’s taking out The Highway Traffic Act and putting in The 
Traffic Safety Act, so that’s an interesting change, again for the 
reasons I talked about earlier. Used to have a reference to the 
Wascana Centre Authority. They don’t exist anymore so now it 
has to be changed to the Provincial Capital Commission. And 
we’ve talked about that here in the House earlier in the year and 
it’s unfortunate that these changes now are requiring changes to 
other Acts as well. 
 
Next one is section 22(1) and there again taking out the 
reference to The Vehicle Equipment Regulations and The 
Vehicle Administration Act and substituting The Traffic Safety 
Act. Curious to know why those changes are needed and would 
need to ask in committee again about those changes and why 
they’re required. 
 
Now there’s something very interesting in the Act here, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ve never seen this before where section 23 is . . . 
The marginal note says “Certain prohibitions respecting 
operation of snowmobiles.” Then section 24 says “Same” and 
section 25 says “Same.” And I’ve never seen marginal notes 
like that where they’re just repeated and then repeated. You 
would think if it’s the same, it would be the same section. So 
I’m not sure why there are three sections here where these last 
two are called “Same” and the first one is about certain 
prohibitions, because they’re all about certain prohibitions 
respecting the operation of snowmobiles. 
 
So I don’t know why that is existing in that format and it’s 
unusual. I’ve looked at a few bills and legislation in my time 
and I’ve never seen that before. So curious. I’m not sure why it 
hasn’t been changed as well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 
it is a drafting issue I think, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 29 has been changed. Now this is a section regarding 
the duty to report certain accidents. So if there is an accident 
where somebody is hurt or there’s injury or death to a person or 
damage to property, apparently exceeding the amount 
prescribed pursuant to The Traffic Safety Act, you have to . . . 
Now it used to say “forthwith” but now it’s “as soon as is 

[reasonably] practicable.” So big change. I don’t know. I don’t 
know if that means anything substantively, but forthwith to me 
is as soon as possible and the wording that’s now being set is as 
soon as is reasonably practicable. So I believe that just is some 
sort of drafting convention but again we can find out. 
 
Now what’s really interesting to me is how can you do it as 
soon as possible if you have to go to The Traffic Safety Act and 
look at the regulations to find out what the amount is 
prescribed. There’s a whole lot of hoops you’ve got to jump 
through, Mr. Speaker, before you can actually get to the point 
of deciding whether or not that amount is exceeded 
“apparently” in the accident. So I think it’s . . . The onus on the 
person to report is maybe a little more severe than most 
snowmobile operators realize, but certainly they’re going to 
have to be able to look at The Traffic Safety Act and at the 
regulations to find out what the amount is before they can 
decide, as soon as possible, what damages are reportable. 
 
Again they’re switching out the word “board” to “admin” in 
that section. And there’s also, section 30, a slight change there 
similar to 29. Section 30 is where peace officers are supposed to 
submit reports of accidents to the board. Now again the 
marginal note isn’t being amended. I know they don’t form part 
of the bill, but I assume that once the changes are made, that 
will be fixed up as well. So a peace officer . . . Oh, I’m sorry. 
These are still going to the board. I think I missed that. Oh no, 
they’re substituting. It’s not “board” anymore; it’s 
“administrator” in section 30. So it’s actually being repealed 
and replaced, and so the reference to the board is removed. 
 
But again we see this “forthwith” being deleted and substituted 
with “as soon as is practicable.” So again there must be some 
drafting conversations going on about that and concerns being 
raised. 
 
Now one of the things I was curious about and would like to 
hear from the minister on this is, you know, we’ve now got this 
calendar time frame between December 1st and April 15th in 
terms of when non-snowmobiles cannot be on the trails. So 
you’d think, well you’d want to make sure that there was a good 
fining opportunity, that there’s a stiff penalty for this to make 
sure that it’s a deterrence to people. Like because, you know, is 
this going to stop people just by creating a calendar prohibition? 
 
And I thought, I wonder what the penalties are for violations of 
the Act. And I’d be curious to sort of do a poll amongst MLAs 
to see what they think the limit on fines would be for violations 
of The Snowmobile Act. And I’d really say, Mr. Speaker, maybe 
you could tell me what your guess is on that. But I’ll get ahead 
of you and I’ll tell you what the Act says right now. So: 
 

A person who is guilty of an offence against this Act or the 
regulations . . . is liable on summary conviction: 
 

(a) for the first offence to a fine of not more than 
$100 . . . 

 
It’s not a big fine. I was really surprised to see that. And you 
think, well maybe for the second or subsequent offence, it 
might be significantly higher. It’s $200. So I really think in 
order to have a deterrent for people who violate the trails and 
violate the new section of the Act, the minister might want to 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3291 

take a look at the actual fines themselves. Because I don’t think 
$100 . . . And you know, when we know speeding tickets are 
higher than that and texting while driving, or is it . . . I forget 
the actual technical term of that offence, when you’re texting. 
Distracted driving — that’s what I’m looking for, yes. So that’s 
a lot more, and then I can’t think of too many fines nowadays 
that are $100. I guess maybe a parking ticket. So you’ve got to 
kind of judge whether or not this is a deterrent or not, but I 
would think it might be something that the minister and the 
ministry might want to look at and you know . . . Yes, 
interesting. 
 
The next one that is being changed is section 40, and in there 
it’s just a switch from the board to the administrator. And 
there’s Her Majesty again. Every reference we see to Her 
Majesty is now being changed. “Her Majesty in right of 
Saskatchewan” is now “the Crown.” And I don’t know if the 
Crown is defined at the beginning of the Act, Mr. Speaker, but I 
guess we’re getting ready for the transition in the . . . No, 
Crown is not defined at all. So the Crown, it may be now 
defined in The Interpretation Act. I’m not sure. The only other 
change . . . The Interpretation Act of course is the definition of 
privatization which seems to be a shifting definition so we’re 
not really sure. But anyways in this case it’s no longer “Her 
Majesty in right of Saskatchewan; it is “the Crown.” 
 
So these are reports that are not available to the public. So any 
reports made to the administrator pursuant to the Act are the 
property of the Crown and are not made public unless the 
administrator determines that they need to be made public, so 
that’s the clause within there. I have no idea why that’s 
important, but I’m sure there are good reasons for it. 
 
Then we get into the regulation section. Again a long list of 
regulations and with a weird numbering which again I think 
when we’re in there changing things . . . I don’t know — (q.1), 
(l.1), (l.2), (l.3), (l.4), (l.5) — it might be helpful to renumber 
just to make it easier. Because now there’s a new . . . there’s 
already an (l) and there’s already a (l.1), so now we have a new 
one, (l.01), so you have to squish that in between (l) and (l.1). 
 
So what is that regulation authority? Basically it’s referring to 
section 20.01, the new clause, and it allows them to make 
regulations about the classes and types of vehicles that are 
permitted to operate on designated trails between December 1st 
and April 15th. So this is the regulations. We have no idea what 
kind of vehicles will be allowed to get on those trails on the 
prohibited time. But we’ll wait and see, Mr. Speaker, and at 
some point those regulations will be approved by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council and we will then know. I’m sure we’ll all 
be waiting with bated breath to find out who is going to be 
allowed on the trails. 
 
Clause (m) is repealed now in the regulations section, and that 
was the trail permit fees. So it looks like trail permit fees, 
there’s not even going to be regulations about those. I guess 
trail permits are being repealed, so there will be no fees 
associated with them. And now it’s a licence plate instead of a 
trail permit. And that’s changed in section (p) and in section (q) 
of the regulations section. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of changes. I think we’ll 
have questions for sure in committee about the impact of some 

of these changes. And again I just want to make sure that, you 
know, we pass on kudos to the snowmobile trail association for 
the fine work that they do in ensuring that this wonderful sport 
is enjoyed by all and that people are safe and looked after as 
they enjoy the winter, the great outdoors in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that will be the extent of my comments on this bill. And at 
this point I would like to move that we adjourn the debate on 
Bill No. 91, An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 91. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 92 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate this afternoon, this time today on Bill No. 
92, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 
2017. It’s a pretty straightforward bill, Mr. Speaker. The 
government is amending, is asking to amend SaskTel and 
SaskTel Holdco’s maximum aggregate borrowing limit from 
1.3 billion to 1.8 billion. So they’re asking to increase SaskTel 
debt by 500 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to note some of the minister’s second reading 
comments. That’s where it’s always good to look to get a sense 
of what the government is proposing or how they are telling the 
story of what they’re proposing around this bill. The minister in 
his second reading speech points out in his comments that this 
will allow flexibility for SaskTel to continue to grow and have 
the capacity to respond to future financial demands. He points 
out that SaskTel is in the first year of a five-year capital 
investment plan. 
 
So it sounds reasonable on the surface, Mr. Speaker, but this 
government has shown that they have some issue with debt. 
And I’ll get into that in a few moments, Mr. Speaker. But the 
minister in his second reading speech points out that SaskTel’s 
five-year plan, that it predicts debt through 2017-18 to 2021; it 
will see the corporation’s debt peak at 1.25 billion in fiscal year 
’19 and ’20, leaving it little room to manoeuvre within the 
current debt limit of $1.3 billion. 
 
He points out that “There are potential business investments 
that could be required in the future that have not been included 
in the plan because the timing cost of these investments is 
unknown.” 
 
And he points out that: 
 



3292 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

Some of these investments include funding for a spectrum 
auction to increase wireless capabilities, funds for the 
development of a 5G wireless network, and other 
technological changes that SaskTel could be required to 
implement in order to serve [he goes on to say] our fine 
province. 

 
[16:45] 
 
And so I think when the critic gets into committee there’ll be 
some interesting questions around the five-year plan and some 
of these investments and what that looks like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, around this government and debt, we just need to look 
to the government’s own budget documents where . . . So 
they’re proposing a $500 million increase to SaskTel and 
SaskTel Holdco’s aggregate debt. So the problem with that, Mr. 
Speaker, is this is a government who since 2012 has seen 
government debt double. From 2012 the overall government 
debt was 8.5 billion; this year, in 2017, it’s 16.1 billion. And by 
2021 it’s projected to be at a record whopping $22.8 billion of 
total government debt, Mr. Speaker. That’s record debt that 
we’ve never seen in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the challenge with debt is that it can limit your ability to 
provide services for your citizens, Mr. Speaker. There was a 
time not long ago, in the ’90s actually in fact, that from what I 
understand, we were paying more in debt servicing charges than 
we were for the entire education budget, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 
that fine balance between maintaining and investing in services 
and taking on reasonable debt and not letting things get out of 
control. 
 
And to be perfectly honest, Mr. Speaker, around the Crowns 
and around debt, I think many people in Saskatchewan have 
some questions of wanting to think that the government is on 
the right track but seeing that there’s some issues around our 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, with respect to STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], less than two years ago we had a 
minister responsible for STC who assured the people of 
Saskatchewan that their bus company was safe, that it was in 
good hands and it wasn’t going anywhere. And less than a year 
ago in a budget we saw the government get rid of our bus 
company that connects quite frankly people all across 
Saskatchewan, providing important services and transportation 
for seniors, for students, for people who don’t own vehicles. 
Not everybody has access to a vehicle, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
true, although not every community had access or had STC, the 
reality is many communities had access to STC nearby. So it’s 
the difference between a half an hour, catching a half-an-hour 
ride to a community that has STC so you can get into one of the 
larger centres or having to catch a ride, a four-hour ride into one 
of the larger centres yourself. 
 
So STC itself, this government has some explaining to do to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And rightfully so, people have some 
issues around trust with respect to this government when it 
comes to Crown corporations in this proposal. Although it 
might be completely reasonable to increase debt by 500 million, 
and in committee the critic will ask many good questions and 
they could have a very reasonable response, but because of this 

government’s past actions, people are starting to question this 
government’s actions.  
 
I know on the doorstep in Fairview and quite honestly, in the 
doorstep prior to the Fairview by-election, in Riversdale over 
the course of the summer, many people were upset about STC. I 
actually, in one of my communities where I didn’t think STC 
would be an issue that would come up very often — 
Montgomery actually, which is one of my more affluent 
communities — it actually was raised quite frequently. 
 
We all have a connection to rural Saskatchewan or people who 
live in rural Saskatchewan and want to make sure that people 
have access to services. This is a government that made a 
decision without thinking of the consequences over the long 
haul. There were people this spring stuck when STC was, as 
they say, wound down before any other services could get up 
and running, which created a huge issue for people with 
medical appointments, the general transportation. 
 
And even now in some areas that have services, those services 
are sketchy, Mr. Speaker. In talking to folks who are trying to 
get back between Saskatoon and Regina or in other locations, 
but even between Saskatoon and Regina, people purchasing 
tickets online from the new provider of transportation services 
between these two cities, getting to the parking lot where 
they’re going to be picked up and finding out that the driver is 
arguing whether or not this person purchased a ticket. And that 
has happened on a few occasions, Mr. Speaker. Or bus runs 
where you purchase a ticket and think that you have a ride into 
another community only to discover that the bus isn’t running 
because there’s not enough people on it. So how do you plan 
medical appointments? How do you plan at all, Mr. Speaker, 
when we don’t have the consistency?  
 
The beauty of STC is people knew when it was leaving, when it 
was arriving, and what was happening in between. You could 
actually plan your life. And again we’ve argued on this side of 
the House, and people in Saskatchewan are arguing, that STC 
was in fact a public service. 
 
And you know, our Crowns are great, and Crowns serve 
multiple purposes. We can talk about SaskTel, this particular 
bill, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 
which is directly dealing with raising SaskTel’s borrowing 
limit. Our Crowns create good, mortgage-paying jobs across the 
province. They ensure that people have services in communities 
where private corporations won’t necessarily provide those 
services. STC is a good case in point, Mr. Speaker. They ensure 
that money actually . . . our Crowns who do make money 
actually put that money back into the General Revenue Fund to 
pay for things like health care, education, and roads. 
 
With respect to SaskTel, one of the things our Crowns do is 
they create a competitive environment and help ensure that 
where there are private providers, that they’re keeping costs 
affordable, or rates affordable, whether it’s wireless or cell 
service, Mr. Speaker. So those are very important things for our 
Crown corporations that they do. And so yes, this might be a 
reasonable ask, increasing debt by 500 million or half a billion 
dollars, but there will be many questions to be asked. But the 
reality is, so STC is one case in point of people in 
Saskatchewan having concerns about their Crown corporations 



December 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3293 

in this government’s hands. 
 
Another actually is The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker, which 
is before us right now, which is the bill that the government has 
said defined, simply defined privatization. But what we saw that 
bill actually do is enable this government to sell a Crown up to 
49 per cent without going to the people of Saskatchewan for a 
referendum and without talking to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I think the government heard loud and clear over the 
course of the summer — I know I did again in Riversdale and in 
Fairview on the doorstep — people didn’t want this government 
messing with its Crown corporations and wanted the 
opportunity to have a say in that and expected that the 
government, if the government was going to do something like 
that, they should come to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, a couple of months ago the Premier said 
genuinely that he heard the people of Saskatchewan and he was 
going to repeal Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, that would see the ability 
of this government to be able to privatize our Crowns up to 49 
per cent. But you know what? Just two days later this 
government said that, or the Premier has said that no, we’re not 
repealing it all. We’re just repealing a small portion of it, the 
piece that allows the privatization up to 49 per cent, but didn’t 
remove the piece around winding down. 
 
We’ve heard mixed results or mixed messages from this 
government. We’ve heard the minister, various ministers say 
and the Premier weigh in saying that Bill 40 was necessary for 
the privatization or the wind-down, pardon me, of STC. Back 
and forth between the ministers and premiers, there’s been the 
debate on that side of the House whether or not it was 
necessary. But we would still like to see, like the people of 
Saskatchewan, the entire repeal of Bill 40 because quite 
honestly people don’t feel good about this government when it 
comes to their Crown corporations and, I think, rightfully so. 
They’ve demonstrated that loud and clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So raising the debt by half a billion dollars, I think again, it’s 
just important to remind people at home that this government, 
its track record around debt, around general government debt is 
one of increasing debt and not necessarily seeing a vast 
improvement in services. As the Health critic, I know we can 
look to front-line services actually. Whether you’re in long-term 
care or in any one of our hospitals, people on the front lines and 
patients and residents would all tell you that front-line care is 
being starved. 
 
So we’ve got a government who has chosen to do things in the 
most expensive way and has piled on debt, piled on debt, quite 
frankly at the richest time in this province’s history, Mr. 
Speaker. At a time of record revenue, they have racked up debt 
and are projecting debt by 2021 — so just four years from now 
or less than four years from now — to be at $22.8 billion. 
 
So I think about my own kids. I have a 10-year-old and a 
19-year-old, and I think about what the future here in 
Saskatchewan looks like for them when debt continues to 
increase. I think about a time, again in the 1990s when the then 
NDP administration, because of the previous Conservative 
government, was in fact paying more to service debt that had 
accumulated at that time than they were on the entire education 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 

So I think about my kids and I think about others, their cohorts 
and your kids, Mr. Speaker. I know you’ve got young kids, and 
there are members in this Assembly with young kids. And I 
think about what this piling on of debt means to future services, 
to education, to advanced education, to health care. This has all 
been incredibly challenging, will prove possibly down the road 
to be incredibly challenging. This government who’s locked us 
into P3 contracts for schools, for hospitals, for long-term care 
facilities, basically rent-to-own schemes that will ensure that 
we’re paying for these things for the next 30 years at incredibly 
high rates. 
 
So I think that the people have the right to question the 
government’s motivation when it comes to increasing debt, 
whether it’s general government debt or forcing debt onto our 
Crown corporations. This isn’t the first bill that’s been before 
this legislature in my time where this government has come 
before us asking to raise debt limits. I think it was SaskPower or 
SaskEnergy last spring. I can’t recall which one. But in my time 
too, around cities, the cities have had to increase their debt 
borrowing limits. 
 
So this in fact is an issue. And I know when the critic gets to 
committee they will have many questions to ask around Bill No. 
92, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 
2017 that sees the increase of the debt limit for SaskTel from 
$1.3 billion to $1.8 billion. Not an insignificant amount of 
money, Mr. Speaker. That is $500 million. We could fund an 
awful lot of things with $500 million, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Some questions undoubtedly the critic will be asking is around 
SaskTel’s five-year plan, what that will look like, and try to dig 
a little bit deeper into the comment the minister made about the 
details of the investments that are still unknown, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that there will be many questions around that. 
 
But as always, it’s a pleasure to wade into debate here, and I 
look forward to hearing more from my colleagues who will also 
be speaking to this bill. And I look forward to the questions 
asked and the answers that hopefully the minister will provide 
in committee when this bill gets there. 
 
But with that, with respect to Bill No. 92, The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act, I think I just have to 
summarize that it’s very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
increasing debt by $500 million might be a very reasonable ask, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It might be a reasonable ask. And we shall 
see when we get to committee. 
 
But this is a government who is doubling debt, has doubled debt 
actually, doubled debt from 2012 to 2017, Mr. Speaker, from 
8.5 billion in 2012 to $16.1 billion in 2017. And as a mom of 
two kids and someone who represents many families and many 
children, I worry about what this might look like for the 
provision of services down the road, whether it’s education or 
health care or advanced education — all those things, Mr. 
Speaker. This is 500 million and we will see what the minister 
has to say once we get into committee. But with respect to that, 
I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 92. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 92. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



3294 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, so the 
committees may carry on with their good work tonight, I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3263 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3263 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3264 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3264 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3264 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3264 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3264 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3266 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3266 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3266 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3266 
 Artist is Finalist in Canadian Painting Competition 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 
 Local Company Has Global Presence 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 
 Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 
 Regina School of Rock 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 
 Announcement of Heavy Oil Extraction Plants 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3268 
 Enhanced Communications Access for Rural Communities 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3268 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3268 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3268 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3270 
 HIV Testing and Treatment 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3270 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3270 
 Health Services for Northern Youth 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3271 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3271 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3271 
 Presumptive Coverage for Workers 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3271 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3272 
 Carbon Pricing Strategy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3272 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3272 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3273 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3273 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3274 



 

THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3274 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3274 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3274 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3276 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3277 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3281 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3282 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3284 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3291 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


