






















































Hansard: March 27, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 64B  MONDAY, MARCH 27, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1909 
 March 27, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I’ll call this Assembly 
to order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have just a few 
more comments before I turn the floor over to one of my other 
colleagues. You know, as we move forward, you know, I’ll talk 
quickly on some of the highlights of this budget. 
 
You know, we still have the lowest PST [provincial sales tax] 
rate of any province with a provincial sales tax, even with an 
increase. And we’re passing on more savings, like the family of 
four in Saskatchewan now pays no income tax on the first 
$50,000 of income, the highest tax-free threshold in Canada. As 
a result of this budget, Saskatchewan individuals and families 
will pay among the lowest income taxes in Canada, ranging 
from the lowest to third lowest for most, depending on levels of 
income. 
 
You know, this budget supports agriculture in a big way again. 
There’s been another little bit of an increase. We’ve increased 
through irrigation, through crop insurance, you know, whatever, 
as we move forward with ag. You know, that’s an important 
part of this economy. 
 
Highways, you know, tops record spending again, second year 
in a row. Major projects, which is a bypass around Regina, 
never mind some of the stuff that has been in my constituency. 
The opposition will get up and they’ll slam everything that we 
did no matter what project it is, whether from this year, last 
year, all the way back to 2007. They’ll blame us for everything 
from the coldest winter to the hottest summer. 
 
You know, highways in my constituency, this will grade and 
pave Highway 16 near Dafoe, repaving Highway 11 near 
Bladworth and Dundurn. You know, those are two $5 million 
projects each. Grade and pave Highway 15 west of Highway 2 
junction, another $6 million project; grade and pave Highway 
42 from Keeler to Eyebrow, $7.4 million project. You know, 
they’ll get up and they’ll slam that. Why are you spending 
money there? Why are you spending money here? 
 
And yet when we spend money, you know, they’re against it, 
and yet they turn around in the next breath, ask, we have to 

spend more. You know, that just shows another opposition 
again. Year after year I’ve sat here and listened to them come 
up with no plan for . . . This is what, going on the ninth year 
now. They’ve slammed every budget we’ve had and, as we 
move forward, the people still keep voting for us. And they’re 
going to keep voting for us because they know the direction 
we’re moving this province. 
 
You just get up without a plan and you just knock us down for 
the last speeches that are going to come from the ones that are 
left, you know. And it’s not going to help you one little bit to 
get a plan that’s out there, at least to offer something to the 
residents of this province because I’ll tell you what. I’m proud 
of this budget. Even though it’s tough times, I’m proud of what 
we had to do and the challenges that we’ve met. And the 
residents that I’ve talked to are all like, yes it had to be done. 
We do not want to go down the road of heavy debt that we had 
before. We do not want to go down of driving this province 
back to where kids are leaving, there is no jobs. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you know we’ve increased funding 
again in health care, not as much as we have in previous years, 
but there’s still an increase in health and there’s also a heavy 
increase in social services. We’re trying to help every level of 
every person in this province. 
 
You know, unlike the members opposite when I was in 
opposition, you know, didn’t help anything. They cut ag. They 
cut social services. They cut education. They cut health. All the 
years I was here in opposition I watched each one of their 
budgets cut every year because they kept losing people and they 
kept losing money so they had no choice. 
 
This province is growing. We’ve had how many more people in 
the last, just the last stats that come out, over 160,000 in the 
last, you know, now a decade. Ten years — you know, that’s 
pretty good growth for this province. 
 
I can remember when the member from, oh was it . . . She was 
an NDP [New Democratic Party] cabinet minister. Doreen 
Hamilton got up and said, you know what? It’s statistically 
impossible to grow this province by 1 per cent a year. She said 
that’s impossible . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You guys are 
right. She got up and just slammed — and that was our plan 
when in opposition — she got up and just slammed it. And I’m 
like, where are you today, Doreen? Like where are you today 
with that? To even say something like that. 
 
And so when I listen, maybe I get a little worked up when I 
listen to the opposition. Year after year after year we’ve been 
here. Just criticize and criticize and criticize, and yet never 
come up with an idea. Not nothing. Not one iota of, what would 
we do different except, you’re just wrong. You’re just wrong. 
 
Well I tell you what. And I . . . you know, they’re saying things. 
Next election, it’ll be the same results over there than it is here. 
You know, if you . . . Anyways my time, I think, is coming up 
because I have another MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] wants to get up and speak. 
 
But I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this budget 
that’s meeting this challenges. I’m proud of what we’ve had to 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

do in tough times, and I’ll be supporting this budget. As for 
their amendment or motion or whatever it is, it’s not worth the 
paper it was wrote on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 
opportunity to be able to respond to the budget. And I would 
like to add at the beginning of my comments that I will be 
supporting this budget. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, I was 
newly elected on April 4th, 2016, so this is the second budget 
that I have had the opportunity to address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to talk a little 
bit more about the people who have supported me and worked 
with me over the past year. It truly has been a learning 
experience for myself. Some days it felt like I was drinking out 
of a water hose, but there was always support there for me 
along the way. 
 
First and foremost I would like to thank my family. I would like 
to thank my partner, Bart, for being there for me while we both 
have gotten used to this new schedule that we’re on. I thank him 
for patiently standing by my side when we are in the grocery 
store or when we go out for dinner or even at a social event and 
a constituent comes up to me and wants to address government 
matters. 
 
I knew what I would be signing up for when I ran for public 
office, but I don’t really think Bart knew exactly what he was 
going to be in for. He has even had to report to me that he had 
to tell people he’s not their MLA and they would have to 
contact me. Now I don’t know how many of you have actually 
met Bart, but he’s not exactly what you would call politically 
correct. So I appreciate the fact that he does not try and answer 
for me or give his opinion and passes them back to me. So 
thank you, Bart, for your patience during this time of transition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly believe you’re never too old to thank your 
parents. My parents, Stan and Jolene Wicks, have always been 
there for me. They have been my biggest supporters through 
this journey that I have embarked on and continue to be my 
biggest supporters. So thank you very much to them for 
teaching me the work ethic that I have and the work ethic that 
I’ve been able to bring to the new position that I hold now. 
 
And speaking of the position that I hold, I did not get here by 
myself. It took a team of people to help me out, and it takes a 
team of people to keep things going. So to my constituency 
association back in Estevan, thank you for always being there 
and supporting me in the past, now, and into the future. I truly 
appreciate the work that you do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to my constituency assistants who work back 
in my office, Rosalie Story, Susan Colbow, and Gale Hilstrom, 
they are continually dealing with our constituents on a 
day-to-day basis. They anticipate what I will need to help deal 
with the constituents on any matters they may have. These 
ladies worked with the previous MLA, Doreen Eagles, and now 
I am lucky to have them work with me. Thank you, ladies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past year has been a year of firsts for myself. 
One of the things I have come to know over the past year is the 

fact that the leader of the party and cabinet ministers of this 
government have the best interest of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan at heart. These 
people, along with the remainder of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus, have looked very hard at the finances of the province 
and have made some necessary decisions to ensure a successful 
future for this province. 
 
The title of this year’s budget is called Meeting the Challenge. 
And what is the challenge that is facing Saskatchewan? Since 
2014-15, resource revenues have declined over $1.3 billion. Tax 
revenue is down by hundreds of millions of dollars due to the 
resource sector slowdown. People just aren’t working; therefore 
they’re not paying taxes. The population has grown by 162,000 
people over the past 10 years, which puts added pressure on our 
vital services. 
 
The budget that has been presented by the Finance minister is 
fiscally responsible and takes into consideration the needs of the 
province of Saskatchewan and the people who live here. This 
budget is what the people of Saskatchewan require in this time 
of tight financial constraint. This budget will continue to work 
with the people of Saskatchewan to continue to keep the 
province strong and moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could summarize what I’m going to talk about 
today, this budget will control and reduce government 
spending. This budget will modernize and expand the tax 
system. This budget will keep the economy strong. This budget 
will invest in priority areas. And, lastly, our goal will be to 
return to balance over the next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this budget has come out, there have 
obviously been some opinions that have come out also. I read 
an interesting article the other day from Maclean’s. The title of 
the article was “Saskatchewan swallows the fiscal pill Alberta 
refuses.” Then it goes on to say “Through restraint and strategic 
tax hikes, Saskatchewan shows how to get off the royalty 
rollercoaster.” For any of you that have the time, I encourage 
you to read this article. 
 
I believe with some of the responses you have heard, there is a 
clear theme that should be coming out. The overall goal of this 
budget is to keep Saskatchewan strong. Over the past 10 years, 
we have significantly invested in all different areas of the 
budget. As a result, this budget builds on a very solid 
foundation. But there are changes that will need to occur to 
continue to be successful. 
 
There is one fundamental change that is taking place in this 
budget. We have come to the realization that we cannot base 
our projections on resource revenues because, as we have all 
seen, the resource revenues have been very volatile over the 
past couple of years. Without those revenues we need to 
re-evaluate the way we do business while still keeping 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The reality is a decline of $1.3 billion in revenue has made this 
budget even more challenging. Having said that, on April 4th, 
2016 I was elected based on a campaign that made few specific 
promises but instead made one simple yet significant 
commitment: to keep Saskatchewan strong. And that is exactly 
what I plan to help do, and I believe that is what this budget will 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

do. 
 
For a number of years, high commodity prices meant 
Saskatchewan’s resource revenues were extremely strong, 
around $2.5 billion a year. Resource revenue has allowed this 
province to do many things. We’ve encouraged new investment 
and new jobs through lower small business taxes and new 
growth tax incentives. We’ve been able to hire more teachers in 
our schools, and I’m very proud to say that two of those 
teachers are two of my daughters. One teaches in Saskatoon and 
one in Estevan. 
 
We’ve been able to hire more doctors. At one point in Estevan 
the constituents . . . I guess I should say more specifically Sun 
Country Health Region was down to 50 per cent of the doctors 
that we needed. But in collaboration with this government a 
group effort was made and we were able to bring us up to a full 
complement. Resources have also allowed this province to hire 
more nurses of all designations as well as reducing surgical wait 
times. 
 
It has also allowed this government to lower income taxes. In 
fact let me expand a little bit on that topic. An individual 
taxpayer pays no Saskatchewan tax on the first $18,960. That’s 
a pretty high number before you have to pay any income tax, if 
you actually think about it. A family of four with a $50,000 
annual income has now seen their provincial income tax cut by 
more than 95 per cent since 2007, from about $2,302 a year to 
zero. 
 
I would like to just repeat that fact. A family of four with 
$50,000 in annual income will pay zero Saskatchewan income 
tax. Since 2007 this government has removed 112,000 people 
off of the provincial income tax roll. That’s 112,000 people that 
have incomes at a level where they don’t have to pay income 
tax. I think that’s pretty significant. 
 
The resource revenue has also allowed this government to pay 
down operating debt while at the same time being able to build 
highways, schools, and hospitals. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And let’s not forget the $6.7 million that are back in the pockets 
of our taxpayers. Because of the tax decreases over the years, 
we’ve been able to let these people spend that money, use it as 
disposable income on things that they need. I believe we can all 
agree that all of these things are just some of the very 
worthwhile investments that high resource revenues allowed us 
to make for the benefit of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
We are very fortunate to live in a province like Saskatchewan. 
We have such a diverse economy and this has served this 
province well. However, despite our more diversified economy, 
we still had an overreliance on the resource revenues to fund 
government services based on an expectation that commodity 
prices and resource revenues would remain high. 
 
Now I’m not sure how many of you know how we forecast 
what the income of this province will be, especially when it 
comes to resource revenue, so I think I’ll take a little bit of time 
and let you know. There are different indicators out there. Now 
these indicators are industry specific and they are industry 

professionals. Different organizations will forecast what they 
think the range of revenue will be at a high end and in a low 
end. Over the past couple of years, it has dipped lower than 
what has been forecasted by these professionals, lower than 
anybody could have ever imagined. 
 
Which reminds me of another article that I read in the past 
couple of days. This one was from The Financial Post. The 
headline was, “Compared to Ottawa’s budget, Saskatchewan’s 
is a fiscally prudent dream.” In this article it goes on to say that 
the feds could learn something from Saskatchewan. Once again, 
another great read, and I would encourage anybody that has the 
time to read it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the decisions we made while deliberating 
this 2017-18 budget were not easy decisions. As with all budget 
deliberations, those decisions will affect the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. So I’m going to touch on the subject 
of asking the public sector compensation savings to come in at 
$250 million. I know this has been and will continue to be a 
contentious issue among our public sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to note that some of the 
people that I am talking about are near and dear to my heart. In 
my close inner circle, this decision will affect my daughters — 
Miranda, who teaches grade 1 in Saskatoon, and Mercedes, who 
teaches grade 4 in Estevan. Both of these young ladies have 
started their teaching careers here in Saskatchewan over the past 
couple of years. And I might add that they had choices but 
chose to stay in Saskatchewan to start their careers. And on a bit 
of a side note, they’ve both started dating nice local 
Saskatchewan boys, so hopefully it’s promising that they’ll stay 
in Saskatchewan and start their families here. 
 
Then there’s my brother-in-law Neil, who is a machinist with 
SaskPower in Saskatoon. He has been a hard-working member 
of the IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] 
for 25 years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very fortunate that during the summer 
months, I enjoy the company of three wonderful ladies every 
Tuesday night while we play ladies’ night golf. One has been a 
friend for the past 30 years. She has a husband and a son who 
both work at Boundary dam power station as heavy-duty 
mechanics. One is a girl who I’ve known since my youth, and 
her husband is an electrician down at Boundary dam power 
station. And the last girl who golfs with me on these very 
enjoyable evenings has worked at SaskPower for the past eight 
years and is a business analyst in accounts payable at Boundary 
dam power station. 
 
I also have a couple of girlfriends that I went to high school 
with who enjoy working in social services in different areas 
across the province. 
 
I could name a number of other people who I would consider to 
be friends that work in the public sector within the province of 
Saskatchewan, but I believe you can see the people who are 
dear and near to me will be directly affected by decisions that 
we are all making in this budget. So you must know that any 
decisions being made are not being taken lightly by myself. 
 
You may have wondered why I talked about resource revenues 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

so much earlier in my speech. I think as I continue, it will 
become abundantly clear. Over the past few years our 
government has been blessed with the resource revenue that has 
come to the province of Saskatchewan, which has also meant 
that we have been very generous with our public sector and 
have not had to say no to them on very many occasions. This 
public sector has enjoyed increases and benefits over the past 
few years even though the revenue of the province has been 
declining, while at the same time the resource sector has been 
struggling. 
 
We have had people in the private industry who have been 
greatly affected. Over the past couple of years the employees 
and labourers who work in this industry have been asked to do 
several things. They’ve been asked to job share. They’ve been 
asked to take pay cuts — some of them have been as high as 
40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And some of them have been laid off 
completely. These people are not all just basic labourers. These 
people are engineers; they’re rig hands; they’re accountants; 
they’re office workers, and that’s just to name a few of the 
professions that have been affected by this. 
 
So we’ve all heard and are seeing that there is a little bit of a 
recovery happening in this sector. But let’s keep this in 
perspective. Oil is still lingering at $50 a barrel. While things 
were slow, the cost curve of the resource industry was bent 
down and it is being reflected in what is happening with the 
people who are being hired back in this industry. I know of an 
employee who was laid off two years ago. He was making 
$31 an hour at that point in time. This employee has been 
fortunate enough to be hired back now. He’s doing the exact 
same job and he has been hired back at $18 an hour, so as you 
can see things are not the same as when oil was averaging 
$110 per barrel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has come to a head and it is time to bend the 
cost curve and change the way we collect revenue in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We need to become less reliant on 
the resource sector and find revenue streams that are more 
predictable. This is one of the reasons the decision was made to 
remove some of the exemptions that were in place for PST and 
raising the rate to 6 per cent. And I believe it is important to 
note that Saskatchewan will still have the lowest PST rate of 
any province that collects provincial sales tax. 
 
As well of importance is, as a result of this budget, 
Saskatchewan individuals and families will pay amongst the 
lowest income taxes in Canada, ranging from the lowest to the 
third lowest for most depending on their level of income. At the 
same time, we as a government need to bend our cost curve and 
make a responsible decision when it comes to spending. That is 
why we as MLAs and ministers have taken a 3.5 per cent 
rollback on our salaries and we are going to be asking our 
public sector to bend their cost curve, but we need to lead by 
example and that is exactly what we are doing. 
 
There are other ways we have decided to go to help reduce 
spending. As everyone is already aware, we are in the process 
of consolidating 12 health regional authorities into one. We 
have also made the decision to discontinue with executive air 
operations and they are being wound down and the airplanes 
will be sold. 
 

And lastly, we decided to wind down Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. As ridership has declined and costs 
have increased, STC’s [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company] subsidy reached unsustainable levels. STC’s 
per-passenger subsidy have grown from $25 per year 10 years 
ago to approximately $94 per passenger today. I have friends 
and family who on occasion have used this service. So once 
again, I want you to know that I did not nor do I take this 
decision lightly. 
 
Our government’s track record of sound fiscal management 
over the past nine years including prudent spending, paying 
down debt, and keeping our debt-to-GDP [gross domestic 
product] ratio among the lowest in the country provides 
capacity to borrow in order to move forward on our capital plan 
instead of delaying projects which would hurt our economy and 
cost more to build in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after having served proudly on Estevan City 
Council for 10 years, I’m pleased to see that revenue sharing 
has been kept whole on this budget. These funds are used for 
several different uses within the municipalities, whether it be 
operation spending, capital projects, or infrastructure projects. 
The city of Estevan as well as all of the municipalities across 
the province of Saskatchewan have benefited greatly from this 
funding. 
 
On the flip side, we are still asking municipalities to be part of 
our plan. So in our plan we are cutting back on some of the 
grants-in-lieu, something that we consider to be a fair 
compromise. While the province is making some very tough 
decisions on what programs and services will be cut, we cannot 
continue to subsidize municipalities at the levels we have been. 
It is simply not sustainable. 
 
As we continue to invest in the people of Saskatchewan, it is 
important that we make sure our commitments are met. 
Investing in the people ensures a continued high quality of life 
for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other areas I would like to touch 
on, but I know my colleagues will be talking about some of 
those. So the last thing I would like to touch on is that this 
government has a plan. We are not just kicking the can down 
the road. We have a plan to return to balance over the next three 
years. It would be nice if we could do this faster, but we do not 
want to harm our economy or the people of Saskatchewan by 
getting to balance immediately. So with the right checks and 
balances in place, we should be able to ensure that we do return 
to balance within three years. 
 
This has been a decision; this has been decision time. Do we 
want to do what’s best for the people of the province? Do we 
want to keep Saskatchewan moving forward or do we want to 
go back to the way things were under the NDP government? I 
think it is clear. We want to keep moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could summarize what I have talked about 
today, this budget will be controlling and reducing government 
spending. This budget will modernize and expand our tax 
system. This budget will keep our economy strong. This budget 
will invest in priority areas. And lastly our goal will be to return 
to balance over the next three years. 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say how humbled I am 
to be in this House and to have the opportunity to speak to the 
budget that has been presented. I am in favour of keeping 
Saskatchewan strong and moving forward. I believe that is 
exactly what this budget does, Mr. Speaker. The title of this 
budget is Meeting the Challenge, and that is what we are doing. 
I will not be supporting the amendment brought forward by our 
opposition, so once again I would like to say I support the 
budget presented by this government. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
and pleasure to wade into the debate on the budget here today. 
It’s been, well, seven years now since I’ve . . . seven and a half 
years, so I’ve got a few budget speeches under my belt, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the one thing I’d like to dispense with first is a birthday 
wish to my . . . a belated birthday wish to my 19-year-old 
daughter who celebrated her birthday on Saturday, which is 
pretty hard for me to believe that Hennessey is 19. It didn’t 
seem like that long ago that I was 19, but apparently it was. 
 
And it’s my kids, actually, Hennessey and Ophelia, who really 
are the reason why I’m here, Mr. Speaker, them and their 
cohort. I think about all the kids and grandkids to come and, 
really, when I got involved and put my name forward, it was . . . 
got involved in politics and put my name forward, it was about 
making a better world for them, Mr. Speaker. So this is about 
them, but they also sure feel the sacrifice or make huge 
sacrifices so their mom can come here and be the voice of 
Saskatoon Riversdale. So a big thanks to my kids, Hennessey 
and Ophelia. Ophelia told me a couple Saturdays ago when I 
was dragging her to yet another meeting, she said to me, “Mom, 
there should be no more meetings on Saturday.” But I don’t 
think that that’s possible to legislate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to also thank my sister and her husband who are like 
another set of parents to my kids. My sister Michelle is 
invaluable in my life and in my kids’ lives, and I really am 
grateful that she is willing to give so much of her time for my 
kids. My parents who despite some of their own challenges with 
aging still take my dog, Taxi, every week when I head out to 
Regina on Sunday night. So they’ve got lots going on in their 
own life but they’re still very willing to be there for me as well. 
 
[19:30] 
 
I want to thank my assistants, Vanessa and Judy, who have busy 
lives themselves. Vanessa — with three kids, an art career, 
school, a husband who’s in full-time school — she’s very busy, 
Mr. Speaker. And Judy, who is in my office one day a week, is 
a very busy grandma. So thank you to those folks for all that 
they do to allow me to serve Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
I want to say thank you to the people of Saskatoon Riversdale 
who’ve sent me to the legislature three times now to give me 
the privilege of being their voice. And it’s through their eyes 
that I will make my budget comments tonight. 
 
When I think about this budget and its impact on people in 

Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon Riversdale, I feel like I’ve 
found a suitable framework for assessing this budget in the 
form of a quote from 1977, Mr. Speaker, by United States 
vice-president, Hubert Humphrey, Mr. Speaker. He said: 
 

The moral test of a government is how that government 
treats those who are in the dawn of life, the children; those 
who are in the twilight of life, the elderly; those who are in 
the shadows of life, the sick, the needy, and the 
handicapped. 
 

Although there are many government, many government 
decisions in this budget that leave it open to harsh critique, my 
allotted time to respond to this budget is brief, only about 20 
minutes, Mr. Speaker. I’ll do my best to use vice-president 
Humphrey’s quote as a template for covering off some of the 
most harmful and mean parts of this budget from my 
perspective as the Health and seniors critic and as someone who 
represents an incredibly socio-economically diverse 
constituency. Undoubtedly there will be things that I miss in 
this budget speech, but I look forward to getting down to 
estimates in a couple weeks time and asking many questions of 
the Health minister. 
 
So just for some context, in general terms this is a budget that 
increases fees and taxes for Saskatchewan citizens by almost a 
billion dollars, including adding taxes to things like kids’ 
diapers, Mr. Speaker, all the while putting . . . And you’d know 
that well, Mr. Speaker, as a father of, is it two children now? 
Two children. You know those diapers are not cheap. All the 
while putting money in the pockets of both corporations and 
well-connected citizens, Mr. Speaker. It’s a budget that tells 
you exactly where the Sask Party priorities are. 
 
It’s a budget that sees the province’s debt double since 2013 
from $9 billion to $18 billion, and that debt is expected to grow 
even further to $22 billion by the end of this government’s 
term. And the Sask Party, by the time they have finished this 
third term, have projected to run more deficits than balanced 
budgets, Mr. Speaker, in our sunniest of times, after draining 
down our rainy day fund and not saving a single cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we look at their jobs record, 40,000 people are looking 
for work today, Mr. Speaker, 20,000 more than when this 
government came to power. This is a government that has cut 
more than 500 jobs just in the last couple of weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re cutting STC jobs; janitorial staff, folks who 
work here in this building; folks who work with those who have 
gambling issues, Mr. Speaker. And there are more to come. 
You can’t cut 3.5 per cent of your civil service and not 
anticipate more job cuts, Mr. Speaker. Mark my words, those 
job cuts are coming. 
 
There’s programs that I will speak about tonight. We don’t have 
numbers yet, but there are jobs that are being lost in many of 
these areas, Mr. Speaker. This record, I would argue, is not the 
hallmark of a government that has the backs of average people 
here in our province. 
 
I’ve heard both the Finance minister and the Premier talk about 
the new norm around our natural resource revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. This would be laughable if it wasn’t so sad. I’ve had 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

the opportunity . . . the MLA who I followed, Mr. Speaker, 
Premier Calvert, talked about the time where $50 a barrel oil 
was fantasy, Mr. Speaker. Never did they think that oil would 
ever reach $50 barrel. They worked with much less, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so for this government, for its previous two terms, to think 
that natural resource revenues just keep on rolling in and 
they’re going to keep on rolling in at $110 a barrel, was not a 
prudent and fiscally responsible government, Mr. Speaker. So 
for the Premier to talk about the new norm, well I would 
encourage him to look back at the history of the province and 
look at what natural resource revenues do over time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I just want to get back to the first part of vice-president 
Humphrey’s quote where he talks about “The moral test of 
government is how that government treats those who are in the 
dawn of life, the children.” So how is the Sask Party 
government meeting that test? I think the evidence shows that 
this government should get a fail on this front. When it comes 
to children, these are some of the Sask Party choices. 
 
So over the next year, Mr. Speaker, they will be cutting 
$54 million from our kids’ classrooms over the next bit of time, 
Mr. Speaker. I encourage the members opposite to talk to 
teachers and parents across the province. They will tell you 
about crowded classrooms, particularly in the urban centres. 
They’ll talk about the lack of resources to support English as an 
additional language for our new arrivals, making it hard on both 
those new students and the rest of the classroom. They’ll talk to 
you about cuts to educational assistants, again placing 
challenges on the entire class, Mr. Speaker. This is already the 
reality now. Those things are the reality now. A $54 million 
funding decrease will hurt students; there is no doubt about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government brags. I don’t think right now is the time for a 
bragfest, any time in this last week or, actually quite honestly, 
any time in this last year, Mr. Speaker, should have been time 
for a bragfest, but this government likes to brag about its new 
schools. New schools are important, as is the need for 
maintenance of our existing and older schools, especially when 
our schools are crumbling and roofs are being held up with 
teleposts, Mr. Speaker. But the happiness of a new school is lost 
if school boards are struggling with finances to be able to staff 
them properly, Mr. Speaker. It’s great to have a new building, 
but if you can’t afford to staff them properly it doesn’t do 
anybody any favours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So how else is this government treating children, Mr. Speaker? 
I want to point to Health, a cut from the Health line item, the 
Health line item, Mr. Speaker. I just have to, my colleagues are 
very exuberant here tonight, Mr. Speaker, and it’s hard for me 
not to listen to their conversation, but I just need to take a 
moment to talk a little bit about some things going on in Health. 
In 1991 there was a parent piloting, a parent project, a parent 
mentoring program, Mr. Speaker, and that became a permanent 
program. 
 
So a program that started in 1991 cost $1.4 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and was in 11 of 12 health regions, a parent mentoring 
program, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to tell you a little bit about it: 

The objectives of the parent mentoring program of 
Saskatchewan [which is offered through public health] are 
to provide knowledge, skills and motivation to parents to 
think, do, feel, and be the best they can be in their roles as 
parents. Our objectives include having a mutually 
satisfying relationship between parent and volunteer, and 
encouraging parents to access other community programs 
and services that meet their needs. The overall outcome of 
meeting the objective is healthier, happier parents with 
healthier, happier children. 

 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that when I first became a mom — 
actually both times I had my kids — parenting is really 
difficult, Mr. Speaker. I have a huge support network. I had a 
partner and I had resources available to me, and parenting was 
still challenging. I would argue that all parents are vulnerable at 
any time in that cycle of parenting, Mr. Speaker, but there are 
some families due to poverty, due to addictions, to all kinds of 
reasons — the legacy of residential school, Mr. Speaker — that 
some parents are even more vulnerable than others. And this 
was a program, a $1.4 million program that helped support 
those vulnerable families, Mr. Speaker. And that program is 
gone, Mr. Speaker, so that’s what this government thinks of 
children here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important to talk about child care. So after a few 
years of not opening any child care spaces, some new schools 
are coming online, Mr. Speaker, and new child care spaces will 
be opening. But I would argue that the government is going to 
have a serious challenge staffing those spaces, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve put extreme pressure on professional child care 
workers, Mr. Speaker, on early learning and care educators. 
They haven’t made child care more affordable for parents, in 
fact quite the opposite. So the turning point, the point at which 
you no longer receive the maximum subsidy, Mr. Speaker, has 
not changed since 1982. And there are many governments who 
own the responsibility for that one, but this is a government that 
had record revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague from Regina Lakeview has brought forward a 
petition pointing to the need for tax exemptions for child care 
centres. That’s because child care centres are being starved, Mr. 
Speaker. They can only raise parent rates or parent fees by so 
much, Mr. Speaker. The money that they get from this 
government to ensure that high-quality, licensed child care 
spaces are available to children does not meet the needs of 
being able to properly fund child care centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Child care is, after housing, for those who have young children 
it’s the second-largest expense of most families, Mr. Speaker. 
This government has not done the work in supporting and the 
building of a strong child care field. There are many wonderful 
people who are child care, early learning and care educators, 
Mr. Speaker, but this government has not done the work to 
support that workforce. Many of those people joined the field, 
Mr. Speaker, and then realized that they could make more 
money working at Walmart, so they leave the profession, Mr. 
Speaker. So this government has not done well in supporting 
child care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The exemption for PST on children’s clothes, on diapers, Mr. 
Speaker. I was shopping, actually I went shoe shopping for 
Ophelia on Saturday, and I was amazed at how many parents 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

were also out shopping for clothing and shoes, trying to beat the 
6 per cent increase. That will have an impact on families, Mr. 
Speaker, and families . . . A consumption tax like PST has the 
biggest impact, Mr. Speaker, on lower income earners, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a greater percentage of their disposable income. 
 
How else is this government treating our children? Let’s talk 
about our slightly older children, our young adults like my 
19-year-old Hennessey who’s at university. There’s a 5 per cent 
cut to universities. That will have an impact. That will have an 
impact on tuition and it will possibly lead to program cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a government who’s cut NORTEP [northern teacher 
education program] and NORPAC [Northern Professional 
Access College] without consultation, ignoring 40 years of 
success in training teachers in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Forty years of success training close to 500 teachers, 
Mr. Speaker, who work in the North. They have trouble with 
recruitment and retention when teachers come from the South, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a government who has failed those 
citizens, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about vice-president Humphrey’s 
quote, the moral test when it comes to the elderly or seniors, 
those folks who are in the twilight of their life. How has this 
government and this budget treated those citizens, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We can talk about long-term care, Mr. Speaker. This 
government is raising long-term care fees. So this has been a 
government who has had a huge challenge in long-term care. 
They’ve starved the front lines. You look at the ratio of workers 
to residents, Mr. Speaker, and it is abysmal. Their own CEO 
[chief executive officer] tours show that over and over and over 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they continue to not put in place the resources our loved 
ones, the frail elderly as the formerly minister of Health used to 
talk about, which is only a small percentage of our population. 
But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, just because they’re a small 
percentage of our population doesn’t mean they’re not worthy 
and deserving of dignity in their final days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what is this government choosing to do? They’re choosing 
to raise those long-term care rates. So the current minimum fee 
on a portion of income is going up from $1,086 and 50 per cent 
of income to $1,086 and 57.5 per cent of income . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Wonder what the former Health minister is so 
interested in talking about here, Mr. Speaker? He should be 
concerned about the diaper fee, Mr. Speaker, as someone who 
has a second child. He should be very concerned about those 
kinds of costs as well. 
 
Back to seniors here, Mr. Speaker. So the maximum monthly 
fee in long-term care is moving from $2,065 to $2,689, Mr. 
Speaker. That is more than $600 for the maximum fee, Mr. 
Speaker. This will impact some of our most vulnerable citizens, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re pushing a fee onto the people who built 
this province quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only are they not getting the care they need, not because the 
workers don’t want to do a really great job and don’t come to 
their job every day as committed as they possibly can be, but 

because there are not enough of them. And they are run off their 
feet, Mr. Speaker. So that’s part of what this government is . . . 
that moral test of a government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Government is cutting the podiatry department that offers 
podiatry services to residents, Mr. Speaker. That will have an 
impact, actually not just on seniors. 
 
The audiology program . . . actually it’s interesting. The 
audiology program, it is being completely cut. In recent years, 
Mr. Speaker, as the Health critic I’ve written to the Minister of 
Health about this, and I’d felt I’d heard from many citizens who 
felt like the audiology program was being starved. I’d heard 
about long wait-lists and having trouble getting phone calls 
back. But they had felt, the people with whom I’d worked and 
communicated with the minister, felt that this government was 
starving the audiology department to cut it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:45] 
 
And you know what? Back in October they did in fact, in the 
Saskatoon Health Region, have to eliminate . . . They 
eliminated two audiology positions, one which was the only 
position in Prince Albert that was publicly funded, Mr. Speaker, 
and the one position in Saskatoon. The wait-list would be 
impacted. 
 
So who does this impact, Mr. Speaker? The most marginalized 
of citizens. I’m thinking about seniors here, but it’s not just 
seniors. It’s not just seniors who need audiology services. So 
who does this impact the most? The lowest of income and the 
most marginalized of citizens who don’t have money to access 
private services, Mr. Speaker. So audiology exams, we can talk 
about . . . This is a cut that isn’t just about seniors, but it has an 
impact on seniors. 
 
Libraries, Mr. Speaker, I will talk a little bit about how libraries 
impact both seniors and other folks. But when we think about 
libraries . . . So this government is cutting completely the 
funding to libraries in both Saskatoon and Regina, and I 
understand about 50 per cent of the budgets in regional 
libraries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries aren’t just about books. I heard the 
Minister of Education today talk about how lending of materials 
is down or borrowing of materials is down, but I’m wondering 
if he’s set foot in a library in recent days or recent years, Mr. 
Speaker. You walk in the door. You’ve got banks of computers, 
Mr. Speaker — I’m thinking about the Saskatoon Public 
Library; the one that I visit most often is Frances Morrison — 
but a bank of computers where you’ve got people who don’t 
have money for computers, who don’t have money for Internet, 
who are using those services to look for jobs, to look for 
housing. You’ve got newcomers who come and use those 
computers to connect with loved ones far away. Those 
newcomers come to the library. And what do they do, Mr. 
Speaker? They read books to improve their English as an 
additional language. 
 
Young people, the programming, they’re in — again at the 
Frances Morrison library in Saskatoon — Pooh Corner, for . . . 
which is different than the Leader of the Opposition was telling 
me about his backyard where his dog visits, Mr. Speaker. 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Winnie the Pooh and Pooh Corner is an important part of the 
programming at the Saskatoon Public Library, Mr. Speaker. 
The Leader of the Opposition misunderstood me when we had a 
conversation about this earlier. But Saturday mornings at Pooh 
Corner is packed. You come sit in there with your kids and the 
librarian engages kids and their caregivers. 
 
And it’s not just about kids. There’s always programming going 
on at the public libraries. They’re meeting places. I remember 
being a new mom actually, Mr. Speaker, and that’s actually 
where . . . Many libraries have little play areas, and it was 
affordable to go and be able to hang out with your friends, with 
the other new moms or parents you’ve connected with, and take 
out some books and visit. 
 
But you know, it was interesting to me. Last spring I had an 
opportunity to participate in a fundraiser, a homelessness 
challenge. And by no means was I thinking I was homeless, but 
we had a day and a half where we were to not have access to 
services. And you know, that was a really important place. 
That’s where we all ended up to go look for housing, Mr. 
Speaker. To look for housing, that was one of our challenges, to 
look at job opportunities. Those are places for marginalized 
people also to go and have access to services they won’t 
otherwise have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many good reasons to support libraries, Mr. Speaker, 
and this government apparently doesn’t get that. Seniors, Mr. 
Speaker, seniors — it’s a place where seniors go too. The bus, 
actually the bus mall . . . thinking I’m very Saskatoon-centric 
here, Mr. Speaker, but these lessons can be applied, I think, 
much broader as well, Mr. Speaker. I’m thinking again about 
the Frances Morrison library where a block away is the bus 
mall, so that’s what many seniors do for outings as well. So I’m 
still speaking of seniors in the twilight of their life and how the 
government is impacting. 
 
The cut to STC, Mr. Speaker, is a big deal, Mr. Speaker, on so 
many levels. I’ve talked about children and seniors already, Mr. 
Speaker, children and seniors. How will STC . . . And then I 
will also talk about the more vulnerable . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m really, really grateful for all 
the support from my colleagues. They’ve got lots of important 
things to say, Mr. Speaker, but sometimes it’s hard not to get 
drawn into that conversation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what does STC do when we think about children, our older 
children, when we think about seniors, when we think about the 
more vulnerable, which I’ll also talk about here in a moment. It 
connects people to education. I’m thinking about kids traveling 
from rural Saskatchewan into the city or into other 
communities, smaller centres, for post-secondary education, 
whether it’s a regional college or a university, anything like 
that, Mr. Speaker. It connects people to jobs. It connects people 
to farms, Mr. Speaker. It connects people to health care. 
 
We heard last week about 300 cancer patients from around the 
province who use STC to get to Regina and Saskatoon for 
treatments. We know, Mr. Speaker, that blood products, STC 
transports blood products across the province. Rabies samples, 
that might be something the members opposite don’t realize, 
but STC actually from rural and remote communities will 
transport rabies samples into the city for testing, Mr. Speaker. 

It was interesting when the minister last week responsible for 
STC had made the point that only 253 communities are serviced 
by STC. There’s over 500 communities in the province and 
those people in those other communities, they also have people 
with cancer that have to make it into the city for treatments and 
they found other options without much problem. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if that minister realized their other option 
was often getting to the community where there was an STC 
line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was a cancer patient last week who talked quite 
eloquently about independence, about cost, that it’s far cheaper 
to have . . . I believe the bus pass is, the medical bus pass is 
about $60, Mr. Speaker. I might be off by about $10 there but I 
believe it’s about $60 for the medical bus pass, which by the 
way about 1,200 people had in the last statistics that we have, in 
2015 I believe. And that number had been going up over the 
years, Mr. Speaker, so 1,200 medical passes in 2015. 
 
So people are using STC for health care. I know that. I had an 
opportunity this past fall to do a health care tour in rural 
Saskatchewan to talk about this government’s decision to move 
from 12 regions to one health region, Mr. Speaker, which 
people aren’t very happy about by the way. But I heard a lot 
about how people really rely on STC to get them to medical 
appointments, so it’s a huge hit. 
 
So this is an indication of about how this government treats 
seniors, young people, the most vulnerable who don’t have any 
other way of getting around, Mr. Speaker. This is what this 
government thinks about those citizens, not to mention all those 
people who are now without a job. More than 200 people, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe it’s about 240 people who have worked for 
STC who will be joining the ranks of those fellow 40,000 
people who are without jobs in a very tough time to find jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a big hit to so many on so many levels. 
 
And I think it’s important to point out that one of the cancer 
patients who uses STC to get to her appointments talked about 
STC being an essential service for people living in smaller 
communities. I think it’s important to point out that actually this 
government thought that STC was an essential service just a 
few years ago as well, and deemed it as such. And now they 
think that they should wind it down — which is just code, Mr. 
Speaker, for privatizing it. 
 
So they had . . . This is a government who is breaking its 
commitments. The minister responsible, less than a year ago, 
said STC wasn’t on the chopping block. We had an election not 
that long ago, Mr. Speaker, and not once did I hear the members 
opposite talk about cutting STC, despite the fact we have a 
Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. That STC not once, not . . . 
I don’t know if anybody else did either but . . . yes, not once, 
not once, Mr. Speaker. And we have a Crown protection Act, a 
piece of legislation that would require the government to go to 
the people of Saskatchewan if they wanted to privatize STC. 
But again, much like Bill 40, they’re trying to do by . . . not just 
trying, they are doing by the back door what they can’t do by 
the front door, Mr. Speaker. That is not fair and that is not right. 
 
My colleagues in the back have lots of things to say tonight. 
 
When we speak about vice-president Humphrey’s quote around 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

the moral test of a government is how it treats the most 
vulnerable — the sick, the needy, the handicapped, Mr. Speaker 
— the one thing that jumps out at me is the funeral cut, Mr. 
Speaker. On social services you will now be entitled to have the 
simplest of caskets or a cremation but not a funeral service, Mr. 
Speaker. And for those who’ve never been on social assistance, 
even the most modest service, anybody who has buried a loved 
one knows, can be quite costly. But not only do people on 
social assistance not have the dignity in life that we all deserve 
as citizens of this province, but they’re not even allowed that 
dignity in death, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An acquaintance of mine, her daughter, she has been adopted. 
This little girl has been adopted and her mother and father both 
had challenges with addictions and had a very challenging life, 
hence the reason their little girl ended up adopted, Mr. Speaker. 
But last year this little girl’s biological father passed away and 
she had an opportunity . . . Social Services paid for the funeral 
of her father. And she didn’t know her dad, Mr. Speaker, but 
she had an opportunity to attend that funeral, say goodbye to 
her biological dad, and see that there were people in the world, 
despite her father’s challenges, who loved her dad, Mr. Speaker. 
That was a really important thing for that little girl to 
experience. And now with this cut to funerals that won’t . . . If 
this cut would’ve happened a year ago, Mr. Speaker, that little 
girl would not have had that opportunity to feel a bit better 
about her dad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Cuts to pastoral care, a $1.5 million cut to pastoral care in 
hospitals. So hospitals are losing the spiritual and emotional 
support that they provide to patients, Mr. Speaker. So just 
taking you to the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region: 
 

Spiritual Care is all about Caring for the Human Spirit. The 
human spirit is that part of every person seeking meaning, 
purpose, hope, and love. 
 
In times of illness, trauma and loss, a person’s beliefs, 
values, and feelings are important aspects of their 
healthcare. Within the Regina Qu’Appelle . . . Region a 
Chaplain is a Spiritual Care professional who is a member 
of your healthcare team. 
 
Chaplains:  
 

Listen to your fears, concerns, and needs;  
Help you identify who or what is important to you;  
Help you identify what you believe;  
Help you ask your own questions and help you find your 
own answers; and  
If you want, can link you with your own religious or 
spiritual community 

 
Mr. Speaker, the pastoral program works with people who are 
sick and dying themselves, or their families, and even help in 
planning funerals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to read you a couple quotes that people responded to this 
cut, Mr. Speaker. “Something so simple that can mean so much 
to patients and families at a time when they have enough going 
on.” Another quote: “Those who don’t see the value in these 
services have never seen a loved one find peace in their final 
hour.” 

I had an opportunity to chat with a fellow who was so grateful 
for pastoral care that his father received in his dying days. He’d 
been ill for some time, and this Anglican priest actually, who 
liked to be called Father Phil — he was an Anglican priest; 
that’s what he liked to go by — Father Phil actually happened 
to be a Vietnam War veteran and a former pilot. And this 
fellow’s father was also a pilot who never saw action. He was in 
the military in the 1950s and had done all the training exercises. 
 
In his final days he had built quite a rapport with this Anglican 
priest, who spent the last couple hours of his life also sitting 
next to him and talking about their shared interest around planes 
and being in the service. And his father . . . He was grateful to 
this Anglican priest for giving his father some pleasure in his 
final few hours, Mr. Speaker. And he actually got quite choked 
up, this fellow who was telling me about the important impact 
of pastoral care, got quite choked up talking about his dad, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How else does this government treat vulnerable people? Cuts to 
chiropractic care. This government, a few years ago, delisted 
chiropractic services for most people, but kept 12 appointments 
a year for those who were on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
Many people would argue chiropractic care is about 
preventative health, Mr. Speaker, and saves money to the 
system if you can keep people healthy, Mr. Speaker. But this 
government is cutting those 12, last 12 remaining funded 
chiropractic treatments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Mental health and addictions. When we talk about the most 
vulnerable, this is a big part of it, how this government has 
treated the most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. We have a mental 
health and addictions action plan of about two years ago that 
has seen very little action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting to me, it’s interesting to me that this 
government recently negotiated a health care accord with the 
feds, and a big part of that is $16 million a year coming for 
targeted mental health support, Mr. Speaker. But there wasn’t a 
word about that in the budget. So apparently this is a high 
priority item for the government, but there was not a word in 
the budget about mental health and addictions, Mr. Speaker, 
which when I think about that, when we . . . 
 
Mental health and addictions in general, I think, deserves a little 
bit of mention, but the fact that we have children — children, 
Mr. Speaker — who are choosing to take their lives in 
communities in Saskatchewan, I think recognizing that $16 
million we’re getting from the federal government and thinking 
about it being a supposed priority of the government, you think 
it would have turned up in their action plan or in their budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many other places. I’m getting the signal that my time 
is just about up here, Mr. Speaker, which is always a shame. I 
have much to say and I know they’re anxious to hear all the 
things that I have to say. But I can talk about . . . I represent a 
constituency that has a good chunk of the Meewasin Valley in 
it, Mr. Speaker. And this cut to Meewasin, more than $400,000 
and actually removing the statutory requirement for funding, 
that has me very concerned. Not only does the cut have me 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

concerned this year, but them getting rid of the statutory 
funding means that it’ll be much easier for them to cut down the 
road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Meewasin Valley, anybody who lives in Saskatoon, 
who has ever visited Saskatoon, knows the benefit of 
conservation and riverbank stewardship, that the Meewasin 
Valley is a gathering place. You only need to take a walk out on 
a summer night and see the hundreds and hundreds of people 
strolling along the river valley, Mr. Speaker. Take a canoe 
down the river and see the wildlife. As I said, I live right on the 
river valley, Mr. Speaker, and I . . . There was a coyote friend 
hanging out not far from my house, Mr. Speaker, on the river 
valley. And it’s a shame that this government is off-loading that 
expense completely on, or taking a good chunk of the money 
away from the Meewasin. 
 
The grants in lieu of taxes, this will be a $36 million hit to our 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. So that’s where SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy used to give grants to our municipalities because 
they don’t pay property tax. I believe it’s about an $8 million hit 
to the city of Saskatoon that will have an impact that’s . . . Our 
cities will either have to raise taxes or decrease services, Mr. 
Speaker. That is a huge issue. 
 
There were many, many things that weren’t in this budget. I 
didn’t see any words about reconciliation and the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission and any calls to action and how we 
were going to meet those calls to action, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 
see any money to fully cover HIV [human immunodeficiency 
virus] drugs, which the Minister of Health said he’d consider 
doing just a few weeks ago. 
 
What else is missing? Not a peep about organ donation. This 
government, the Minister of Health, called a committee on 
looking at how to improve organ donation, Mr. Speaker. The 
committee developed some recommendations. The Premier 
decided to go rogue and do his own thing, but we didn’t see a 
single word about how we were going to bring those 
recommendations to life and improve organ donation rates here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
There was no money for long-term care in La Ronge, no money 
for Victoria Hospital in P.A. [Prince Albert], no money for the 
hospital in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, who I know has done a lot of 
work in raising some of their own money. 
 
What was in the budget though were tax increases on average 
folks and families, and job losses, more than 500 and more to 
come, Mr. Speaker. Those job losses are people who spend 
money in their communities and will have less money to spend. 
 
So if you look at vice-president Humphrey’s moral test of 
government, his quote, it is a mean budget and not a smart 
budget. These choices this government has made will hurt 
people and it will hurt job creation. I will be supporting the 
amendment, and I cannot support this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
today to stand and support the budget of our Finance minister 

that he presented here on March 22nd. But before I get into the 
budget reply, I have some people I’d like to thank. 
 
I want to thank my very supportive wife Karen, who is always 
by my side at the many events I am proud to attend on behalf of 
this government. I also want to thank the Finance minister and 
his officials for their hard work in providing a clear path for our 
province in this budget. And I also want to thank my 
constituency assistant, Sasha Peters, who is always diligent in 
completing the tasks that are required and always is more than 
pleased to help constituents in a polite and meaningful 
demeanour. 
 
The theme meeting the challenge is an appropriate one for this 
year’s budget, but really, Mr. Speaker, it should be the theme 
for every budget. We always have challenges and we always 
should have. 
 
Saskatchewan has grown by 160,000 people in the last decade 
and it’s the second fastest growing province in Canada with a 
population of 1.15 million. This has put pressure on 
Saskatchewan’s infrastructure that we have consistently 
invested in. Because of a larger population, we have to meet the 
challenge by recruiting more doctors, nurses, and teachers to 
keep Saskatchewan growing. Mr. Speaker, we have 3,000 more 
nurses and 750 more doctors, and this is in stark contrast to the 
NDP, who lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors between 2001 and 
2006. 
 
Saskatchewan now has among the shortest wait times in Canada 
and while when the NDP was in power, they had the worst 
surgical wait times in Canada. 
 
Since Saskatchewan became a province, we have had 
challenges to overcome. However, not every government in our 
history has had the challenge or the courage to move our 
province forward. This budget clearly provides a path for us to 
get back to balance in three years. The challenge is clear, Mr. 
Speaker. With resource revenues significantly dropping for the 
last three years, it’s time to set a new course to respond to this 
current challenge. 
 
It’s been three years now with resource revenues significantly 
lower than anyone would’ve expected. Now it has become clear 
that we need to change in direction with respect to how we tax 
our economy. A shift away from dependence on resource 
revenues by modernizing and expanding the tax system, along 
with controlling and reducing government spending, will ensure 
our economy remains strong, and this strategy will return us to 
balance in three years. 
 
We must have a vision for the future of our province and some 
will not see it until they look back years later. Consider this 
beautiful building, Mr. Speaker, and the vision our first premier, 
Walter Scott, had for this city and our province. Consider that 
Premier Scott was criticized for building the most venerable 
legislative building, and it was so far from downtown Regina 
and south of the Wascana Creek. I can’t imagine when I look at 
this breathtaking building being anywhere else in Regina. He 
had a vision that I don’t think anyone would challenge today. 
This palace of the prairies has been the centre of our highs and 
lows as a province, enduring a cyclone, a drought, the Great 
Depression, and demonstrations, all the while remaining the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

go-to place to celebrate royal visits, Grey Cups, Canada Day, 
and weddings — lots of weddings. You might say Walter Scott 
had no trouble meeting the challenge. But he would not have 
accomplished his vision if he had focused on the naysayers.  
 
The challenge Saskatchewan is facing is that since 2014-15 
resource revenue has declined by more than a billion dollars, 
and tax revenue is down by hundreds of millions due to the 
resource sector slowdown. The population has grown by 
160,000 in the last decade which has put pressure on vital 
services. But every place we see the challenge of growth, we 
see the examples where our government has met the challenge. 
This year we are forecasting a deficit of 685 million and a 
smaller deficit of 304 million in ’18-19 with a return to balance 
in ’19-20 with a forecasted surplus of 15 million. 
 
Through careful debt management, since forming government 
in 2007, Saskatchewan has the second-lowest debt-to-GDP ratio 
in Canada. This plan to get the balance and control debt is a 
challenge that we have met to make sure that future generations 
are not burdened with reckless spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we have a plan to balance, we see that our 
government will continue to invest in health, education, and 
social services and assistance is up nearly 72 per cent or 
4.4 billion. This year, funding in these three areas is 
10.6 billion, nearly 1.4 billion in the area of social services and 
assistance, a 51 per cent increase since 2007-08. Twelve million 
for overcapacity in ER [emergency room] wait times in Regina 
and Saskatoon, 3.7 billion for schools, highways, bridges, 
hospitals, and Crown infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government acknowledges that the budget 
needs to balance restraint with strategic investment. That is why 
we are trying to control and reduce government spending in this 
budget. We said we would take a wage rollback before we 
asked anyone else to do the same, and we will be reducing 
MLAs’ wages by 3.5 per cent for all MLAs and ministers. 
 
We’ll also be consolidating the current 12 regional health 
regions into one with potential saving of between 10 to 
20 million in 2018. Total health care spending will be held to a 
point seven per cent increase. And we made the tough decision 
to wind down STC and executive air service.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is poised for growth in 
2017. Commodity prices including oil are forecast to rise 
slightly and drilling activity is expected to strengthen. Even 
though the global economy is not as strong as I think we would 
all like it to be, there are signs that it is starting to strengthen, 
which is helpful to Saskatchewan’s export-based economy. 
 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is among the lowest in 
Canada. Manufacturing sales were up 11.9 per cent in 
December to 1.3 billion year-over-year, representing the 
second-highest growth among provinces in 2016. 
 
Investment in non-residential building construction reached 
1.9 billion, up by 9.6 per cent, and again was the second 
strongest in the country last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently the Fraser Institute named Saskatchewan 
the best place in the world to invest in mining, which is up one 

spot from last year. Over the past decade, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has created a business investment climate that is 
the envy of the country by continuing to reduce corporate taxes 
and will be an even more attractive province to invest in. 
 
Total capital investment in Saskatchewan has grown from 
8.3 billion in 2007 to a peak of 20 billion in 2014, with a strong 
forecast of 14.5 billion for 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, meeting the challenge requires changes in the 
delivery of services to make it more streamlined, efficient, and 
customer-focused, while at the same time cost-effective. These 
transformational changes can be complex and require time to 
successfully implement, and our government will continue to 
work with stakeholders across all sectors to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Government’s investments into income assistance programs 
designed to meet the needs of our most vulnerable citizens have 
improved dramatically over the past 10 years, but they have 
become unnecessarily complex. A redesign of income 
assistance programs is currently under way, a transformational 
change that will make programs simpler for clients and 
workers, focusing on providing effective support to the most 
vulnerable in our society while ensuring programs are 
sustainable into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this last year the governance panel undertook 
some very extensive consultation in meetings all across this 
province. What they found was that there was a lot of support 
for maintaining the same amount of school divisions and 
keeping elected boards. 
 
Also new in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is a transparent 
post-secondary student loan program that will help students 
obtain, starting in August, loans to access upfront student loans 
to those who need it the most. This new system will help 
students know up front how much they can expect to receive in 
grants and how much they will need to borrow for their 
education. Mr. Speaker, when you combine that with the 
Saskatchewan scholarship program and federal grants, the new 
system will cover most, if not all in some cases, of a lower 
income undergraduate student’s tuition cost. 
 
[20:15] 
 
These are just a few of the transformational changes being 
undertaken across government, which is aimed at delivering 
vital services to Saskatchewan people while exploring new 
ways to do new things and address challenges. 
 
In Education we have built 40 brand new or replacement 
schools and have completed 25 major school renovations, and 
this is in comparison to the NDP, where they closed 176 
schools and the number of teachers dropped by 400. I have one 
of those brand new schools in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
and I toured it last weekend and it is a beautiful school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also invested in post-secondary 
institutions by increasing funding by 40 per cent over 10 years, 
which is significantly more than the NDP, who increased 
funding by 20 per cent in 16 years, which is just over 1 per cent 
per year. 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a strong record on tax 
reductions, providing some of the largest tax reductions in 
Saskatchewan’s history. Personal and corporate income tax in 
this budget are being reduced, which will keep life affordable 
while supporting growth. And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, 
the patent box initiative will further reduce the corporate 
income tax rate for companies that use their intellectual 
property to create jobs and new investment. 
 
The research and development grant is being reformed to better 
target small and medium-sized companies. As well, the oil 
processing investment incentive encourages processing of our 
oil resources within the province, with royalty credits on new 
production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shifting away from income and productivity to 
consumption helps to improve the economy and improves 
government’s revenue stability. Changes will generate 
consistent revenue to pay for the valued services we all might 
need from time to time, such as health care, education, and 
social services. 
 
It will also provide much-needed capital for schools, hospitals, 
and roads. These changes will create a more stable revenue base 
to provide these services and provide and keep vital services 
sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when changes are fully implemented, 
Saskatchewan will have the lowest corporate income tax rate 
and the lowest tax rate on manufacturing and processing and 
among the lowest income tax rates in the country. This will be a 
great Saskatchewan advantage for businesses to invest and 
expand in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the largest expenses to government is 
compensation to the public sector. That expense is 7 billion 
annually and this represents the largest single expense to 
government. Given the fiscal challenges we are facing, this 
budget is planned for a reduction in total public sector spending 
of 250 million or 3.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
announced that effective April 1st, all MLAs will take a 3.5 per 
cent wage rollback and staff in the Premier’s office, caucus 
office, and ministers’ office will take nine unpaid days off 
which is the equivalent of 3.5 per cent. 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, is that STC will be wound down 
as ridership continues to fall, while expenses and the 
dependence on subsidies continue to rise. Since 2007 the cost to 
subsidize STC has been 112 million. The cost per person to 
subsidize riders was $25 back in 2007 and now it is $94 today. 
If STC were to continue to operate, it would cost another 
85 million in the next four years. Last year saw 77 per cent 
lower riders than STC in its busiest year and unfortunately is 
not sustainable when increasing subsidies are weighed against 
other spending priorities in the province such as health care and 
education. This was a tough decision, but a decision that needed 
to be made. 
 
Executive air is also winding down as it is declining similarly 
by more than 73 per cent and, given the challenging financial 
times, this should save taxpayers between 700,000 and 
1 million. 
 

Since 2007 total investment into three priority areas — health, 
education, and social services and assistance — has increased 
by 72 per cent or 4.4 billion. These three areas make up nearly 
three quarters of government’s total expenses and are projected 
to be a combined 10.6 billion in 2017-18, up 107 million or 
about 1 per cent since last year. 
 
In 2017-18, total spending for health care is expected to be 
5.6 billion, an increase of over 39 million over last year. This 
includes spending through the Ministry of Health, the regional 
health authorities, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, eHealth, 
the Health Quality Council, 3sHealth, and the Physician 
Recruitment Agency. Overall expense for health has grown by 
55 per cent over the last decade, from 3.6 billion in 2007-8 to 
5.6 billion in forecasts for this year. 
 
Total education expense this year is budgeted at 3.6 billion, 
down 45.1 million or 1.2 per cent from last year. This includes 
budgeted spending through the ministries of Advanced 
Education, Education, and Economy, and the board of 
education, Sask Polytechnic, regional colleges, the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission, and the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund. 
 
Although we do see a small decrease, Mr. Speaker, the reality is 
that since 2007-08 the budget for education, which includes 
both the pre-kindergarten to grade 12 and post-secondary 
sectors, has experienced a 100 per cent increase from 1.8 billion 
to its current 3.6 billion. Saskatchewan’s 28 school divisions 
will receive 1.9 billion in school operating funding. 
 
While this represents a slight reduction, it represents significant 
financial support for classrooms and is a huge improvement 
when compared to the previous government’s record. This 
represents a financial challenge facing the province but also the 
opportunity to seek improvements through innovation and 
change. Significant investment in post-secondary education 
continues in this budget, including student support and the 
continuation of the student retention program, providing up to 
20,000 income tax credits to graduates who live and work in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides strong supports for 
Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions, with 649 million in 
operating and capital funding. However, a 5 per cent reduction 
in base operating grants to universities, technical institutes, and 
regional colleges will be part of meeting the province’s fiscal 
challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes 3.7 billion for investment in 
Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. The commercial Crown sector is 
investing 1.6 billion, and 1.6 billion is being invested by 
executive government ministries and agencies. Solid capital 
investment will help Saskatchewan meet the challenge of a 
growing province and strengthen the economy now and moving 
forward. Capital projects lead to construction jobs at a time 
when oil and gas are recovering from commodity price 
downturns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is another important tax conversation 
that needs to be discussed. Unlike the members opposite and 
every jurisdiction in the country, Saskatchewan will not 
implement a carbon tax. In a province like Saskatchewan such a 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

tax would disproportionately affect key drivers of growth. 
When companies look for places to invest, they look for 
predictable and competitive tax and royalty regimes. 
Saskatchewan, by not implementing a carbon tax, keeps us 
competitive. This is unlike the members opposite who have 
either come right out and supported such a system or seem to be 
eerily quiet when asked about whether they support or don’t 
support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to the oil and gas industry, the budget 
sees significant enhancement to the regulatory oversight. The 
petroleum and natural gas divisions of the Ministry of the 
Economy, which is the regulator of the oil and gas activities, 
will receive an additional 1.4 million and 13 full-time 
equivalent positions in the 2017-18 budget. 
 
This budget will address the following initiatives: $600,000 
start-up funding for a multi-year pipeline regulation 
enhancement program to strengthen Saskatchewan’s approach 
to pipeline regulation; there will be 500,000 in core funding to 
increase the number of field inspectors in the ministry’s offices 
in Estevan, Swift Current, Kindersley, and Lloydminster; and 
250,000 funding to expand the technical capacity of the 
ministry to support the government’s commitment to 
Saskatchewan’s climate change related to the oil and gas 
industry. 
 
The budget also includes 460,000 in capital spending to begin 
the expansion of the integrated resource information system to 
support the implementation of the pipeline regulation 
enhancement program. This funding will allow for web-based 
pipeline licensing including flow lines as well as additional 
reporting and mapping capabilities related to pipeline 
regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these investments outlined in the budget will 
help keep Saskatchewan strong and provide a promising future 
for generations to come, and continue to keep our economy 
strong despite having less revenues from the resource sector. 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget presented by the 
Finance minister and will not be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to rise in support of the motion brought forward by our 
member from Regina Northeast, and I also want to 
acknowledge the seconder, my colleague, the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
There’s a lot of things I want to talk about in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but first of all there’s some people I’d . . . Like all the 
colleagues here, I have some people that I have to thank first 
and foremost. First and foremost my wife, Lois, who has been 
by my side through all the years of what I’ve been doing in my 
career in promoting and working for rural Saskatchewan. And I 
think that is something that I really have to acknowledge, is the 
sacrifice that she has made while I’ve been gone away from 
home, not only in raising our two children but also running a 
business of her own. 
 

I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge my 
children: our daughter Katie who lives here in the city of 
Regina with her husband, Darrel, and two lovely 
granddaughters that they’ve blessed us with in Lily and Olivia, 
and she works here in the city of Regina as a social worker. 
And our son Jordan who is finishing up his fellowship as a 
doctor in Alberta right now, finishing his fellowship and hoping 
to return to the province of Saskatchewan to practise medicine 
here in the province, and we’re welcome for that. 
 
But I also want to, if I could, Mr. Speaker, I have to echo the 
sentiments or the comments that my colleague from 
Martensville-Warman made in regards to a dear friend of mine 
and dear friend of hers also in Nithi Govindasamy, who is 
retiring as the deputy minister of Highways. And I’ve come to 
know Nithi since he came to this province in 2007 when he was 
asked by the minister, then minister of Agriculture, to come and 
work in the ministry as an ADM [associate deputy minister]. 
And in my previous life in working with SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], our paths crossed quite 
regular and we engaged in a lot of projects together and we 
became very good friends. And Nithi will be truly missed 
within the Ministry of Highways. And I wish him well in his 
future endeavours and hopefully we’ll have . . . our paths will 
cross. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my previous life and role as the president of 
SARM I had the privilege of working with great boards and 
great staff, and the experience that I gained there, Mr. Speaker, 
was phenomenal on infrastructure and what was happening in 
rural Saskatchewan. In my years in the executive of SARM 
which was a little over 10 years, I probably logged well in 
excess of 400,000 kilometres around the province of 
Saskatchewan, and of course many of those on the provincial 
highway system. So I was getting to know the province and 
getting to know rural Saskatchewan and the people that 
represented and worked for the ratepayers and for the people of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So if I can, Mr. Speaker, I do want to also touch on other people 
that have helped me within the constituency. Of course my 
constituency assistant Sandy Kuffner who has been just a real 
pillar in my constituency especially in light of my becoming a 
minister. She’s running the office and handling it very well and 
setting up meetings for me when I get home on Fridays and 
she’s done a phenomenal job. And I cannot help but recognize 
her and thank her for the work that she has done for me. 
 
[20:30] 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will also thank many of the people in 
my constituency that helped with the election: my entire team; 
my business manager, my campaign manager who happened to 
be a husband and wife, Randy and Sandra Clark, who were 
great assets for me and working through the campaign; and all 
the others that helped out. Derek Tallon, who is the president of 
the constituency, is phenomenal in the work that he does on my 
behalf and for us in the Wood River constituency. But last and 
of course not least, Mr. Speaker, I really do have to thank the 
voters of Wood River constituency who have given me the 
honour and the privilege to serve in this Legislative Assembly 
on their behalf, and that is awful humbling of me to be able to 
represent them here, Mr. Speaker. 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

I now would like to touch on some things in the budget as many 
of my colleagues have, and obviously how do we meet the 
current economic challenges that we’re facing here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. With resource revenue falling at 
$1.3 billion since 2014, we’ve really had three years of revenue 
shortfall in the resource sector. 
 
But despite the downturn, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worth 
mentioning, and I really must mention that over 3,500 new oil 
wells have been drilled in the province of Saskatchewan in 
2015 and ’16. And I think that’s incredible when, at that time, 
oil prices were well below the current 47 or $48 level they’re at 
now. We saw oil prices well under 30. But I think it shows of 
the investment attraction and the environment that this province 
has created for the industry to grow and to flourish. And we’re 
seeing that even today, when we hear the announcements of 
Crescent Point Energy investing huge dollars in oil exploration 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I did make a few phone calls to friends of mine in the 
southeast part of the province, talking to a good friend of mine 
not long ago. And at their council meetings, they are approving 
one or two oil well leases just about every month. And he said 
it’s great to see the rigs moving around again, and they are 
doing what they can to accommodate them working that way. 
And we’re seeing that all over the province, Mr. Speaker, where 
municipalities are working with the industry to make sure that 
they can continue to do the job and that we continue to see 
growth in the oil sector. 
 
But what I really like about this budget, Mr. Speaker, is its 
fiscal responsibility. That’s important to us and with a plan to 
balance. And I think that is . . . It has to be mentioned over and 
over again. I think it’s predictable. It’s fair. And hopefully in 
three years we’re in a surplus situation.  
 
And changes, of course, have started, and we as government 
have taken one of the very first changes when we of course are 
taking a three and a half per cent pay cut. And this side of the 
House has recognized that, and even our constituency assistants 
have seen the same and are taking those same measures as well. 
And I know the reduction doesn’t seem like a lot, but it all adds 
up, and that reduction alone will be about a half a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. And all those half a million dollars will 
add up. 
 
And another one that we’ve obviously looked at was exec air. 
And although we have reduced the executive air services by 
73 per cent compared to the previous government, we have seen 
that it’s time to wind down the service, and hopefully it will end 
up that we will save the taxpayers up to a million dollars 
annually. And I think it’s ironic, Mr. Speaker, on budget day 
talking to private carriers that are very interested in the purchase 
and growing that industry within the province of Saskatchewan. 
I think that’s very important news. And it’s good news also for 
the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon. So I think that’s 
important. 
 
I do want to touch briefly on education, but I’m sure there’s a 
lot of my colleagues that will be touching on it. And I just want 
to just add a few things if I could, really within the budget on 
education. 
 

And of course one of the big ones is with the announcement of 
2.1 million for two more new schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one for Rosthern and one for the 
city of Weyburn. And I think that’s good news for the province 
of Saskatchewan to see new infrastructure going up to house the 
children and the growth that’s happening in this province. 
 
And it also provides 56 million to child care funding for 889 
new child care spaces across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. That is showing that we are having growth, and we’re 
meeting the challenges around that. Since we have formed 
government, we have now built 40 new schools and hired more 
than 750 more teachers.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP like to talk. And what is their record? 
They closed 176 schools, and one of them was in my 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll touch briefly on health if I can, Mr. Speaker, while I have 
the opportunity. I’m glad that we decided to create a single 
provincial health authority. This is expected to save taxpayers 
between 10 and $20 million through reduced administration. 
We believe the focus should be on front-line services, and we 
have now hired 750 new doctors. And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, 
in a couple years, if they can hire my son when he comes back, 
that would be good news. We’d make it 751 and hopefully 
more. And over 3,000 more nurses working in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP like to talk about actions in health, but 
what have they done? What did they do? They closed 52 rural 
hospitals, Mr. Speaker, and over a thousand hospital beds. They 
eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds between 2001 and 2006. 
The province lost nearly 1,200 health care workers. During the 
period, the province had lost 455 nurses and nearly 200 doctors, 
Mr. Speaker. And they presided over the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada. 
 
If I could . . . I know the Minister of Agriculture gave a great 
presentation this afternoon that I thoroughly enjoyed. And I do 
want to talk about the importance of agriculture in the province 
of Saskatchewan. As we all know, it is a major industry here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about some of the things that I 
know my colleague from Moosomin had touched on. And I 
thought it was an incredible number when he mentioned 300, 
over 300 food processors in the province of Saskatchewan that 
employ over 5,000 people. I think that’s an amazing 
accomplishment in the food sector, and how we have really 
grown the value-added processing here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that is important for growth and important 
for jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to talk about the successful manufacturing 
operations that are here in the province of Saskatchewan that a 
lot of people don’t talk about, and they really should, because 
this is a major industry in the . . . and something we should 
really very be proud of. I mean these companies are worldwide 
known, and I’m going to try and list a few, Mr. Speaker, 
because . . . And I know I’m going to leave some out because 
the list is long. 
 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

But you have Bourgault Industries right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a major manufacturer. Seed Hawk 
manufacturing, SeedMaster Manufacturing, Morris 
manufacturing. Degelman equipment, just north of the city of 
Regina. I was just north of the city the other day. I can’t believe 
their lot is full of equipment where they’ve even . . . Now 
they’re storing it across the highway; they’ve got so much. 
Their sales are so good. 
 
Honey Bee Manufacturing down in Climax, or down in 
Bracken . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Frontier. Frontier. In 
Frontier, the Honey family, down in Frontier. I had the privilege 
a few years ago, the whole SARM board actually went down 
there, walked through that whole plant with Greg Honey. And it 
was a great experience on the amount of employees they have 
there, the new technologies they’re bringing to the industry. 
 
But Brandt Industries. We just heard Brandt Industries is taking 
over, you know, another major company here in the province. 
But their farm manufacturing here, but also their industrial 
equipment side of it. Case IH in Saskatoon with the 
manufacturing that they do there. These are all thriving in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they employ 
thousands of people. 
 
I haven’t even got into the other sectors. We have Doepker 
Industries. We’ve got all kinds. We’ve got Schulte Industries. 
We’ve got Harmon Industries. 
 
The list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker, that we should all be very 
proud of. But they do not get the recognition that they very well 
deserve for employing people. But not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
doing business in the province of Saskatchewan, staying here in 
the province of Saskatchewan and employing Saskatchewan 
people, paying Saskatchewan taxes and delivering their product 
around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year, as you also know that we are funding 
172 million for crop insurance premiums and program delivery, 
Mr. Speaker. We are fully funding our business risk 
management programs with an investment of 264.1 million or a 
4 per cent increase.  
 
And I know in previous years, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP 
government, they never ever fully funded. They always said, 
well we’ll see if we have to or we’ll see if we have to. And they 
were always doing one-offs and wondering if they had to pay or 
contribute into it, but it was never part of their budget to say 
they’d be fully funding it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP planned to balance the budget from a few 
years ago and they never did it. A Finance critic said they could 
look at some of the initiatives around agriculture and look at 
some of the things they’ve done for municipalities. Which 
things, Mr. Speaker? Which things have they done both for 
agriculture and for municipalities in the province of 
Saskatchewan? I really would like to see that list and what 
they’ve done. 
 
I do now also want to talk, Mr. Speaker, if I can, about the sale 
of the grain cars. The corporation was established in 1979 to 
address the capacity crisis. The government purchased 1,000 
cars, 900 of which are still in service. Those cars are nearing the 

end of their service life, leaving us with two choices: either we 
plan to replace the fleet over the next 14 years at an estimated 
cost of $100 million; or we sell the cars while we still have 
some commercial value. There were very good reasons for the 
government to get into the grain business back in the 1970s, but 
times have changed, and we’re in a much different place, Mr. 
Speaker. It should be noted that maintaining the fleet does come 
at a cost. In 2014 we repainted 293 cars. We estimate painting 
the rest of the fleet would cost about $4.1 million. We will be 
giving Saskatchewan shortline railways the first opportunity to 
buy the cars which will ensure they will continue to service 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cars are being sold through a competitive 
request-for-offers process and the RFO [request for offers] 
submission deadline is May 12, 2017, with the sale expected to 
be concluded this summer under the oversight of a fairness 
adviser. The successful offers will provide the best overall 
value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is important for Saskatchewan farmers 
but also for the Saskatchewan shortlines. It gives them capacity. 
It gives them opportunity to move grain to markets, but it also 
gives the grain producers a chance to load producer cars if they 
so wish. But it also gives opportunity for other grain industries 
to come in and do business with farmers, and it really creates a 
competitive atmosphere for the farmers to move their grain to 
different companies or through different mechanisms. 
 
And we’re seeing that on the shortlines right now, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re seeing lentils being moved on shortline with brokers on 
shortlines. We’re seeing durum being moved. We’re seeing 
canola being moved. We’re seeing peas being moved. So we’re 
seeing all types of commodities being moved on shortlines 
through different brokers with farmers taking every opportunity 
to market their product around the world. 
 
So I think it’s important that we go down this road, but the most 
important thing to me, Mr. Speaker, on this one is the cars will 
be used by Saskatchewan farmers to move Saskatchewan grain. 
Under the previous leases they were leased to CP [Canadian 
Pacific] Rail. They were being used anywhere they could be in 
North America, wherever CP was using them and that’s the 
reality of what it was. But now they will be actually hauling 
grain or agricultural commodities for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I now, of course, want to touch on the Highways budget, Mr. 
Speaker, if I could. And I really do want to take this opportunity 
for thanking the Premier for giving me the honour to serve as 
the Minister of Highways. This is incredibly humbling of me to 
be in this position and something that I have thoroughly 
engaged myself in and enjoying at this point. This is of course 
as you know my very first budget this way, as Minister of 
Highways, and we invest in highways; we invest in safety and 
trade. 
 
I do also want to talk, Mr. Speaker, if I could . . . I’ve had the 
opportunity at the last couple of SARM conventions to talk to 
municipal leaders around the province on ways that we can do, 
finding new ways that we can fund our highway system and 
how we can fix our roads in rural Saskatchewan. And it is 
amazing, Mr. Speaker, of the opportunities that we have come 
to with meeting with our municipal leaders around the province 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

where we are looking at highways that they will partner with us 
and we can do things to fix up their roads. Because at the end of 
the day, Mr. Speaker, there is only one taxpayer. And how do 
we find the ways to fix our highway network that is in dire 
needs of repair? And when we have the highways we do, we 
have to find new ways to do things and new challenges to do it. 
 
So I do want to quote if I could, Mr. Speaker. As a result of the 
budget, last week . . . The president of the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association is Shantel Lipp and she summed it up 
well on budget day when she said this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Highways transportation is literally the artery that keeps 
this province going. Nothing moves in or out of this 
province unless it’s on roads, so it’s very important to have 
a highway infrastructure to have the ability to move our 
products to market.  
 

[20:45] 
 
So I think it’s important. And this year’s highway’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, is $1.1 billion, the second-largest highways budget in 
Saskatchewan’s history. To provide some context, during our 
10 budgets in our office while we were in government, our 
government has invested over $7.4 billion in highways and 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. In the last 10 years under the NDP, 
they spent 3.1 billion. 
 
We have increased investment over 139 per cent in highway 
infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan. This budget 
includes 500 million to the continued work on the Regina 
bypass, and 343 million for capital construction. We will see 
work on more than 900 kilometres of provincial highways 
improved, in addition to working on the bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are investing in major projects such as passing lanes on 
Highway No. 5 from Humboldt towards No. 2 Highway, 
overpasses at Martensville and Warman, Highway 7 twinning 
from Vanscoy to Delisle, Highway 16 twinning east of 
Saskatoon, Highway 39 twinning from Estevan to Bienfait, and 
planning for passing lanes on Highway No. 4 north of North 
Battleford and Highway 7 west of Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And northern Saskatchewan remains an area of importance to 
our government. To highlight the importance, we are 
committing more than 53 million to build, operate, and maintain 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan. This work 
includes improvements to Highway 102 north of the junction 
with Highway 915, and the replacement of several bridges on 
Highway 165. This year, we will repave about 300 kilometres 
of provincial highway system. This includes some of our 
busiest highways, like Highway 9 north of Carlyle, Highway 11 
near Lumsden, Highway 55 near Big River, Highway 12 near 
Blaine Lake, and Highway 21 near Glidden. 
 
Five hundred and forty kilometres of medium treatments 
include Highway 1 near Moose Jaw, Highway 1 near Grenfell, 
Highway 1 near Maple Creek, Highway 2 near Weyakwin, 
Highway 3 near Kinistino, Highway 6 south of Regina, 
Highway 11 near Osler, Highway 13 near Trossachs, and 
Highway 219 south of Saskatoon. 
 
And we are going to be doing some rural upgrades, Mr. 

Speaker, and these are new types of technology and new types 
of surfacing that we’re trying: Highway 4 south of Cadillac, 
Highway 51 near Kelfield, Highway 80 north of Esterhazy, and 
Highway 322 north of Silton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems . . . Now I do want to change my 
attention and I want to talk about the Regina bypass. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP have always tried to smear this project. In 
2015 the Government of Manitoba announced they were 
building four overpasses. This is in Manitoba in 2015. Four 
overpasses they were going to build in Manitoba, price 
expected to be $800 million. 
 
The Regina bypass project includes 12 overpasses, which the 
members opposite always seem to forget, in addition to 
40 kilometres of new four-lane highways, 55 kilometres of new 
service roads, and rebuilding of 20 kilometres of four-lane on 
Highway No. 1, along with the 12 overpasses — all of this for 
1.2 billion construction cost. We are getting a good deal, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP always use cost per kilometre on this 
project. That’s like taking the cost to build a new $200 million 
bridge and then dividing the cost by the kilometres paved and 
saying it was $100 million per kilometre of paving. This 
comparison is misleading. The interim leader knows better. He 
had a technical briefing on the project. He knows it. 
 
In her speech on budget day, the member from Nutana said, 
“. . . just imagine if the Sask Party had decided not to blow over 
$2 billion in waste . . .” And she was talking about the Regina 
bypass project. In response to this, I want to read in the record 
what are people are saying about the project. 
 
We’ve said on many occasions, we will continue saying, the 
bypass must be built and that the bypass must be built as soon 
as possible. That was the member from Athabasca. He went on 
to say: 
 

And it should be stated right at the front that one of the 
things that’s really important to this side of the Assembly 
is that it is important that people out there understand, 
when it comes to the Regina bypass, the NDP are in full 
support of having the bypass built . . . 

 
Another comment — he must have made that up — Dewdney 
Avenue, which cuts through a residential neighbourhood, is 
inundated with heavy-haul truck traffic: 
 

And it’s just a major safety issue that, really it’s my 
greatest concern that there’s going to be tragic 
circumstances if left unresolved . . . The bypass is an 
important long-term solution . . . and timelines and 
resources are important on that front. 

 
That was the interim leader who said that, Mr. Speaker. He 
knows how important the west section of the bypass is. His 
constituents know it, and they live it every day. He also stood in 
this place and petitioned the government to do something to 
address truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue. For over 80 times he 
stood and raised a petition on this issue. 
 
The interim leader also commented on the east side of the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

bypass project. And he said, I quote: 
 

. . . lives are being placed at risk on a daily basis in and 
around Regina is out at Emerald Park and White City as 
they connect on Highway No. 1. And of course the bypass 
is . . . an important piece there and proper connections to 
Highway 1 . . . I hear from so many families that are 
coming in for work or that are coming in for sports or that 
are going out at night for different activities, it’s a real 
threat out there right now. 

 
Of course bypasses are the long-term plan . . . We’re going 
to be looking for commitment to resources and the timely 
fulfillment of these bypasses. 

 
And I recognize the pressure you’d be facing from a host 
of different perspectives and certainly identify that the 
bypass is the long-term solution that needs timely 
fulfillment. 

 
I would like to read in the record a letter that the member of 
Athabasca read into record in committee in 2014. And at the 
time, he was urging the government to move on the project. The 
letter was from Carmen Sasyniuk. Mr. Speaker, I could go into 
the letter. I really would like to go into it but I think I’m getting 
close to the end of my time, but I’m getting kind of wound up. 
Should I read the letter? Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the letter: 
 

Every person who lives in Emerald Park, White City, 
Balgonie, Pilot Butte, Edenwold all have a child, a spouse, 
a parent, a sibling, a friend of whom they worry about 
when travelling this stretch of highway. As well as local 
traffic, out-of-area drivers who use the highway are also 
. . . [experiencing] concern, including my own family 
members from Yorkton who . . . [drive] to avoid Highway 
. . . 1 . . . whenever possible. 

 
As a resident of Emerald Park and mother of children ages 
14 and 12, my children learning to drive is troublesome to 
say the least. Some friends and neighbours already have 
children driving, and they all seem to say the same thing. 
The moment their child leaves home to make that left-hand 
turn on Highway No. 1 into Regina is gut wrenching. My 
neighbour made the comment that after her son would 
leave their home to go into Regina and she [would] 
followed shortly after, she was sick all the way to Great 
Plains Road until she arrived at the same left-hand turn on 
to the highway, praying he had safely crossed. One mother 
of a 15-year-old has even told me that her and her husband 
have thought about not letting their son not take his 
driver’s licence test until things improve on Highway 
No. 1. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was read by the then member from Athabasca 
in the House here, and now they stand up and run down the 
project, Mr. Speaker. No leadership. No credibility. The 
member from Athabasca admitted it on budget day. He said, 
“. . . this could be the largest overrun in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan when it comes to infrastructure work, 
Mr. Speaker. [Oh] I made that last part up . . .” This is typical 
NDP — talk, and a lot, but never delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what really brings me to the NDP economy. 

It really does. We built a framework that business can thrive in. 
That’s what we strive to do. The New Democrats competed 
with families and their business. And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to 
give a story, a family story, and it just burns. It bothers me to 
this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This one I’m not making up. In 1979, Mr. Speaker, my brother 
and I were looking at buying a farm and expanding our farming 
operation. We had a deal made with a neighbouring landowner. 
We were going that day to write him the cheque, and we went 
into his house and sat down. We were having a cup of coffee 
and he said, boys, I hate to inform you, but land bank called 
today and they made a better offer than you did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had to compete with the then NDP 
government, who owned land bank, to buy land with our own 
tax dollars. They were using my tax dollars to outbid me to buy 
a farm. To this day I’ve never forgiven the NDP party for that, 
for getting into the land bank or owning farm land they 
shouldn’t be. We as governments should not be in the business 
of owning land. That should be left to the private landowners. 
The farmers and ranchers know how to look after the property 
and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, but Karl Marx said we should. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Well, sorry. I’m not a Karl Marx fan 
either, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote talked about how government 
should be doing business. And she went back to the old NDP 
playbook of government competing with business and she said, 
“And I hope that we can expand our Crowns.” And she said, 
“That’s how you diversify our economy.” She forgets how it 
was in the old days, Mr. Speaker. She talked about SaskTel 
doing business in France, and SaskEnergy doing business in 
Nova Scotia, and she was upset that SaskTel had to sell 
Navigata. I don’t want to get into it, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be here all 
night. The NDP lost $90 million on that deal.  
 
They lost millions on all kinds of schemes competing with other 
businesses, Mr. Speaker. They lost millions in Guyana trying to 
start a power company. They lost 17 million on Coachman 
Insurance, an attempted Ontario insurance company. Mr. 
Speaker, this wasn’t even money lost in our own province; this 
was lost in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. It goes on. I have 
pages of it, the same as Minister of Ag. We had pages of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude with this, I really do, that we 
focus on core services. I believe that we are a very fiscal 
responsible government. I think this is a very fiscal responsible 
budget. Mr. Speaker, we will have a balanced budget within 
three years. Mr. Speaker, I want to end with this: that I am in 
favour of the minister’s finance budget. I will be supporting his 
motion. I will not be supporting the amendment by the member 
opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I get into my 
speech here tonight, I’d like to thank a few people from home: 
my wife and my family and the members, the voters in our 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

constituency. My wife has been there for many years helping 
me, backing me up on the farm over the years that I’ve been 
active in municipal politics and politics in general. Now I’m 
here today. My son and daughter, one is in Lethbridge and one 
lives outside of Grand Coulee here of Regina. My son and 
daughter-in-law just transferred from Pelican Narrows to just 
outside of Regina here to White City. I thank them for their 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to stand in support of the budget. 
It’s a budget we can be proud of and makes me glad to be a 
member of this government, and this caucus has shown clearly 
that we are meeting the challenges with the 2017-2018 budget. 
 
The job of every Member of the Legislative Assembly is to help 
keep Saskatchewan moving forward, shaping a better province 
for today, tomorrow, and the future. This is a job we all take 
seriously, and there’s no question we are facing difficult times 
due to sustained lower resource prices. Mr. Speaker, this has 
required us to make some difficult decisions. 
 
These difficult decisions are what was needed to meet the 
changes we face, and I believe the end result will be what is 
needed to bring the budget to a balance over the course of the 
next three years, unlike our neighbours to the west who are 
facing similar financial challenges due to resource prices. 
Alberta has not put any restraints on their spending; that will 
leave Albertans and their children a debt that will cost them 
dearly in the future. Our budget shows that we have pulled in 
our reins on our spending while trying to keep as much 
financial strain off the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The most important part of any budget is to keep revenues and 
expenditures manageable. With the resource revenues declining 
over the last couple of years, our government was faced with 
economic and budgetary challenges in the 2017-2018 budget. 
Mr. Speaker, the revenues from natural resources are down by 
about $1 billion. The budget commits to moving away from 
relying on resource revenues and continue building a solid 
foundation during these challenging times. Our government will 
continue to do that and keep the best interest of the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is dedicated to meeting the 
challenges before us: controlling and reducing spending, 
modernizing the tax base, and ensuring our economy remains 
strong. As government, we had to look at every area of service 
delivery and to ensure the resources are being used in the most 
effective and efficient manner. Anyone who has managed a 
household budget knows that when money stops coming in, you 
need to stop spending and re-evaluate your budget. That is what 
we are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government we took the time to listen to the 
people of the province and we have acted, honouring our 
commitments we made to those who voted for us. Under the 
financial strains, our government made the tough decisions — 
decisions that were not easy and ones that nobody takes lightly. 
We hope the people are able to understand the reasons and the 
purpose behind these decisions. Perhaps they will appreciate in 
the long term the good it will be. The good will be for the whole 

province as we alternate to a new tax base. Continued 
investments in our province’s future, through strategic 
infrastructure and keeping the deficit and debt in control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the importance of 
agriculture in our economy by continuing to invest in programs, 
services to continue to drive sustainable growth in support of 
our farmers and ranchers within the province. In the Southwest, 
agriculture plays a large part of everyday life. The work on the 
farm or the ranch differs throughout the year with each season, 
bringing rewards. Spring is a busy time of the year. The smell 
of the newly worked up soil when planting a crop, or the sight 
of the newborn calves a sign of promise. In the fall, you reap 
the rewards of your long hours of toil. Through the changes in 
the weather or the highs and lows of the price adversities, 
producers always emerge stronger than before. They bind 
together and support each other and display Canadian pride that 
has sustained farmers and ranchers for so many centuries. 
 
On our modern farms, youth are more knowledgeable and 
achieving things their forefathers never thought possible. 
Agriculture is a foundation of our province, and our 
government wants to make sure we are providing the right 
services in the right locations using the best delivery options 
possible. We are asking producers and industry how we can 
better service them and how we can ensure activities remain 
relevant and valuable. 
 
With the industry forever evolving, our extension activities 
need to be driving sustainable growth and ensuring our 
producers stay competitive in the global market. Agriculture 
research will continue to be supported, with investment of 
26.8 million being funded by the province, supporting farmers 
and ranchers to continue to develop and produce self-sufficient, 
high-valued operations. Our government wants to ensure that 
our next generation is in a good position to build their future 
right here at home. 
 
Over the last decade, Saskatchewan’s agriculture exports grew 
by 186 per cent. Last year’s ag exports were the second largest 
on record, with total sales of 14 billion to 147 countries in all. 
Thirteen countries were recipients of over 200 million in 
Saskatchewan’s ag food exports, making Saskatchewan’s 
agriculture the most diversified market of any sector in 
Canada’s economy. We can be proud of the work our producers 
do every day. Not only does their hard work benefit our 
province but benefits our nation and we are making a better 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know how near and dear health care is to 
our hearts. Saskatchewan has long been known in Canada as a 
pioneer in the health care field. We announced earlier this year 
that the current 12 health regions would be consolidated into a 
single provincial health authority. The new provincial 
governance health board will be responsible for health services 
delivered for the entire province, reporting to the Minister of 
Health. The new health board will change the structure of the 
health care system roles and responsibilities, making the health 
care system more effective and efficient. 
 
This transition will ensure better coordination in health services 
across the province while reducing the duplication of 
administration costs. We continue to remain as committed to 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

providing a high-quality health care to the people of 
Saskatchewan as we did on the first day we formed 
government. Mr. Speaker, the priority is to strengthen and 
improve the way health care is administrated in an effective 
manner, meeting the health needs at a local level. I would like 
to point out that this government has been a leader in the field 
of health care since we took office in 2007. In addition, 
Saskatchewan has the shortest surgical wait times. 
 
This leadership has been shown not only to benefit urban care 
centres, but also those in rural and remote areas of the province. 
Mr. Speaker, we have made significant improvements towards 
creating facilities, providing innovative services, and recruiting 
health care professionals throughout the rural and remote areas 
of this province. Our government has continued to help increase 
the physicians that practice in our province over the last 
10 years. An increase of more than 750 doctors and over 3,000 
more nurses have come to work in Saskatchewan. Our 
government will continue to recruit and retain doctors and 
nurses to ensure that a high level of care continues to be given 
to the people in this province. 
 
The exact opposite happened when the NDP was in 
government. Saskatchewan had the worst doctor and nurse 
retention rate in Canada. From 2001 to 2006, 173 doctors and 
450 nurses left the province. In addition, they also closed 52 
hospitals during their time in term. It is obvious our plan has 
and will continue to move Saskatchewan forward while the 
NDP’s record and retention will only remove our province 
back. Let’s never go back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2017-2018 budget continued to prove that this 
government is committed to investing in health care across the 
province, investing 5.2 billion in infrastructure and core health 
care services. We have made significant improvements towards 
creating health care facilities, providing innovative services, 
and recruiting health care professionals across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2017-2018 budget commits to building a solid 
foundation during these challenging times. We will continue to 
look after keeping the best interest of the people in 
Saskatchewan in mind in everything we do while other 
jurisdictions simply download the current fiscal challenges to 
the future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, modernizing the tax base will secure a more stable 
economy, ensuring Saskatchewan’s taxes remain fair and 
competitive. Our government has taken into consideration the 
growth rate of our province by reducing income taxes, which 
we will realize will be key for the strong economy. This will 
attract new economic activities which in turn will create new 
jobs and investments throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, our 
government is ensuring that taxes remain fair and competitive at 
every income level. The switch to a greater reliance on 
compensation taxes will ensure that our tax system is fair for 
decades to come. 
 
Over the next couple of years the reduction in personal income 
tax reductions will continue growing and will make 
Saskatchewan one of the most competitive jurisdictions to both 
earning a living and invested. Since 2007 there’s been nearly 
6 billion in tax reductions for families, individuals, businesses, 
and farmers. We have among the lowest in personal and 

business tax burdens in Canada. This contrasts with an NDP . . . 
While in government, they raised the taxes 21 times during their 
16 years in power, including raising the PST four times and the 
gas tax twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even with the increases, the PST to 6 per cent, 
Saskatchewan still has the lowest provincial sales tax rate in 
Canada among provinces that have PST. Saskatchewan people 
will also pay among the lowest income tax in Canada. Because 
of reduction, this . . . reductions in this budget and the planned 
reductions we come to balance everyone at every level in 
income. We will be paying less income tax. Mr. Speaker, that 
means people will see more money on their paycheques. 
 
Saskatchewan is leading in Canada in job growth, and with our 
province’s low taxes and tax incentives, we will continue to 
attract new investments and jobs to our province. 
 
Our government has refused to plan to implement a federal 
government-imposed carbon tax. Saskatchewan’s economy 
would be hit hard if this tax like this was imposed on the people 
of the province. Saskatchewan would be the only province in 
Canada with no carbon tax. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind 
everyone that the NDP was in favour of the carbon tax that 
would have put more hardship on the people in this 
province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s not happening? 
Okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the resources are being 
used in the most effective and efficient manner. This includes 
investing in our kids. As government, we have demonstrated 
that we are not about closing down schools. In fact, since being 
in government, we have built 40 brand new schools. This is in 
clear contrast to when the NDP were in power. Between 2000 
and 2007 the NDP shut down 176 schools when in government. 
This left 400 teachers without jobs, many of which had to leave 
the province to find work. 
 
A clear sign that things are going well in the province, in 
population’s growth, Saskatchewan’s population has grown by 
130,000 people since 2006. Our government will continue to 
invest in education and schools to ensure that we are prepared 
for future growth. We continue to promote growth by making 
record investments of every kind. Mr. Speaker, we continue to 
make significant investments in the quality of education 
provided in the province, ensuring that the resources that have 
been provided are effectively achieving the right outcomes for 
our students. Our government believes in investing in the 
future. Even with some of our constraints we have in this 
budget, there will be 21 new schools opening this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that we have chosen to continue 
improving our infrastructure. In doing this we are helping 
improve the quality of care in our communities across the 
province and benefiting the people that we serve. Investing in 
infrastructure that we drive on will help to make it safe for 
travel and supporting the growth of our economy. 
 
New infrastructure of schools, ensuring the facilities housing 
education, pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 continues, 
continues as a whole house to grow . . . will create tremendous 
benefits down the road. Building and adding on to infrastructure 
of our hospitals to help address over-capacity pressures and 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

emergency department wait times. Mr. Speaker, it is clear our 
government is continuing to take care of the people in 
Saskatchewan with maintaining the needs, health care, 
infrastructure of our communities that we all depend on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year we continue to support growth of child 
care spaces across the province. Over the last 10 years we have 
added 6,500 spaces. We continue to invest in our youth, our 
future, which we feel is a very worthy investment. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Our government has made choices that will define our future. 
Instead of putting a freeze on capital spending and shocking the 
economy, we will continue to move forward and keep up the 
maintenance of our aging infrastructure, lowering income tax 
for the people of our province, and keeping the carbon tax at 
bay. Our government will also continue to ensure that important 
government programs and services remain affordable and 
sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this budget. I am proud of our 
decisions that we made. This budget represents our 
government’s care for the people of Saskatchewan. We are 
going to continue moving forward and return to a budget to be 
balanced, and I support the 2017-2018 budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as all of our colleagues have done, before I get into my 
budget comments I want to thank a few people in my life that 
allow me to do the job we do. First and foremost is my wife, 
Larissa. We have taken the Saskatchewan government’s growth 
plan very seriously so we’ve added our third child here on 
January 2nd. So we have three children: Nickson, who is three 
and a half; Claire, who is 19 months; and Jameson, who’s two 
months. And they’d better be in bed so they better not be 
watching dad tonight on TV. So goodnight. I love you. 
 
My wife, Larissa, who is at home right now on maternity leave, 
and she is one of the most amazing people I know. She is a 
perfect mother to our three children and supports us, the job I 
do here very well. She deals with me on a day-to-day basis 
which should give her sainthood almost automatically, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I just want to say thank you very much for 
all you do, Larissa. You make our family work and you allow 
me to do a job in this House, so thank you very much. I love 
you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, colleagues. 
 
Moving on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of people within 
our constituency that make the good work of the people of 
Walsh Acres, answer the calls, and that’s Heather 
Howell-Shiplack is our constituency assistant in Walsh Acres. 
And she’s been with us since the beginning. She does such a 
good job and she works hard and she handles the calls 
professionally. And she makes sure that we get answers for our 
constituents when they’re calling into the office and she’s, like 
all of our colleagues have said, kind of the first line when 
people come in and they call our office. I’m very fortunate to 
have her. She does a wonderful job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

I have a great constituency association. We went through a 
campaign not too long ago and I have a lot of people that helped 
out in the campaign and volunteers, a lot to name, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I want to say thank you to my constituency 
association and our campaign team in Walsh Acres. They did a 
great job and they allow me to have the honour to rise in this 
Assembly and talk to budgets and talk to throne speeches, and 
outside of this Assembly to bring forward the concerns of the 
people of Walsh Acres in our caucus. And it’s a responsibility I 
don’t take lightly, and it’s something I think all must do the best 
job that we can to represent our constituents. And I think we 
have that part of our job, which is the most important part, is to 
lobby for the people that we represent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there continues to be a divergence 
between the renewal we see in the economy and what we’re 
experiencing in government. The economy is getting stronger. 
We know that, not just anecdotally but statistically. But 
revenues in government are still weak and by now you’re 
probably familiar with some of those numbers. This fiscal year 
non-renewable resources are down about $1.2 billion from 2014 
levels. That’s $1.2 billion on a $14.4 billion budget, a drop of 
about 8 per cent. Well that’s what we’re facing today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Oil has fallen back below $500 a barrel West 
Texas Intermediate, and most experts say the ceiling for that 
increase is $60 a barrel. That’s when American shale producers 
will get busy and bring on more supply. We’re not going to see 
$100 oil very soon. And making matters worse, uranium and 
potash prices are near record lows and the recovery in those 
markets will be prolonged. 
 
Resource revenues are lower and so is tax revenues for 
government. This fiscal year tax revenue has dropped 
$400 million from what we forecast in our budget. Resource 
revenues . . . On expenditure side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
are pressures in health care, social services, and corrections, in 
part because of our growing population. So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re getting hit at both ends, revenues and 
expenditures. Over time these pressures will erode our ability to 
provide the services that support quality of life in our province. 
It will put in peril the Saskatchewan advantage we’ve all 
worked so hard to create together. 
 
We have to take action on a deficit today, not tomorrow, not at 
some undetermined point in the future. Because we’ve seen 
other governments in Canada kick the can down the road, 
postpone the hard decisions that must be made, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, perhaps in the belief that somehow deficit will 
magically take care of themselves. But budgets don’t balance 
themselves. It will take a determined, disciplined effort on the 
part of everyone in government at all levels of government to 
deal with these very real challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot about the budget from both sides 
of the House but we often forget to talk about what the 2017-18 
budget means for the big picture for our province. And by big 
picture, I mean what this budget means for future generations. 
 
Before I get into that, I want to acknowledge the tough 
decisions that were made, and that every person who has seen a 
pay cut or a position removed, those are decisions we don’t take 
lightly but we need to take those decisions in order to ensure 
our province stays strong for future generations. Further, the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

unprecedented and sustained low energy prices we have seen 
have made an impact. We’ve seen a shortfall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my emphasis however is about future generations. 
Admittedly I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about the future 
lately and thinking about my kids’ future, having just added 
another little one in January. Although my three kids are at 
home right now, and I’m sure the economy is the furthest thing 
on their minds, we need to think about them and all of our 
children with every policy we make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the problem with the NDP. They seem not 
to care about the future. Everything they say is about now and 
everything they demand has no way to be paid for. On this side 
of the House, we know we need to plan to get back to balanced 
budgets. The reason: that every dollar we go in debt today is a 
dollar that my kids will have to pay back tomorrow. It’s a dollar 
that future generations won’t have to pay for the services they 
and we will all depend on. I for one am willing to make tough 
decisions today to make sure that my kids have the future they 
deserve tomorrow. 
 
The 2017-18 budget continues to improve the Saskatchewan 
advantage for businesses, job creation, and restrained spending 
— things that we need for future generations to succeed. 
Although members opposite can’t understand that their reckless 
spending hinders future generations, I’d like to emphasize some 
of the encouraging economic indicators that demonstrate that 
our policies are moving the province forward and in the right 
direction. 
 
This past weekend, we’ve seen two major private sector 
investments in the province. We see that Brandt Industries is 
purchasing Hitachi facility in Saskatoon — which some 
Saskatoon members, you would think, would be happy about — 
a facility that will produce some of the technology needed to 
move our economy forward. 
 
We see Grain Millers announced a $100 million project 
investment in Yorkton, dollars that will pay dividends in the 
community for generations to come by making sure there are 
good-paying jobs and high-quality agricultural services for local 
farmers to ship their grains globally. 
 
There are other key indicators that speak to where the economy 
is going in the right direction. We’ve seen record growth in 
manufacturing sales. They rose by 5.4 per cent between 
November 2016 and December 2016. Nationally, sales were up 
2.3 per cent on a year-over-year basis. Sales were up 1.9 per 
cent, seasonally adjusted, in Saskatchewan — the second 
highest among all provinces and well ahead of the 4.1 per cent 
posted nationally. In December, manufacturing sales totalled 
1.3 billion. Major gains on an annual basis were recorded year 
over year for machinery manufacturing; wood products also, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is good news and shows although 
revenues are feeling the impact of low energy prices, the 
economy is moving in the right direction. 
 
Another key indicator is job growth. We saw that in February 
2017, 8,000 jobs were created in Saskatchewan, up 1.4 per cent, 
the highest growth rate in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
More people were employed in Saskatchewan in February than 
ever before, with 563,600 people working in our province. 

Major year-over-year gains were reported: for trade, up 
700,000; professionals — scientific and technical services, up 
4,800; educational services, up 4,500; and manufacturing, up 
3,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, off-reserve Aboriginal employment was up 4,400 
for eight consecutive months of year-over-year increases. 
Although there are a lot of numbers there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the thing that I will remember is that people are working. 
 
I’d like to now discuss some of the key aspects of our budget, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and first and foremost, I think we should 
talk about the wind-down of STC. This is one of the toughest 
choices we’ve made in our budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
like I said earlier, we don’t take these decisions lightly. We 
realize that there are going to be 224 staff out of work, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we know that that’s going to affect them 
and their families. 
 
And these are decisions that were tough, and I think both sides 
of the House understand these tough decisions are made. I think 
the member from Saskatoon Centre, who was in government for 
a few years, he made a quote that I agree with, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. When the NDP cut 500 jobs, a large number of those 
were environment. The then-minister from Environment, the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, said: “Now, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately as a result of this need to reduce expenditures, we 
also had to reduce staff and this was not an easy decision to 
make.” 
 
I agree with the member from Saskatoon Centre. He goes on: 
“But in order to govern effectively, we had to have responsible 
finances and not to back down from these difficult choices [we 
made].” Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give him credit. They made 
some very tough choices when they were in government, and 
the member from Saskatoon Centre understands those tough 
choices that they had. 
 
I think now we’re going through some of these same tough 
choices. And we understand that they had to make tough 
choices and we’re going to have to make these decisions to 
ensure that we have strength going forward and strength for 
future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did some tax changes in this budget, and I 
want to talk about a few of those tax changes. Tax changes 
make up the most visible part of this budget. The provincial 
sales tax rate is being raised by one point, from 5 to 6 per cent, 
and a number of PST exemptions are being eliminated to meet 
the current financial challenge. 
 
Although everyone notices this, the reality is that this is part of 
a major restructuring of Saskatchewan’s tax system. We will 
see a personal corporate income tax, personal income tax 
reduction by half a per cent point on each bracket effective July 
1st, 2015 and by another half a point effective July 1st, 2019. 
Likewise the corporate income tax rate will be reduced by half a 
point in 2017 and by a further half point in 2019. When fully 
implemented, Saskatchewan will have the lowest corporate tax 
rate and the lowest tax rate on manufacturing and processing in 
the country, giving Saskatchewan a tremendous advantage to 
attract new business investment and jobs to our province. This 
will make taxes more fair for all people in Saskatchewan and 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

stabilize the tax base for future generations. 
 
Getting back to balance is where we’re headed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. A deficit of 685 million is forecasted for this year, a 
smaller shortfall of 304 million is projected for 2018-19, 
followed by a 50 million surplus in 2019-20, and a sum of 
183 million surplus in ’20-21. And I think another thing to note 
is in this budget there’s a $300 million contingency fund, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that’s to deal with pressures in budgets 
that come up either in health care or social services or 
corrections. And I think that’s some prudent budgeting done 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I think is a very good 
change that we’ve made to ensure that we account for some of 
the pressures that growing provinces face. When your 
population grows, there’s going to be some more pressures on 
health care and social services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture’s budget for 2017-18 is 
388.6 million, continues to support Saskatchewan’s strong 
agriculture industry. As we all recognize, agriculture is one of 
the backbones of our province. 
 
The 2017-18 budget continues to invest in post-secondary 
education. That’s something I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I am going to do something I didn’t think I’d ever 
do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m going to quote Joe Biden. So, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Mr. Biden said when he was VP 
[vice-president], “Don’t tell me what you value. Show me your 
budget, and I will tell you what you value.” 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that holds true for our budget. 
Seventy-five cents of every dollar goes into health care, 
education, and social services — 75 cents of every dollar. 
That’s what we value on this side. You can see that by our 
investments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you put that much 
money into three segments of your operations, people know that 
although there are some restraint measures in this budget, we 
value those three things above all else. So when you look at our 
budget, you can see what we value, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Central Services . . . And this affects 
one of our . . . the Crown jewel of our legislation and 
legislature, Wascana Centre Authority. Government Services 
will take on responsibility for Wascana Centre as part of the 
’17-18 provincial budget. The change will see a streamlined 
approach to operations and investments in the park and will 
bring stability to Wascana Centre’s funding. 
 
An independent review in 2011 . . . And I hope the members 
opposite listen to this from Regina. An independent review in 
2011 commissioned by the centre’s partners, the city of Regina, 
the University of Regina, and the province, highlighted issues 
with an unsustainable funding model and an infrastructure 
deficit, which they should know a lot about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s what they kind of do. The report recommended 
the province assume control of the park. The Wascana Centre 
partners will continue to have input for decisions, and the 
committee structure is part of the Provincial Capital 
Commission.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s something we’ve heard loud 

and clear, is everyone values Wascana Centre Authority, and 
having it roll into the Provincial Capital Commission gives it 
more ability to have a more stable funding structure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And also there is an infrastructure deficit in 
Wascana Centre, and the Provincial Capital Commission is able 
to deal with that infrastructure deficit more capably. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in education, the Government of 
Saskatchewan today released the final report from the advisory 
panel on education governance renewal. The government is 
accepting the findings in the report including keeping elected 
boards — something we heard a lot about and we heard the 
people talk and they wanted to keep their elected school boards; 
that’s in the budget — no major school division boundary 
changes, keeping the focus on the education sector strategy 
plan, making legislative changes to clarify roles within the 
sector and create efficiencies, and improving engagement with 
First Nations and Métis, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan’s 28 school divisions will receive $1.86 billion in 
school operating funding which includes revenues collected 
from the education property tax. This is down 22 million from 
2016-17 and represents a 1.2 per cent reduction year over year. 
Overall the 2017-18 budget provides 2.02 billion for education, 
a 6.7 per cent decrease in funding compared to last year. Much 
of the decrease — now, important — much of the decrease is 
due to 262 million reduction in funds. And why were those 
funds . . . Why is there a reduction of those funds? The 
construction of the 18 new schools in Regina, Saskatoon, 
Warman, and Martensville which are scheduled for completion 
and to open in 2017, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And some of the members opposite and even some of the new 
ones have caught on to this fearmongering jargon that the NDP 
continue to use since the beginning of time. They did it when, 
last budget when they said, oh you’re not going to fund all the 
teachers’ contracts so teachers aren’t going to get paid. False. 
Never happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now they’re trying to 
say, oh you’ve built these 18 schools but you’re not going to 
have desks or teachers in them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, only an 
NDP MLA or one of their followers would believe that 
someone would build a school and then not staff it. Like I don’t 
know . . . And first of all, I don’t even understand how they can 
talk about building schools because they never built any. So 
how would they even know what the staffing requirements 
would be, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So when . . . I take their advice with a little grain of salt when 
they talk about building infrastructure and you’re not going to 
staff education and you’re not going to staff schools, when they 
never built a thing in 16 years. If I want advice from them, I’ll 
go and ask them how to close schools because they closed 176 
schools. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think sometimes they need to throttle 
back the hyperbole. And I don’t know if they’ve realized it but I 
think the fearmongering thing isn’t working really well. I think 
that’s not really going over with the public over the last couple 
elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think the one thing that we have done here, and we’ve said 
it time and time again, is that this budget is a plan. It’s a plan to 
get that back to balance. It’s a plan to make sure that this 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

province doesn’t go into debt further, like our neighbours to the 
west. 
 
And I’m very excited. At some point in time, I don’t know 
when it’s going to be, probably after their leadership race, but 
I’m very excited to see when they come up with a plan, when 
they actually come up with ideas on what they’re going to do. 
Because I know their last plan, and I have it in here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is . . . Their last plan, when they . . . They had a plan. 
It has to be their campaign platform because that’s the last time 
they had an idea. So when you look at their campaign platform 
they have 17, 17 promises that they never even costed for a 
billion dollars. So that’s the last time they’ve had a plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So we still have to go with the plan they had 
ran on the campaign until they come up with something new. 
 
Hopefully the member from Lakeview gets her leadership 
website up so she can show us her plan, what direction she’s 
going to take the province in, because she’s enjoying heckling 
from her seat, but I’ve never heard her come up with an idea. 
But I’m very, very excited to see what her leadership campaign, 
when she rolls it out, what’s that going to look like, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because I think she’s gearing up. I think she’s gearing 
up, and it’s going to be interesting. The member from 
Meewasin has a little bit of a head start and some more name 
recognition, but I think she could probably catch him, I think, if 
she gets out early enough here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now going back to the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
running a little bit short on time but I have a few people that 
talked about our budget. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Jack Mintz, 
he probably knows more about economics than, I’m guessing, 
than their caucus. But I’d say that a quote from Jack Mintz is, 
“Saskatchewan’s budget is a dream for fiscally prudent voters: 
it keeps spending down, starts balancing the books, and shifts 
taxation to less distortionary revenue sources,” which I think is 
a good thing. 
 
That’s another thing that they called for over there. At some 
point in time they called for, we wanted to diversify the 
economy. We wanted to rely less on oil. So we made some tax 
changes to be less reliant on oil, less reliant on potash, have a 
more reliable revenue stream. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’d 
think they’d appreciate that. Even the Leap Manifesto member 
over there from Nutana, you’d think . . . If the government’s 
moving away from resource revenue, which she can’t stand, 
you’d think, hey, I would think she should appreciate that 
because she doesn’t want any extraction anymore, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And unfortunately my time is running short, but there’s a few 
things . . . One thing that the member from Riversdale says — 
and you might find this shocking, but the member from 
Riversdale and I are probably never going to agree on anything, 
even the colour of the sky — but she said, she said, how you 
look after your most vulnerable and your youngest, and she 
used a nice quote, and how you look after your youngest, your 
most vulnerable, that’s how you should be judged as a 
government. So just a quick little thing on how they looked 
after the youngest — closed 176 schools. Wow, you must really 
care about the young people in our province. 
 
From 2000 to 2007, the numbers of teachers dropped 400. So 

they actually fired the people that are supposed to look after our 
youngest, our next generation, which they chased out of the 
province anyway so they didn’t care. They underfunded K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] education leading to significant 
education property tax increases and tax revolts. 
 
In 16 years, and this is their child care rant, in 16 years those 
members opposite created 2,856 child care spaces. You should 
be embarrassed of that record. And you . . . they chirp us on this 
side for creating over 10,000 and they did 2,856. You should be 
ashamed of yourselves for not giving people a chance to have 
good child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The NDP cut nearly 500 million out of the municipal revenue 
sharing. And so you look after your most vulnerable. How did 
they look after the seniors in our province? Saskatchewan lost 
450 nurses, 173 doctors from 2001 to 2006, longest wait times 
in Canada, closed 52 hospitals, closed 1,200 long-term care 
beds. And this kills me, because they stand hand over chest and 
talk about how much they care for seniors, and they didn’t raise 
the seniors’ income plan once. That’s embarrassing for your 
record and embarrassing for your government. 
 
I’ll be supporting this government’s budget. I will not be 
supporting the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’ll be 
supporting this government because they have a plan for the 
future. And I’ll be proud to stand up and talk about this 
government’s budget with my kid, going down the road, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise and speak to this budget. Unfortunately there’s 
absolutely zero honour in this budget or in the members 
opposite. But I’ll get into that a little bit more after I first take 
the opportunity to thank the people who have elected me, 
people who I’m representing in Regina Douglas Park, giving 
me the opportunity to be here and the honour to be here, as well 
as the members of my family who have been so supportive. 
 
My parents, I have to take the opportunity to thank my parents 
who’ve been nothing but supportive to me. And my partner as 
well who puts up with my crazy schedule and often our times of 
moving in and out of . . . Or going to public events and having 
to have a lot of conversations about important issues. But 
sometimes it’s a bit of a lot for my partner to handle, so I want 
to thank him as well too. 
 
But I don’t want to take . . . Oh, I also should take one moment 
also to thank my constituency assistant, Nathaniel, who works 
really hard every single day. He’s actually at a town hall 
meeting where there’s quite a few community members tonight 
at the Artesian who are quite upset over this budget. And it 
seems like we’re in crazy land when we’re in the House, or 
we’re in some sort of vacuum where nothing’s wrong and 
there’s nothing to see here. But we don’t actually operate in a 
vacuum. And there’s actually a lot of people who are rising up 
to speak their piece, their anger about the terrible budget that we 
have in front of us, Mr. Speaker, and tonight is no exception. So 
I want to thank Nathaniel for being there this evening to hear 
what the people are saying. 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Now I know this sounds crazy, and I want my colleagues to 
stop me if they heard any of this during the election, which was 
less than 12 months ago, or even giving them a pass if they 
heard any of this during the Meewasin by-election, which was 
less than a month ago. Now PST up 1 per cent; removal of 
many PST exemptions including children’s clothes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — children’s clothes which includes baby bibs, baby 
blankets, children’s clothing and footwear, really, really 
frivolous things apparently, Mr. Deputy Speaker — those are 
the real extras in life apparently; diapers, cloth and disposable; 
jackets; pyjamas; underwear, that’s where we’re putting the 
burden of this government’s failings on. In addition they’re 
going to expand the PST to cover restaurants, snacks, and 
construction. 
 
Now I’ve heard a lot, and some of the members opposite seem 
to say that they haven’t heard anybody speaking up against this 
budget and haven’t heard anything. Well I think a lot of 
members on this side could speak about quite a few 
conversations we’ve had, and it’s only been a few days, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And people are still sort of reeling and are still 
kind of learning about how this budget is going to have serious 
impacts for a lot of people. 
 
But I was in a restaurant on Friday night in Regina, downtown 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there’s a lot of local business 
owners who are incredibly upset over the multiple ways they’re 
being hit by this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this local 
restaurant owner was particularly upset and feeling particularly 
devastated by the impact, and that this . . . Restaurants operate 
on a low cost recovery model and they don’t have a whole lot of 
profit margin to work with. So when we’re talking about 
expanding PST exemptions and increasing the PST, it can have 
a real impact on things like local restaurants, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And we’re talking about Saskatchewan people. Lots of them are 
my generation, starting new businesses, growing our local 
economy, because it’s businesses like these that grow our local 
economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are the ones that employ 
many people and they are what make our community great, 
frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they’re the ones that are 
apparently going to have to carry the burden for this 
government’s failings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s absolutely 
ridiculous. 
 
And I wanted to go into this a little bit because the member 
from Walsh Acres was talking a little bit about education 
funding and seemed to not completely have all of his facts 
straight. 
 
Now this budget is also including a cut to education funding. 
It’s actually a fairly major cut, not just to post-secondary but 
also to K to 12, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the weird thing is that 
the education property tax is also going up. So in Regina, the 
education property tax is going up 10.5 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but they’re changing the rules so none of that money is 
going to go to education. It’s all going into the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund], Mr. Deputy Speaker. So like I said, even 
though education property tax is going up, education is actually 
experiencing a reduction. And the member from Walsh Acres 
seemed to not totally have his facts straight in that regard, so 
I’m going to provide him a little bit of a lesson here. 

Now this is a Government of Saskatchewan document that is 
talking about the school division fiscal year and the difference 
in funding for each school division in our province. Now I am 
seeing a whole lot of minus signs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
because every single school division in this province is 
receiving a reduction in funding. So for the member from 
Walsh Acres benefit, I’ll go specifically to Regina’s. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Regina Catholic is going to have a decrease in funding of 1 per 
cent. Regina Public is going to have a decrease in funding of 
2.3 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s massive for our 
education sector. That’s massive for school divisions who have 
worked hard to build efficiencies within their own systems to 
save and to make sure that they’re not doing anything that will 
impact student learning, that will impact student success. But 
these cuts are so big that we’re going to end up seeing larger 
classroom sizes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the ridiculous thing, the thing that . . . Well it’s not the 
thing that frustrates me the most about members opposite 
because there’s too many things to count right now. But I don’t 
know how many times we’ve heard about the new schools 
opening up since the budget because it’s what they’re using as 
one of their good news stories because there’s so many bad 
news stories right now frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But when you see a reduction in funding to a school division, 
I’m not too sure how they’re supposed to hire more teachers 
with less money than they already have, how they’re supposed 
to pay for more furniture with less money than they have, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I’m not too sure what sort of math the 
member from Walsh Acres is doing in his mind, but it just 
doesn’t make any sense to me. 
 
Just looking at some of the other school divisions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re talking about an 8 per cent reduction in funding 
for Chinook School Division; for Christ the Teacher, 4.9 per 
cent; for Creighton, 4.7 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
could go all down the line here because there’s a lot of 
members on the other side who represent these areas, and I’m 
not too sure what they’re going to tell their constituents when 
their school divisions find out how much money they won’t be 
getting this year, as opposed to last year. 
 
And it’s real rich for a government to increase funding to a 
property tax called the education property tax but not actually 
provide that corresponding increase into education. That money 
is going to flow into the GRF, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then 
we’re not going to be able to trace it. And that’s what’s 
frustrating, one of quite a few things frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that are frustrating about this. 
 
Another thing that I think members opposite seem to not fully 
understand are the massive changes that are going to happen 
with . . . into The Education Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 
think the member from Walsh Acres had just said in his speech 
that they were talking about perhaps amalgamating school 
divisions. They listened to the people, and they’ve decided that 
they’re going to keep their locally elected school boards 
because they listened to the people. People really wanted to 
keep their locally elected school boards so that they weren’t 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

going to make any changes to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I think, and I don’t . . . I want to have the benefit of the 
doubt to those backbenchers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 
that they didn’t read the fine print. I’m hoping that they’re not 
hoping that their constituents won’t read the fine print of this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I know quite a few of the members on this side of the 
House went into communities that were very, very upset over 
the thought of losing their school boards. I know my colleague 
from Regina Lakeview went to a lot of those community 
meetings. I went in particular to Wymark, Saskatchewan 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their MLA and the MLAs around 
that area did not want to attend. There was about 90 people, I 
think, at that meeting. 
 
I’m just going into my phone to remember what ridings I’m 
talking about. So Wymark school division, or Wymark, 
Saskatchewan is in the Wood River riding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s just south of the Premier’s riding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it’s close to ridings like Cypress Hills and 
Lumsden-Morse, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 90 people that I 
saw, like I said, very, very upset over the thought of losing their 
locally elected school boards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They were 
worried about losing control, and they were worried about 
losing a say. 
 
So if you look in the fine print, and I’ve got . . . This is the 
budget in my hands. There is going to be a change to The 
Education Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m going to read 
directly from the budget because I’m hoping that what’s 
happened here is that members opposite haven’t actually read 
this, and I’m hoping that it’s not that they’re trying to . . . Oh, I 
don’t know what’s a parliamentary word for what I’m thinking 
of saying, but I’m hoping that, let’s just hope that that’s what’s 
happening here is that they’re trying to . . . is that they haven’t 
actually read the fine print. 
 
“The purpose of this Bill is to provide the Minister of Education 
with . . .” Now members are heckling from the other side, but 
you really should listen to this if you haven’t heard it yet or if 
you haven’t bothered to read it yet because it’s very important. 
You’re going to have to explain this to your constituents: 
 

The purpose of this Bill is to provide the Minister of 
Education with additional powers and authority to issue 
directives to the boards of education and the Conseil des 
écoles fransaskoises with respect to the number of 
approved trustees and their compensation levels, and the 
expenditure of capital and operating funding provided by 
government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the expenditure of capital and operating 
funding provided by government are the trustees’ powers. The 
trustees’ powers are being taken away; the trustees’ powers are 
going to the Minister. Everybody’s school divisions are going 
to be run out of Regina. I hope that it’s the backbench MLAs 
didn’t read this and just didn’t realize what was going on. And I 
hope that they didn’t just assume that their constituents weren’t 
going to read the fine print of this budget because I can assure 
you that this does nothing in terms of reflecting what 
constituents have been saying about their concerns with the 

school division amalgamations. This is not in any way 
reflecting what we’ve been hearing across the province and, I’m 
sure, MLAs on the other side have been hearing across the 
province. 
 
The MLA from Battleford was courageous enough to do his 
job, frankly, and advocate for his constituents, and was actually 
in the media saying that his constituents were very concerned 
about locally elected school boards losing their voice. So I’m 
hoping that the MLA for Battleford hasn’t read the fine print of 
this and I hope that when he does, he will once again do his job 
and stand up for his constituents. 
 
So let me keep going with more surprises we have in the budget 
because, like I said, none of this was in the . . . One of this was 
discussed during the Meewasin by-election, and none of this 
was discussed during the election in 2016. Booze tax is going 
up — booze tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker — going up 4 to 6 per 
cent. 
 
Library funding — cut. And I have a good . . . There’s already 
been quite a bit of discussion about this library funding that’s 
been cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m sure we’re going to be 
hearing more and more about this and the impacts that it’s 
going to have across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in 
particular in our rural locations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to read, this is a fact sheet created by the Southeast 
Regional Library, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they wanted to 
make sure that their patrons knew how severe this cut is going 
to be for them and their services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
without headquarters operation, and they’re saying that the cut’s 
going to directly impact the regional library headquarters’ 
ability to coordinate services. So: 
 

Without Headquarters operations, local rural public library 
branches and their communities will lose the following 
services: 
 

No new materials such as books, DVDs or magazines 
will be purchased or processed. 
No ability to transfer books or other items between 
library branches. 
No digital resources such as e-books, e-audiobooks, 
streaming music, streaming movies, or downloadable 
newspapers and . . . [papers]. 
No province-wide integrated computer system for rural 
branches. 
No coordinaton of literacy programs such as Aboriginal 
Storytelling Month or Summer Reading Club [Mr. 
Deputy Speaker]. 
No payroll system or administrative support. Public 
library staff will have to become employees of their 
municipality. 
No I.T. support for staff and public-access computers or 
the computer network. 
No guidance, professional advice, or support to local 
library boards. 
No training or supervision for local branch staff. 
No special programming kits such as book club or 
makerspace kits. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely ridiculous. Of all of the programs 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

that they’re going to cut, they’re going to cut funding for our 
libraries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s so callous. I don’t even . . . 
I’m at a bit of a loss for words frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is a newspaper article. We’re seeing more and more news 
articles. They like to quote the one positive article that I’ve 
seen, and I think anyone’s seen about this budget. But there’s 
literally a plethora of negative articles that they seem to be 
missing when they’re going through what they’re going to say 
for their budget. But here’s one. I believe this is CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] news on March 27th, and the title is 
“Government doesn’t understand role of libraries, says CEO.” 
 
It would be interesting to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
many members on the other side have stepped foot into a library 
in the last few years. I know members on this side understand 
the importance of libraries and the importance of libraries to our 
constituents. And the member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
already gone into that in quite a bit of a detail tonight and talked 
about the essential services that libraries provide. Another quote 
from the Southeast Regional Library, which I believe is in, yes, 
in the member from Weyburn’s area . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Weyburn-Big Muddy, that’s correct. Thank 
you. The statement called, or the statement that I was just 
reading in the paper, they describe it, and they said “. . . the cuts 
[are] the greatest crisis in the history of the public library 
system.” That will be the Sask Party’s, amongst many things, 
but that will be one of the things that the Sask Party will go 
down in history for, creating the greatest crisis in the history of 
the public library system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just ridiculous. 
 
But I want to take the time to talk a little bit about this whole 
municipal revenue-sharing piece, and how the Finance minister 
on budget day got up and said there wasn’t going to be any 
changes to the municipal revenue sharing. He listened. Again, 
once again, that’s another example of Sask Party ministers 
listening to the voices of their constituents. There was an outcry 
to make sure that there wasn’t any changes to the municipal 
revenue sharing. Instead they did something completely by 
surprise to all of the members of SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association], Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they cut 
the grants-in-lieu. 
 
And like I said already, we don’t operate in a vacuum here in 
the legislature. And when I was walking in this evening to 
evening session, I was watching before, while I was eating my 
dinner, I was watching the Regina City Council have an 
emergency meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this budget. It was 
a very, very long meeting. I believe they had an in camera 
before they went on camera . . . in camera, out of camera. It’s 
close to 10, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I sort of lose my words this 
late at night.  
 
Anyways, all of those council members got up this evening and 
expressed, very emotionally, how upset they were with this 
budget, what real serious impacts the cuts to the grants-in-lieu 
are going to have on Regina and on their ability to service this 
city, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I noticed that there’s already 
been a Leader-Post article about this meeting, which is nice 
because I wasn’t able to write down all of the quotes, all of the 

concerns that the council members had, but thankfully the 
Leader-Post was able to do that for me. 
 
So I want to read a few of those quotes into the record because 
it’s not . . . And I want to make sure that all members 
understand that this isn’t just Regina that’s speaking up against 
this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s not just Saskatoon 
that’s speaking up about this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
the entire province. 
 
Like the mayor of Regina said this evening, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he’s never seen every single SUMA mayor speak out 
on the same issue with the same voice like they are right now, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the Sask Party wants to be proud of one 
thing, good job — you’ve united the province in rage. That’s 
fantastic. 
 
Let’s read some of these quotes in. Councillor Bob Hawkins: 
“This is a budget that comes like a thief in the night.” I believe 
he . . . did he run for the Sask Party once? Again, Councillor 
Bob Hawkins: “This is not preserving funding. This is, by 
sleight of hand, expropriating funding. What the provincial 
right hand purports to give, the left is taking away.” 
 
Councillor John Findura: “I am not confused. I am scared of the 
future. Not just of today, but tomorrow. I’m glad SUMA is 
working on things.” 
 
Councillor Joel Murray: “This is the equivalent of using our 
savings account to pay our monthly expenses. What happens 
when savings are gone?” 
 
Councillor Sharron Bryce, she suggests that you “Upload all 
this stuff back to the provincial government. I’m tired of this.” 
 
Councillor Lori Bresciani: “If we increase the mill rate, we are 
downloading to our people. It is very unfair.” 
 
How about Mayor Fougere: “We are here to govern the city and 
we have been dropped this $11 million hole to fill.” And then 
he suggests that, adding that if a tax increase comes, he wants to 
see it on the tax bill as a provincial levy, as called provincial 
levy. I’ve also heard it called the . . . I don’t know if I can say 
his name without . . . the “Wall tax,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
quoting so I think I’m allowed to say it that way. If not, I did it 
anyway. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Here’s another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So as I said, SUMA is 
speaking in unison about their outrage over this budget, over 
their outrage over the fact that they were not consulted. They 
were not warned that this was going to happen. Many cities 
have already created a budget, not expecting to have this 
massive of a cut, not expecting to lose their grants-in-lieu, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
These are numbers that are coming from SUMA themselves. 
They wanted to make sure that the province had a full 
understanding of the loss for communities by percentage. And I 
want to talk about . . . I will mention the top nine, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think there are many Sask Party members who 
represent these areas, so I’m curious to know what they’re 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

going to tell their constituents. Yorkton is losing 58.45 per cent 
of their funding. Moose Jaw’s losing 49.44 per cent. 
Humboldt’s losing 49.3 per cent. North Battleford’s losing 
48.39 per cent. Estevan’s losing 47.49 per cent. Melville’s 
losing 47.08 per cent. Weyburn’s losing 43.98 per cent. Prince 
Albert’s losing 43.48 per cent. And Melfort, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is losing 41.8 per cent. 
 
It’s absolutely devastating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what it’s 
going to result in is increase in, further increase in property 
taxes, further increases in the mill rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s another example of the province downloading their 
failing onto other people than themselves. The hard thing for 
municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they have no one else 
they can download it onto other than the taxpayers. They are the 
closest level of government to the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they’re not given the respect that they deserve from this 
government. 
 
Like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely, absolutely 
devastating. And this won’t be the end that we’ve heard of 
council members expressing their outrage and constituents 
expressing their outrage as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I even talk about . . . but I’m going to talk about it very briefly. 
There’s quite a few other things that I haven’t even gone into 
yet. I don’t know how much time I have left, but there’s 
changes, they’re making changes to the Wascana Centre 
Authority’s management structure. 
 
They’re making a massive cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
post-secondary education. Our universities are going to receive 
a 5 per cent reduction in funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
University of Regina, the University of Saskatchewan, 5 per 
cent reduction in funding. It may have been struggling to 
maintain their services as is, on zero per cent increases in 
funding over the last few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Five per 
cent is huge. It’s incredibly huge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s 
going to result in significantly increased tuition. We’ve already 
seen increases in tuition over the last few years, because 
post-secondary institutions aren’t being funded commensurate 
with their current realities at zero per cent increases. So with a 
5 per cent decrease, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to be huge, 
huge, huge on our post-secondary education institutions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I had some quotes because, for example, the member from 
Walsh Acres seems to accuse us of fearmongering. Those 
MLAs don’t seem to believe what’s coming out of our mouths, 
so even though we’re elected here to be the voice of those who 
are telling us of their concerns, we’re supposed to be holding 
the government accountable. And we do. Unfortunately not 
everyone on that side always believes what we’re saying. The 
member from Walsh Acres doesn’t seem to believe what we’re 
saying, but maybe he and the other MLAs will take it from all 
these individuals that I’m quoting tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
How about a quote from the University of Regina president, 
Vianne Timmons: 
 

It’s a huge number. It’s millions and millions of dollars. So 
it will mean that we will lose positions — absolutely, there 
will be positions lost. Services for students potentially lost. 

We will have to look at everything we do. It will be a 
tough, tough year for us, and tough to manage this. 

 
How about the University of Saskatchewan president, Peter 
Stoicheff: “I can’t side step the fact that a minus 5 [per cent in 
funding] is probably the largest single budget cut we’ve ever 
had in our history.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now members opposite talk about how 
budgets should be reflections of their priorities and stand up 
proudly — which is shocking to me — in support of this 
budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, apparently the future of our 
province is not the priority of the Sask Party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because their funding is not being reflective of that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So everyone with this budget . . . including corporations and 
Saskatchewan’s wealthiest citizens will get a 1 per cent income 
tax reduction over the next few years. And I think it’s important 
to point out . . . and I’ve been watching the Premier’s tweets 
and the different charts that the Sask Party’s been putting out 
about how this budget is going to affect individuals. But it’s 
clear that most middle-class savings will be eaten by the PST, 
which is what the Sask Party fails to add into their chart 
projections, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the education property tax 
and the utility increases that are going to happen as a result of, 
and potentially the mill rate increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
find it kind of funny that none of those additional burdens on 
the middle class are included in the Premier’s charts that he 
keeps tweeting out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot there to chew on already, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I haven’t even talked about one of the most alarming parts of 
this budget. And I know I’m limited for time, but I do want to 
mention the shutdown of STC, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It has a 
significant impact on many people in our province, thousands 
of people in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s already 
come out in the media. There’s already been quite a few people 
who’ve spoken out who need that service to get to their cancer 
treatments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So not only are we talking about the loss of jobs, of over 200 
jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but also the devastating impact that 
this has on some of the most vulnerable people in our province. 
Even my grandmother uses this service and needs this service 
because she can’t drive outside of Humboldt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s very, very devastating for a lot of people. And 
what this will do will force families — for those who have 
families who can — to fill in the void, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 
there’s many people out there who don’t have that luxury. 
 
And the upsetting thing about this is that there was absolutely 
no discussion of this prior. This came completely out of the 
blue. Not once did any of those members opposite talk about 
this. Not once did I hear them talk about it during the Meewasin 
by-election, although I know a few of them were out — not 
many, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but a few of them were out door 
knocking in Meewasin. But not once did anyone, anyone speak 
about it, anyone. 
 
I’m not too sure if the members opposite are waving at me 
because they did speak about closing the STC or if they’re just 
waving at me because they were door knocking. So I’ll let 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

them, the opportunity to . . . okay. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
members opposite are trying to distract me from my very 
important speech and it’s very upsetting. 
 
Here’s the thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not once did we hear 
about this prior. Not only are they trying to . . . And this is what 
I think is going to be interesting. There’s a lot of . . . and my 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana and I talk about this a lot, that 
there’s a lot of aspects of this budget that smell of lawsuits, 
frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think there’s going to be a lot 
more impact. I bet that contingency fund is probably going to 
be eaten up by the lawsuits that this budget is going to create. 
 
And I have a feeling, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Or what I will 
say is that it’s going to be interesting to watch the wind-down 
of the STC. They have to be very, very careful to make sure that 
they don’t run afoul of the Crown corporations protection 
ownership Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have to be very, very 
careful. And it’s creating a very difficult position, a very 
difficult situation for quite a lot of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know I’m limited for time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that 
members opposite are getting quite eager to get back into the 
debate again. I don’t know why they’re so eager to talk about 
this budget. If I were them, I’d be running for the hills and 
hiding behind bushes if I could. But apparently they want to 
keep talking about the budget, which is fine by me. 
 
I do want to mention, because they keep talking about how 
they’re on a plan to balancing the budget . . . And they’re very 
proud of their plan, and they really are. They say it’s only going 
to be three years and then we’ll be a balanced budget again. 
And they don’t talk about all of the deficits that they ran prior to 
this. 
 
But I do want to point out that they keep forgetting to mention 
that they’re still projecting a $685 million deficit for this 
upcoming budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s really, really hard 
for me to take that number seriously. I really want to take that 
number seriously, but I don’t know how I’m supposed to when 
this past budget, they were off on their deficit projection by 
$860 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and rising, for this past year. 
 
So let me say that number again: for this past budget, they were 
off their budget deficit projection by $860 million and rising. 
And I keep saying “and rising,” because every time we hear 
what the deficit is, it keeps going up. Every couple of months 
it’s a little bit higher. So I’ll be interested to see when that 
Public Accounts document comes out in July what the number 
actually is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
If this budget is a reflection of anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s a reflection of what the Sask Party likes to do when they 
don’t like what they hear. They try to change the game to match 
whatever they’ve wanted to do all along. So privatizing 
Crowns, gutting — neutering, frankly, Mr. Speaker — our 
school board trustees so there’s no locally elected powers, and 
changing the municipal funding game, Mr. Speaker, which is 
going to put all of our municipalities in a devastating financial 
position. 
 
So to say it: I think it’s probably a given, but I’m absolutely not 
going to be supporting a budget that massively hurts our 

essential services, that callously shuts down the STC, even 
though many people who need it desperately need it, that 
offload the Sask Party failings onto our municipalities, and that 
despite all of these cuts still project a deficit that’s going to rise 
to who knows what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and severely impacts 
the middle class while giving tax breaks to corporations and 
wealthy. And with that, for all of those reasons, I won’t be 
supporting the budget. I will be supporting my colleague’s 
sound amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m delighted to get up and speak to this budget, Meeting 
the Challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess as the other people do, I want to say a few thank 
yous. I want to thank my constituency assistants, Shelley Meyer 
and Cindy Warner, who do a great job of looking after things 
when I’m not there and actually do a lot better job of looking 
after things when I am there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my family, which I’m 
happy to say both of my children are now working in 
Saskatchewan due to the fact that we have a government in 
power that’s not sending our kids out to other provinces to have 
to go and find a job. I also want to thank my wife for letting me 
do this. Actually she seems to be very happy when I’m doing 
this because I always come in, when we’re in session, on 
Sundays, and she’s always smiling when I leave the house. So I 
take it that that’s . . . She enjoys that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is called Meeting the Challenge, and it 
is a challenge with what we’ve had happen in our resource 
sector. And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, that, you 
know, the other side may think that we like to see people lose 
their jobs. We do not. No employer wants to see anyone lose 
their jobs. It’s a tough, it’s a tough, tough decision. 
 
And I know because I, as many of the other people on this side 
of the House, are entrepreneurs. And I’ll tell you what. The 
hardest thing you can do in business is to tell somebody that 
unfortunately they’re not going to be coming to work. And 
that’s tough. The other side doesn’t quite realize that because I 
don’t think any of the other side has any businesses over there. 
But this side of the House, it does. And it’s tough. It’s tough, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[22:15] 
 
I hate to see these things happen but we have tough choices to 
make, and that’s why this budget’s called Meeting the 
Challenge, because we do have some challenges out there, Mr. 
Speaker. But you know what? In listening to the other side 
speak, I get . . . Listen, they’re talking about health. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was first elected in 2007 I still remember 
Nipawin Hospital had four physicians. That’s all they had — 
four physicians in Nipawin Hospital. They’ve got 12 there now. 
Mr. Speaker, the last time we had a long-term care home built 
in my constituency was back in Grant Devine’s days. We have 
a brand new one in Tisdale. 
 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

An Hon. Member: — Bit of a drought. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes. There was, as the member from 
Melfort said, a bit of a drought — a bit of a drought. That was a 
huge drought. 
 
And they talk about education, Mr. Speaker. We have a brand 
new school in Hudson Bay and another one in the constituency 
right next to me in Porcupine Plain. I can remember my son 
going there to play basketball in Porcupine Plain and the roof 
was leaking so bad they had 5-gallon pails all over in the old 
school. Where was the NDP at that time? They sit there and 
criticize our education program. They had 5-gallon pails all 
over in that school because it was leaking. 
 
Also in Kelvington there is a new integrated care home in 
Kelvington, an integrated care facility, Mr. Speaker. And they 
sit there and say, well we don’t do anything in health. We’ve 
hired 3,000 more nurses, 750 more doctors. These are things 
that we’ve done and we want to continue on doing those things. 
But right now what we have to do is we have to be very careful, 
very careful, on the money that we spend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You also hear them talk about child care spaces. The number of 
new spaces created after this year since we have formed 
government will be an extra 6,500 spaces. Compare that to the 
NDP record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are so many things that we can talk about. And I wasn’t 
going to . . . I wanted to talk a lot about this budget, but I just 
wanted to bring up some of the things, some of the . . . which 
they have sat there and ragged on us for some of the things they 
say that we didn’t do or are not doing. Like another one I just 
happened to mark it down here, and was just brought up by the 
member from Douglas Park, was talking about the education 
property tax. We happened to lower that education property tax. 
The farmers were paying a disproportionate share of that for 
years, for years and years and years. And the NDP always said, 
one after the other of their leaders said — right back to good old 
Tommy — said, well you know that’s not status quo. That’s not 
on the table anymore. Did they ever, ever lower it? No, they did 
not. It finally came around to the Saskatchewan Party 
government to lower that tax. We’re adding a little bit back on, 
but it’s just being fair because of the reassessment end of it. 
This should not be a problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing too on health . . . I’m just going back and 
picking out different odds and ends because I don’t have that 
long to speak. But the NDP looked at STARS [Shock Trauma 
Air Rescue Society] but as usual they just looked at it. They 
never got around to it, never got around to it. We now have 
STARS in this province. And there was a lady from Carrot 
River who was just flown in just last week because she had a 
heart attack and got flown into the city for, and saved her life 
because of STARS, which the NDP never had the foresight to 
even think of putting in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we start looking at the infrastructure that’s 
been done here, when I think of the highways — and our 
Highways minister was just speaking here a little while ago — 
when we look at the highways and the deplorable shape the 
highways were in when we first formed government, we also 
have another . . . This is another record year on putting money 

into highways. Why do we have to put so much money into 
highways every year? Because we had years and years of 
neglect, and all the NDP could do is say, well why don’t you fill 
your own potholes? That’s the record of the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also let’s go back and let’s take a look at the 
population end. The NDP think that Saskatchewan is going 
down the drain. How come people keep on moving here? How 
come people keep on having jobs? 
 
We just had . . . One of the members here just mentioned about 
our mining. Number one. Number one in all of Canada for 
mining, or in the world, excuse me, in the world for mining, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have, even with this downturn, we’re still getting more 
people moving into this province. More people can see the 
advantage of Saskatchewan, and they see a government, they 
see a government that yes, we are in tough times. But they see a 
government with a plan, with a plan to move the province 
forward, with a plan to get us out of this deficit within three 
years and moving things forward. Whereas when you take a 
look at the NDP plan, do they have one? 
 
But anyways when you take a look at the NDP plan, that last 
plan on their tree book, they kind of forgot to mention about a 
billion dollars worth of spending under their promises which 
yes, it’s a minor technicality to them. But boy, they sure like to 
pick on this one here. 
 
Are we going to provide everything for the people that the 
people want in the province? No, you’re not going to do that. 
You wouldn’t do that. It wouldn’t matter how much money you 
put to it. But, Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is we have to 
have this plan to move everything forward, to keep everything 
in a nice, straight line, not like the NDP and not like . . . Well 
the member from Athabasca will stand up and he’ll say, we left 
you so many billions of dollars, and it goes up every time he 
stands up to speak. But unfortunately that’s kind of a little bit a 
stretch of what he says sometimes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing too, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, we have 
members on the other side that are very happy to sign into the 
Leap Manifesto, to endorse the Leap Manifesto that their 
federal government has. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that a 
Leap Manifesto would down everything. Like I mean they will 
not . . . I don’t think they’re going to ever form government in 
this province again, and hopefully they’ll never form 
government federally because, Mr. Speaker, that would destroy 
not just Saskatchewan but Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re also very supportive of a carbon tax. They 
think that we should have a carbon tax in this province, which 
would disproportionately also wreck our agriculture industry, 
our manufacturing industry, our mining industry. Oh, what else 
is left in Saskatchewan? Our forest industry. It would make us 
uncompetitive on the world market. 
 
We export. We are an exporting province. We have to have a 
way to be able to produce products as efficiently as we can. Our 
major trading partner is the United States, and I don’t think 
they’re going to be putting on any carbon tax, at least not for 
the next four years, Mr. Speaker, because their good friend Mr. 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Obama is gone and Trump is in there and he’s not going to put 
on a carbon tax. And I’ll tell you what. If they don’t put on a 
carbon tax and we do, we’re going to be dead in the water here. 
 
Now they don’t . . . I’ve already seen what’s been happening 
with the NDP over in Alberta where they put on the carbon tax. 
You know how that’s been working over there. I was looking at 
a bill, and I wish I had it here. I’d like to table it. It’s sitting on 
my desk in my office. And the Environment critic is chirping 
from her seat. I can show her that bill if she wants to . . . on a 
person that heats their place with coal in Alberta. And the 
carbon tax, the Alberta carbon tax is just about as much as what 
the cost of the coal is. Now this is great. In February how are 
you going to heat your house? 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at Ontario, the great things that 
Kathryn Wynne did out there on her green energy. How’s that 
working out when people can’t even buy food? And you worry 
about some little tax that’s going on. Or it’s not a little tax, but 
you worry about . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I realize that it’s late in the evening, 
and everyone’s getting perhaps a little bit giddy. But the 
member from Carrot River Valley has the floor, and we are near 
adjournment. So I’ll recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — So basically the whole idea of the NDP is, 
what they would do is they would throw on a carbon tax if they 
were here, which would shut down our ag — I’d already said 
that — would shut down our agriculture industry. It would shut 
down our mining industry. It would shut down our oil industry. 
It would shut down basically everything. And we could go back 
to I guess chopping wood to heat our homes, Mr. Speaker. Oh, 
that’s right too. You’re going to have something to be able to 
make the steel to make that axe blade. Well you could just go 
out in the bush and bust up some sticks, I guess. So, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the things that they’ve come up with or come 
out with, I really have to question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at what has happened 
. . . And I just don’t have much time to speak. But I’ll go back 
to the health system here, which is very important, that in the 
health system how basically the NDP destroyed the health 
system, not just in rural Saskatchewan, in the major portion of 
all of Saskatchewan. When we had the longest surgical wait 
times, when we had nurses and doctors leaving this province in 
droves, that was the NDP’s record on health. 
 
They wanted to talk about the seniors. They say, well we’re 
going to be hurting the seniors. Well okay, let’s take a look at 
the seniors, the seniors’ income plan. We’ve raised it by $180 a 
month. It’s up from $90. Sixteen years they paid $90 to the 
seniors per month. It is now $270. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
embarrassing. Like I mean how hypocritical of them, how to 
even sit there and try and criticize the things that we’re trying to 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the education end of it — and I’m going to go 
back to the education end of it just a little bit here, Mr. Speaker 
— they didn’t have a plan, the same thing as they don’t have 

any kind of a plan for budgeting. They didn’t have a plan for 
growth. They didn’t have a plan for kids coming into this, or 
staying in this province. So what did they do? They were 
shutting down schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have built 40 new schools in this province — 40 new 
schools, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t that amazing compared to their 
record of going around and shutting the schools down? They 
didn’t care about the kids because the kids were all going to 
move out and go to Alberta and British Columbia — and, 
heaven forbid, Ontario — to try and get a job. Well anyone that 
went out to Ontario wants to come back because of their great 
green plan out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take a look . . . And they talk about 
people who are on low income. We took 112,000 people in 
Saskatchewan off of having to pay any income tax. When they 
were in government, a little over $8,000, they had to pay 
income tax and I think now it’s sitting somewhere around 
$16,000. Mr. Speaker, this is great for the low-income people of 
our province. But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I am going to 
be supporting this government’s budget and I definitely will not 
be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being close to the time of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 
1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1909 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1910 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1913 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1918 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1921 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1925 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1931 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1936 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




