






















































Hansard: April 04, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 69A  TUESDAY, APRIL 4, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2091 
 April 4, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce a number of guests in your gallery, 
individuals who are literally building the province. We had the 
opportunity yesterday to kick off the first annual Saskatchewan 
Construction Week at a great event here in Regina, and there’s a 
number of individuals who have joined us from the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association, many of whom also 
are very distinguished business people in their own right. 
 
I see Mark Cooper, the executive director of the SCA 
[Saskatchewan Construction Association Inc.]; Karen Low, 
executive director, Merit Contractors; Cory Richter, 
vice-president of Quorex Construction services; Stu Niebergall, 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of Regina & 
Region Home Builders’ Association; Matt Walker, sales rep 
from Lehigh Cement; Ken Swann, president, Interwest 
Mechanical. 
 
And I know those were the individuals that met with the caucus 
policy committee on the economy this morning. I know there’s 
many other individuals in the gallery who also were here 
meeting with ministers and with members of the legislature. So 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
distinguished individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to join with the minister here today, it’s my 
pleasure to welcome these leaders within construction to their 
Assembly and to thank them for their role within this very, very 
important industry, a key driver within our economy and an 
industry that truly does build Saskatchewan. And we are joined 
by literally the builders of Saskatchewan here today. 
 
So on behalf of a grateful opposition, on behalf of a grateful 
province, I say thank you to each and every one of you that are 
here today. We’re looking forward to the meetings later here 
today, and we’re looking forward to all the activities through 
Construction Week that celebrates this incredibly important 
industry to our province. So I say thank you to those that have 
joined us here today and thank you to the thousands and 
thousands and thousands that work day after day in this 
industry, that help build Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to acknowledge a constituent of mine, Mr. 
Wally Andrews, who is seated in your gallery with his wife, 
Beth, and one of his daughters, Delise, and her husband, Mark 

Pitman. Wally has had two honours bestowed upon him 
recently — first, the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal in 
which he was recognized as having a long service in protecting 
Saskatchewan people and property and ensuring their safety, 
security, and protection; and secondly, the Fire Services 
Exemplary Service Medal, which recognizes Canadian fire 
service providers who have completed long-time service and at 
least 10 years of that have been served in the performance of 
duties involving potential risks. 
 
For 40 years, Wally has volunteered with the Pense Fire 
Department and served as fire chief for many of those years. 
Wally has seen the devastation that fire brings to both property 
and, on two sad occasions, the loss of life. 
 
Wally also spent his years as a charter member of the Pense and 
District Lions Club and was a member on the village council for 
several years. Currently Wally remains active in the community 
by being a member of the Pense Legion as well as remaining 
with the fire department in a lesser role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wally Andrews is a leader in our community, and 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Wally on his 
accomplishments, thank him for his service, and welcome him 
and his family members to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition I just want to join with the member in 
recognizing Wally Andrews and the service that he has given 
the province, Mr. Speaker, over these many, many years. We 
want to say thank you on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say hello to Mark 
Pitman, who’s somebody I’ve had the pleasure to work 
alongside and to know the great impact that Mark has in the 
work that he does in lots of different areas. But my experience 
with Mark was when he was working at the North Central 
Community Association, particularly with the Good Neighbour 
construction company. And the kind of difference that he made 
in a lot of young lives, I witnessed first-hand, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s good to see Mark here, and again congratulations, Mr. 
Andrews, on a tremendous contribution. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and to all the members a group of grade 10 students in 
the west gallery. They’re from F.W. Johnson Collegiate here in 
Regina. There’s 32 of them here today, take up almost the 
whole gallery. It’s great to see their teachers once again, Mr. 
Scott McKillop, assistants Ted Hastings and Nicole Herbert, 
and some interns as well, Jordyn Leib and Rachel Jay. I look 
forward to having a conversation with them after routine 
proceedings. All members help me welcome them, please. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care. The petitioners are concerned that this 
government does not actually know what spiritual care 
providers, professional spiritual care providers do, nor the 
impact that they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that in this budget the Sask Party has 
eliminated funding for pastoral care services which provided 
spiritual care within Saskatchewan’s health facilities; that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province within Canada to not 
fund this support for patients, residents, and their families 
seeking wellness. They point out that the Sask Party hid their 
plan to scrap funding for spiritual care within health region 
facilities during the 2016 election, Mr. Speaker, and that 
spiritual care responds to the spiritual and emotional needs of 
patients and residents and provides a compassionate listening 
presence in times of crisis. 
 
They point out that spiritual care providers support families, 
patients, and residents in making difficult decisions and that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents, regardless of faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and 
support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for pastoral care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a federally imposed carbon tax really has no effect 
on carbon reduction. It’s simply a tax, a tax that would have a 
detrimental effect on our provincial economy, making 
Saskatchewan products less than competitive on the world 
market, especially when no carbon tax is being imposed on 
competitive industries just across the border. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan agriculture has taken initiatives that 
have greatly reduced emissions and the development of the 
carbon capture facilities in Boundary dam has further reduced 
Saskatchewan’s carbon footprint. But a federal-imposed carbon 
tax would significantly damage the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw, 
Aylesbury, Caron, Kuroki, Regina, Drinkwater, and Crane 
Valley. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m rising 
again to present a petition that’s opposed to Bill 40 and a 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people 
who have signed the petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition 
for privatization that allows the government to wind down, 
dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown 
corporation without holding a referendum; that in 2015-16 
alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations returned almost 
$300 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of people across the 
province and under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of 
Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income 
tax provided not less than 90 per cent of the shares are being 
held by a government or a province. The Sask Party’s proposal 
would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without 
being considered privatized, and this short-sighted legislation 
therefore risks sending millions of our Crown dividends to 
Ottawa rather than the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed these petitions 
today are from the cities of Regina and Saskatoon and the 
communities of Bjorkdale and Archerwill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. And 
we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives found 
that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 cents 
for every dollar a man makes, and in Regina women earned on 
average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. According to 
the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender wage gap for 
full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan, 
within the private sector, to eliminate the wage gap 
between women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mobile crisis is a bridge to mainstream services. 
Mobile crisis services performs a community triage function, 
acting as a point of entry for people into various service 
systems. Crisis counsellors perform thorough assessments and 
make referrals, helping people secure needed resources. This 
ensures that people utilize the right service specific to their 
problem rather than assessing more expensive or inappropriate 
service systems. 
 
Prince Albert mobile crisis has had to close its doors during the 
daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in 
distress. The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put 
stress on Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and 
other agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to 
provide the counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis so they may once again offer 
24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s individuals across the province who have 
signed these petitions, and this particular petition was signed by 
individuals from Saskatoon, La Ronge, and Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding library cuts in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
the people who have been circulating this petition have been 
doing an incredible job getting the word out and countering a 
lot of misinformation and falsehoods that have been circulated 
about this. They want to draw attention to the good work that 
libraries are doing in the province, and they want people to 
know just how devastating this 58 per cent cut is to the regional 
library program in the province, Mr. Speaker, up to and 
including what we’ve already seen have been layoffs. And I 
know that some of those people were here in the Assembly 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
More layoffs to come, potentially branch closures, and of 
course today the latest, the interlibrary loans program has been 
the latest casualty, Mr. Speaker. These are people that are very 
upset about these cuts and the impacts that are yet to come. 
 
So I will read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan renew its 
commitment to the invaluable programming, educational 
opportunities, and public spaces our libraries provide in 
this province and restore the $4.8 million in funding for 
public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside 
in Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling on this government to restore funding 
to post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Sask Party is making students 
and their families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement. 
They point out that Saskatchewan students already pay the 
second-highest tuition fees in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That of 
course comes from the good people at Statistics Canada, though 
I know they don’t like it over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that this budget cuts $36.8 million from 
post-secondary education, that this budget cuts $6.4 million 
from technical institutions. They point out that funding for the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships has been cut 
by $8.2 million, Mr. Speaker. And they point out that the Sask 
Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling their 
first home plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by good 
citizens from Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct 
and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Moose Jaw. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Once again under the direction and the call for action to support 
the member from Prince Albert Northcote, where she asked for 
anyone in the Assembly to support her in her request for a 
second bridge, I stand proudly with my colleague, the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote, to present a petition on a second 
bridge for Prince Albert, and, Mr. Speaker, that the need for a 
second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is 
today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
the businesses that send people and products through Prince 
Albert require a solution. 
 
So therefore, the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated time and time again, we 
stand up in this Assembly day after day presenting page after 
page of this petition, and on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, 
that I’m presenting, the people that have signed this page are 
primarily from Moose Jaw. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Construction Week 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of the Economy joined representatives from more than 
20 industry associations and business support groups to 
officially launch the first ever Saskatchewan Construction 
Week. This week is a celebration of the important economic 
and social contributions made by the province’s second-largest 
private sector employer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are roughly 8,000 construction-based 
businesses operating in our province, representing more than 
51,000 employees — the same as manufacturing, mining, oil 

and gas, and forestry combined. These workers collectively earn 
approximately $3 billion in wages each year, with earnings 27 
per cent higher than the provincial average for all industries. In 
addition, it is a sector that makes up 8 per cent of our entire 
province’s GDP [gross domestic product]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction matters to Saskatchewan. It provides 
good, well-paying jobs and facilitates growth across every other 
segment of our economy. It provides the corridors that connect 
our goods to market, the homes we live in, the world-class 
spaces to educate our children, and the infrastructure that spurs 
innovation. I had the pleasure, along with several of my 
colleagues, to meet with some representatives from the industry 
this morning where we had productive conversations about the 
industry’s bright future in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in thanking the people and businesses that 
help build Saskatchewan every day, and in recognizing the 
inaugural Saskatchewan Construction Week. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
recognize the first ever Saskatchewan Construction Week, 
which has been proclaimed for April 3rd through April 7th. 
This is an important week that celebrates the important 
economic and social contributions made by the province’s 
second-largest private sector employer. This week has been 
designated to acknowledge and celebrate the contributions of 
tradespeople, entrepreneurs, industry partners — literally the 
builders of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Saskatchewan construction 
industry contributes immensely to our community and our 
economy. Construction creates valued infrastructure and valued 
jobs, providing great career choices for so many. Eight 
thousand Saskatchewan-based businesses are involved in the 
construction sector, from large general contractors to 
building-material suppliers and small businesses right across 
our province. 
 
As was noted, in 2016 alone there were over 51,000 people 
employed in the sector, more than manufacturing, oil and gas, 
and forestry combined. Saskatchewan construction companies 
paid an estimated $3.3 billion in wages and salaries to their 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to thank the title sponsors and all those 
involved for making this week happen, and ask all members to 
join with me in celebrating the first ever Saskatchewan 
Construction Week and in thanking all of those involved in this 
valued industry who literally build Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

13th Annual World Class Players Cup Held in Regina 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
past Thursday I had the honour of bringing greetings at the 
opening ceremony of the 13th Annual Mosaic World Class 
Players Cup soccer tournament held here in Regina. 
 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

The tournament is held at the Credit Union EventPlex and runs 
from March 30th to April 15th. Mr. Speaker, 1,200 soccer 
players from more 70 teams representing 32 countries will 
compete over the course of 17 days. The tournament is geared 
towards players of all ages and abilities, from adults to 
teenagers, to children younger than 12 years of age, as well as a 
Special Olympics team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tournament brings together a multicultural 
array of people, people who live, work, and play together in 
Saskatchewan, but who come from a multitude of nationalities. 
Bringing people together to engage in friendly competition 
helps us recognize and celebrate our province’s diversity. It is a 
wonderful thing to see young people from so many different 
countries, passionately playing a sport loved by billions of 
people around the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking the 
sponsors and over 100 volunteers who made this tournament 
possible. I’d also like to congratulate the Regina Multicultural 
Council and the organizers of the World Class Players Cup for 
all the success of the tournament. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Three Minute Thesis Competition at 
University of Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday I 
was honoured to help judge the University of Saskatchewan’s 
third annual Three Minute Thesis Competition. Mr. Speaker, 
3MT is a celebration of grad students and their research. It 
showcases their innovative ideas in a way that engages the 
community. 3MT began at the University of Queensland in 
2008. Since then it has gained popularity worldwide, and is now 
held across 350 universities in 58 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, judging 3MT served as a great opportunity to 
experience both the ingenuity and diversity of our grad 
students. With thesis topics ranging from exploring the child 
transition of immigrants in Canada through picture books, to 
exterminating insects in wheat without using chemical methods, 
the work that our graduate students are performing is not only 
diverse, it’s the kind of research that will drive the future of our 
province. Winners of the competition included Brian Kulyk in 
third place, Shailza Sapal in second place, and Renbo Xu taking 
first place with the thesis of the addition of nutritional value to 
low-fat meat products. 
 
On April 28th the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] will 
host the 3MT winners from across Western Canada to compete 
in the Western regional finals, and I will be cheering for these 
bright students as they continue on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in thanking 
the University of Saskatchewan’s Graduate Students’ 
Association for organizing this fun and insightful event, and in 
congratulating all participants for their hard work and our 
winners for moving on to the Western regional finals. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Campbell Senior Boys’ Basketball Team Wins Title 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to announce that last weekend the Campbell senior boys’ 
basketball team won the provincial 5A basketball title in the 
Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association tournament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tartans beat the LeBoldus Golden Suns, 
another great school in my constituency. This further cemented 
a great athletics rivalry between the two great schools in Regina 
University. Tyrese Potoma of the Campbell Tartans was the 
leading scorer of the game with 23 points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this game was actually a rematch for the Golden 
Suns and Tartans, as they had previously faced each other in the 
city final championship one week earlier; however, that game 
had a very different outcome. The Golden Suns were 
triumphant in that match, beating the Tartans 96-72 in the 
Regina Intercollegiate Basketball League’s tier 1 final on March 
17th. After a good week of practice and refocusing under the 
tutelage of head coach Will Redl, the Tartans were able to pull 
it off and, Mr. Speaker, they could not be more deserving. 
 
Mr. Speaker I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Campbell Tartans senior boys’ basketball team on their 5A 
provincial title, as well as the LeBoldus Golden Suns, on a great 
game. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

International Wood Collectors Society Honours 
Saskatchewan Resident 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to 
stand in this Assembly today to acknowledge a constituent who 
has received a special honour from the IWCS, the International 
Wood Collectors Society. The IWCS is the world’s leading 
authority on distributing, collecting, identifying, and naming 
wood samples globally. The society has members from almost 
every country around the world. 
 
Mr. Gordon Friedrick of Marshall, Saskatchewan is one of the 
longest-serving members in the world. Gordon was recently 
featured in the society’s bimonthly magazine World of Wood. 
He joined the society in the early ’60s where he indicated that 
he had a love of trees, wood, and conservation. 
 
The last 50 years of his life, career, and hobbies have revolved 
around wood collecting and conserving some of the most 
unique trees in the world, as well as furniture building and 
refinishing. Throughout his life, he has also taken every 
opportunity possible to teach others about the importance of 
forests and woodlands. 
 
As a member of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, Gordon 
distributes 800 to 1,000 Colorado blue spruce saplings to 
schools each year. In Saskatchewan the Independent Order of 
Odd Fellows and Rebekahs have planted and given out over 
300,000 trees in the last six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating Gordon Friedrick on his long service to the 
IWCS and wish him the best as he inspires others in his love of 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

trees, wood, and conservation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 

New Schools in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to stand today to highlight this government’s 
commitment to our education system with the near completion 
of two more new schools in my constituency. 
 
In addition to the two new Willowgrove schools which opened 
very recently, Dr. Sylvia Fedoruk, Saskatoon Public; and St. 
Nicholas, Saskatoon Catholic are the two new schools in 
Evergreen. They are both wonderful facilities and will be home 
to 800 students and 90 child care centre spaces when they open 
this September. 
 
Evergreen has seen amazing growth over the past several years, 
Mr. Speaker, growing by some 4,000 people since 2013. Much 
of the new housing in the Willowgrove constituency is filled by 
young families and young children who will benefit from 
increased access to schools and a child care facility. The 
surrounding schools will see benefits ranging from smaller 
classroom sizes to less pressure on resources. This new 
joint-use school will also benefit the community as a whole 
with access to a fitness centre and a community resource centre. 
These facilities will be available to the public after regular 
school hours, providing a real pillar for those growing 
communities. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I am proud of this government’s record when it comes to 
education. Our record is one of opening 40 new schools, 
including 21 this year, along with 25 major renovations, while 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] record was closing 176 
schools and vastly reducing the number of teachers. Mr. 
Speaker, our government is meeting the challenge and will 
continue to ensure that Saskatchewan is a great place to live, 
work, raise a family, and go to school. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a year since 
Saskatchewan people went to the polls, but they’re no longer 
trusting what the Sask Party had to say during that campaign of 
just a year ago. 
 
Just look at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal 
alone. Two wealthy and well-connected donors to that party 
made out with $11 million of taxpayers’ money. During the 
election, the Premier told the people of Saskatchewan time and 
time again that there was nothing to see. He said that he had an 
appraisal that justified the scandalous deal and scandalous and 
outrageous price tag; if only, of course, he could actually show 
us that appraisal, Mr. Speaker. But of course he’s failed to do 
that and failed to answer simple, straightforward questions on 

the floor of this Assembly time after time. 
 
We know now that, from the scathing auditor’s report that 
exonerated no one, that the appraisal wasn’t even considered by 
government, nor should have it ever been considered by 
government. So a year later, I guess the question is to the 
Deputy Premier here today. Why did the Premier of 
Saskatchewan tell the people of our province that the appraisal 
would clear everything up when it had nothing to do with it? 
Why wasn’t he straight with Saskatchewan people? And why 
won’t he be straight with Saskatchewan people now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course as members well know, on both sides of the 
aisle, the auditor looked into this matter in great detail. The 
auditor had access to all of the documents which she requested 
access to. The auditor was able to talk to all of the individuals 
to whom she wished to speak. The auditor, by her own 
testimony, did a very thorough job and had a very thorough 
look at this matter. 
 
And what the auditor said . . . She had 10 recommendations. 
We’ve accepted those recommendations. We either have 
implemented or are implementing these recommendations. And 
what the auditor said, these are the auditor’s words, and I would 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest, and we didn’t find evidence of conflict 
of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the 
course of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Pathetic and weak, Mr. Speaker. And 
you know, same old, tired talking points from the appointed 
minister. But the arrogance is incredible. And you know, we’ve 
been reaching out across the province, hearing and listening to 
many of their constituents, Mr. Speaker. And if the 
backbenchers would actually be listening to their constituents, I 
don’t think they’d be feeling quite as arrogant as we see here 
today, Mr. Speaker. In fact those backbenchers, if they were 
true to their word, they should be feeling as betrayed as 
Saskatchewan people are here today by that cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on election night the Premier said that 
Saskatchewan people gave them an opportunity to “. . . keep the 
promises we made in this election campaign.” One of their 
promises was to return the budget to balance — this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, they missed that by just a little bit, 
a billion dollars or so, Mr. Speaker. They came up short. Now 
of course they knew this all along. They were hiding the state of 
the finances from Saskatchewan people, hiding the budget, 
hiding the facts. So to the Deputy Premier: when will he come 
clean that they knew all along that their plan was to make 
Saskatchewan people pay for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste? 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find it interesting in this debate that the Leader of the 
Opposition or the Finance critic has never once acknowledged 
the fact that resource revenues are down over a billion dollars 
this year, Mr. Speaker, from last year and the year before and 
the year . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And they always say 
over there, everybody saw that coming, Mr. Speaker. 
Everybody saw that coming. If they all saw it coming, they’d be 
owning yachts and be in Hawaii right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The entire industry didn’t see the price of oil coming and 
staying down for as long as it did. The price of potash has come 
down, Mr. Speaker, considerably. The value of the Canadian 
dollar, Mr. Speaker, impacts the revenues of this province. We 
have lost over $1.2 billion in revenue. Along with that, on a lag 
effect with respect to the downturn in the economy, Mr. 
Speaker, primarily in the resource sector, you start to see a lag 
with respect to revenues on our corporate income tax and 
personal income tax here, Mr. Speaker.  
 
What the people of this province have asked this Premier and 
this government to do is not take draconian action with respect 
to the economy, Mr. Speaker, and get the budget back to 
balance over the course of a period of time. We’re going to be 
doing that, Mr. Speaker, in three years time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Taxation  
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the financial position of 
this province would have been well known to that Finance 
minister. He knows it full well. The Premier said, “We won’t 
take a day for granted.” Well they’re taking a lot more than 
days for granted, Mr. Speaker. They’re taking Saskatchewan 
people for granted, and we won’t tolerate it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They promised time and time again that they wouldn’t raise 
taxes. But, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t straight, of course, with 
Saskatchewan people, and now they’re raising taxes on families 
and small businesses by a billion dollars in this budget alone. 
They scrapped exemptions on everything from children’s 
clothing through to construction projects. 
 
How do they expect to turn the economy around if families 
have less money in their pockets, if small businesses have less 
money to grow and to create jobs, and if those who want to 
build Saskatchewan are hit with the very definition of a 
job-killing tax, an increase, a new 6 per cent tax on construction 
projects, Mr. Speaker? 
 
You know their main promise was to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. So why are they pushing this tax on growth that 
weakens Saskatchewan’s economy, our competitive advantage, 
that raises new barriers to investment and that threatens and 
undermines the very kind of job creation that we need here and 
now in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

can say . . . And I know the Leader of the Opposition is going to 
be meeting with the construction association representatives 
after question period or sometime later this afternoon. And I 
want to correct the record yet again, Mr. Speaker. This is not a 
new 6 per cent tax on construction services in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan construction industry they 
have always paid 5 per cent, or the provincial sales tax, on 
materials that go into either renovations or new home 
construction, Mr. Speaker. They no longer have to pay the 6 per 
cent PST [provincial sales tax] on their materials, Mr. Speaker. 
They are tax exempt now from purchasing those materials, 
which now puts them on an equal playing, level playing field 
with respect to contractors from the province of Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The realtors association, on budget day, put out a news release. 
Here’s what the realtors association, I think an organization 
knows a little bit about selling new homes in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. They said the “. . . Association had four goals for the 
provincial budget, and three of them have been achieved: 
focusing on growth, not subsidy; using broad-based taxes to 
share the load widely; and targeting any tax hikes to 
consumption while offsetting them with cuts in income tax.” 
 
The Association of Saskatchewan Realtors, Mr. Speaker “. . . 
grades the new provincial budget a net positive, saying it shows 
courage in taking difficult measures to tackle the deficit, and 
imagination in shifting toward a tax system that favours 
growth.” That’s what the realtors said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, adding the PST on construction 
products and labour contracts will slow the economy. Period. 
And the Sask Party said nothing about it in their campaign. And 
the same is true for the Sask Party’s new 6 per cent tax on 
tourism and Saskatchewan people looking for a night out. Mr. 
Speaker, to once again quote Restaurants Canada, the minister 
is “. . . punishing the sector of the food industry that creates the 
most jobs and economic activity.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of the PST hike, there is another broken 
promise to seniors. The Sask Party said they’d let seniors defer 
their property taxes. Well that must have slipped the Finance 
minister’s mind. 
 
Punishing job creators and emptying the pockets of 
Saskatchewan families and seniors is no way to stimulate the 
economy. Can the Finance minister admit that he broke their 
promise to seniors and has no real plan to turn the economy 
around? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
day after day, the Leader of the Opposition and/or the Finance 
critic get up in this Chamber and they decry the tax changes that 
we’ve made in this province. They make no acknowledgement 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, of the provincial income tax 
reductions we’ve also offered up in this budget, no mention 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, of the corporate income taxes we’re 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

going to be reducing in this budget over the course of the next 
couple of years to keep this province competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Finance critic gets up every single day and decries the tax 
changes that we’ve made in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to fill a 
$1.2 billion revenue hole. And then as soon as she’s done and 
sits down, the Education critic, the Social Services critic, the 
Health critic get up and says, we want to see more spending in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker. We want to see more spending in 
education, more spending in post-secondary education, more 
spending in health care. And then the Leader of the Opposition 
will get up, Mr. Speaker, and he’ll say, we don’t like deficits in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and we abhor debt, so you shouldn’t 
be borrowing money to invest in any of these kinds of things, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what the people of Saskatchewan have said to me, 
Mr. Speaker? In the absence of a plan with the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, they want to know what would the Leader of the 
Opposition do with respect to a $1.2 billion hole in our revenue 
base, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we have been talking about it. 
We’ve been talking about their mismanagement, their scandal, 
and their waste. That’s why we’re in this situation. Mr. Speaker, 
they promised a year ago to keep Saskatchewan strong, but the 
truth is the Sask Party is tying an anchor to our economy. 
They’re hiking taxes by a billion dollars, and they are cutting 
tens of millions of dollars from their funding to our cities and 
towns, so the cities and towns will have to raise taxes too. Does 
the Sask Party think that no one will notice? Do they think the 
people of Saskatchewan will blame their mayors and reeves for 
the Sask Party tax hikes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more faith in the people of 
Saskatchewan. We are hearing from them every day, and they 
are telling us, they’re telling all of us that they are upset about 
the Sask Party’s broken promises, and they feel betrayed and 
that they simply don’t support them anymore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re laughing, but to anyone on the other side, 
to anyone in cabinet, what are the Saskatchewan people telling 
them about this damaging budget and their broken promises? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that 
there has been difficult decisions that needed to be made in this 
budget, and there was no surprise that we were going to have to 
make those difficult decisions, Mr. Speaker. But what has been 
our support for the municipal sector? 
 
Maybe the member opposite last . . . Yesterday I read into the 
record about her previous leader and how he announced a 
whopping big $10 million in revenue sharing for the 
municipalities which brought the ceiling up to — oh, I don’t 
know — $95 million. What is it in this budget, Mr. Speaker? 
What is our support for municipalities in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker? $257 million, Mr. Speaker. 

Year over year over year, the municipalities had no clue what 
those members opposite were going to give them. They had no 
way of knowing. They didn’t know how to budget for it. They 
had no predictability. They were struggling with infrastructure 
because those members opposite didn’t think infrastructure was 
a worthwhile investment in this province. 
 
Things have changed. The support for municipalities has been 
very strong from this government. We have shown it year over 
year over year. This is the first time, Mr. Speaker, we have 
asked them to take a reduction in a very strange program that’s 
called grants to lieu that’s not really grants-in-lieu, and this is 
the very first time that any one of them have seen a reduction. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, during the campaign I guess the 
Sask Party forgot to promise rural people that if their 
community was not big enough according to Sask Party cabinet, 
that their library would be closed. They didn’t promise, despite 
what the minister said yesterday, that even the interlibrary loan 
service would be cancelled. And while they were claiming to 
“keep Saskatchewan strong,” they didn’t claim that they’d fire 
educators and leave Saskatchewan with limited literary 
resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does the minister have a clue? Does he have any clue about the 
damage that he’s doing to these communities, to our province, 
to our kids, and to our future? In true Sask Party fashion, he is 
cutting first and measuring later. How can the minister possibly 
justify these terrible, these mean-spirited, and these 
unjustifiable cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the people on this side of 
the House will never apologize for looking for efficiencies, for 
looking for economies, and looking for ways to do things better 
than we’ve done before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have one of the best interlibrary loan services 
in the Dominion of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, this morning I 
directed the officials to meet with the regional libraries to 
determine the best ways of restructuring to make sure that we 
can maintain and continue the interlibrary loan service. We 
have a large investment made in that service, and it’s something 
that we will continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the minister missed the 
notification on the library websites today noting that that 
program would be suspended come next week. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Sask Party platform also didn’t mention a word about what 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

this government’s plan was for education in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. There was nothing in there about raising education 
property taxes while at the same time pulling even more money 
out of our kids’ classrooms. Nothing about dumping education 
tax revenue into the general revenue fund to pay for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste, and nothing about 
forcing school divisions to make deep cuts in our kids’ 
classrooms and laying off teachers and support staff, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
School divisions all across this province are warning that there 
will be further cuts to our kids’ classrooms. Mr. Speaker, why 
wasn’t this minister upfront about his government’s plan for 
Saskatchewan people to pay more in education property tax 
while ensuring that our kids’ classrooms receive less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the best metric of our 
success as a province has been in the rapid growth in our 
province: 1.14 billion people that live in this province, the 
highest population that we’ve ever had; people that have come 
back from other provinces because of our education system, 
because of our schools, and because of the economic 
opportunities in our province, as opposed to the members 
opposite who closed school after school after school in 
community after community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a list: the people that lived in Neville have 
no school. The people that live in Admiral have no school, 
Piapot, Lang, Earl Grey, the school in Kronau, Gray, Wilcox, 
Francis, Odessa, Glenavon, École Ross, Willow Bunch, 
Briercrest, Crane Valley school, Limerick, Macdowall, Prince 
Charles school in Prince Albert, Smeaton school, Sylvania 
school, Broadway Elementary School in Melfort, Camsell 
Portage school in Uranium City, Isaac School in La Loche, 
Griffin school in Griffin, Golden Prairie school, Windthorst, 
Lintlaw, Endeavour, Pleasantdale. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
legacy that was left by those people over there, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to stand in this House every day and 
remind the people of it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Support for Children With Autism 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s one broken promise after 
another. Families can’t count on the Sask Party. In the election 
campaign, the Sask Party promised there would be more 
funding for children with autism spectrum disorder in this 
year’s budget, this year’s budget. Then of course the budget 
comes, and the funding is not there. These families were 
promised. They expected this support, but this support has not 
come. 
 
Instead we are seeing cuts to inclusive daycares and to 
classrooms. The Sask Party is actually cutting some of the few 
supports that these families did have. Mr. Speaker, they 
promised that in this budget these families could count on some 
support, and nothing. What is the minister . . . What does he 
have to say to the families of children who are living with 
autism? And why did they break their promise to them? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we take this issue very 
seriously. The individualized funding for children with autism 
has been deferred one year. But, Mr. Speaker, we have 
appointed the working group, which would have had to have 
been appointed anyway. They’ll be doing their good work over 
the next number of months. We expect to hear back from them 
with some recommendations next fall. Mr. Speaker, the 
individualized funding for autism will be in the next budget 
cycle. We’ll make the decisions at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out that funding for 
children with autism under this government has increased 
dramatically since the members opposite were in government, 
Mr. Speaker, a total of $9.1 million in 2017-18. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Hearing Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it was a promise made, and it 
was a promise broken. It’s not fair to these kids and their 
families. 
 
Same story yesterday. As the minister tried to explain away the 
cuts he made to the hearing aid program, we heard him say that 
they needed to, and I quote, “. . . focus on core services in 
health . . . like doctors and nurses and hospitals.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, he said that these weren’t core services. We are 
talking about audiologists and hearing services and essential 
support that kids throughout our province need for 
development. Well, Mr. Speaker, if taking care of our kids, if 
caring for them is not a core service of government, what is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member mentioned the questions yesterday on cochlear 
implants for children. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday her line of questioning, she was wrong. Cochlear 
implants will continue to be covered. Bone-anchored devices 
will continue to be covered. Mr. Speaker, those programs are 
not impacted by this. The hearing aid plan is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know that the . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well, Mr. Speaker, she doesn’t want to hear the answer. 
She’s quick to criticize any heckling from this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, but she never listens to the answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is those specific programs 
will continue in their current form. Mr. Speaker, the hearing aid 
program will not. It was a difficult decision we needed to make 
but, Mr. Speaker, Health is about 40 per cent of the entire 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we’re going to get our expenses in order, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously there’s going to be some impact in this ministry. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, their decision to sell off STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] is another broken 
promise to Saskatchewan people. They’re selling off STC and 
they’re selling out Saskatchewan people. They didn’t consult 
with anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC even bought brand new buses, smaller ones 
to deal with less routes that Saskatchewan residents were saying 
and they were accusing to the people. But they should go 
around Saskatchewan. They should talk to the people. They 
should let them know their stories. I’m sure they’re hearing 
from their constituents — community leaders, seniors, parents 
with sick kids, the list goes on. But Mr. Speaker, when will the 
Sask Party do the right thing? When will they listen to the 
people who own it and reverse their terrible decision? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank the 
member opposite for that question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the winding down of STC was a very difficult decision, Mr. 
Speaker, but it was one that had to be made, Mr. Speaker. We 
looked at the ridership decline, Mr. Speaker, over the years: 
down 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker, since 2012. Last year alone, Mr. 
Speaker, we were down 18,000 rides in one year, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s, Mr. Speaker, why we had to wind down SaskTel. 
 
Route discontinuation was looked at. You know, frequency 
reduction was looked at, Mr. Speaker, the marketing strategies, 
even the bus sizes, Mr. Speaker. But at the end of the day 
18,000 rides in last year, Mr. Speaker, decline, that is 
unsustainable. With that subsidy going up, Mr. Speaker, from 
$25 all the way to $94, Mr. Speaker, that’s unsustainable, and 
they know that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Intent of The Interpretation Amendment Act 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier told reporters on the 
campaign trail that the NDP were being desperate and that they 
had absolutely no plan to sell off our Crowns. Well what a 
difference a year makes, Mr. Speaker. They’re shutting down 
and selling off STC, scrapping the grain cars, and Bill 40 puts 
every one of our Crowns on the chopping block. 
 
The Premier told reporters: “If we’re re-elected, we’ll make one 
change: that’s to the liquor retailing in the province.” Talking 
about the Crown protection Act, the Premier said, “But will it 
be changed in respect to SaskTel? No. SaskPower? No. 
SaskEnergy? No. SGI? No.” They laughed off concerns they’d 
sell off our Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 lets them sell off 49 per cent of every one 
of our Crowns without ever asking permission from the owners, 
the Saskatchewan people. Is the Premier still laughing off the 
concerns or just laughing that they got away with another 

broken promise? I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan certainly aren’t laughing at all. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the 
amendment to The Interpretation Act is to introduce the 
definition of the word “privatize,” Mr. Speaker. When the New 
Democrats were on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and 
they passed their legislation, they had every opportunity to 
define that word, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t do it, Mr. 
Speaker, which leads one to suspect why they didn’t do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about partnerships. Every one of the speeches that 
they speak out . . . in second reading, they talk about 
partnerships, Mr. Speaker. This legislation’s about defining a 
word. It’s about establishing partnerships, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
not going to withdraw the legislation. We’re going to move 
forward with it, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the position of the 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Effect of Taxation Change on Price of Beer 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand how they can 
be so out of touch with the realities people are facing today. 
When they said they’d sell off 40 SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority] stores, they promised “more 
competitive pricing.” Well, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the Sask 
Party, this summer Saskatchewan people will be cracking open 
the most expensive beer in the country. That’s right. Under their 
new tax plan, buying a two-four here in Saskatchewan will cost 
more than anywhere else in Canada. So this summer when 
families head out to the cabin or get ready to have friends over 
for a barbeque, they’re going to be paying more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were worried the private liquor stores would 
raise the prices, but the Sask Party beat them to it. Mr. Speaker, 
why is the Sask Party pushing ahead with their ill-conceived 
and un-Saskatchewan tax grab on beer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the SLGA. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to report, pleased to report to the House 
that the conversion of the stores is going well, that there have 
been seven conversions thus far. Others are proceeding apace, 
Mr. Speaker. We had an SLGA board meeting this morning and 
significant . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — And significant positive progress is 
being made. With respect, with respect to a beer tax, Mr. 
Speaker, let me talk about a government that instituted a 
massive new beer tax on Saskatchewan beer. That would be the 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

government of Alberta, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP that 
instituted a massive increase on products of Saskatchewan 
imported regional beer, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this side of the House, we are going to defend 
Great Western Brewery. We are going to defend our industry in 
this province, even if they won’t. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Deputy Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery is Eugene Paquin, one of my constituents, a great 
volunteer, a great citizen of the province. Very active in 
MS-related [multiple sclerosis] issues as well as hard-of-hearing 
issues. Somebody that’s a tireless volunteer for many good 
charities including the particular one that I have a specific 
interest in. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to welcome 
Mr. Paquin to his Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I’d like to join in with the minister to introduce 
a guest in the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I too would want to welcome Eugene Paquin to 
his legislature. Eugene has quite a history in education and as 
well in the health with MS, I believe, and as well within . . . 
Issues around hearing is a big, big issue for Eugene and he has 
been a frequent visitor to the legislature, very concerned about 
the progress of people who are vulnerable in our society. So I 
would like to ask all members to join the opposition and the 
government side in welcoming Eugene Paquin to his legislature. 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial 
Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation 
Incentive (Patent Box) Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Economy that Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan Commercial 
Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — First reading of this bill. When shall this bill 
be read a second time? I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that Bill No. 62 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 285. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
response to question 285. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

answer to question no. 286. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered a 
response to question 286. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 287. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the answer 
to question 287. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act deals with the procedures for charging 
people with provincial offences and offences against municipal 
bylaws. The Act also prescribes the court’s powers and duties 
respecting provincial offences, which generally follow the 
summary conviction provisions of the Criminal Code, and the 
enforcement of fines resulting from convictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments that I’m proposing are aimed at 
ensuring that Saskatchewan’s traffic laws are enforced fairly 
and efficiently. The amendments will create regulatory 
authority to remove traffic fines from eligibility for registration 
in the fine option program. Mr. Speaker, the fine option 
program will no longer be available for offenders paying fines 
for all offences under The Traffic Safety Act and associated 
regulations, or for parking and speeding offences under bylaws. 
 
The specific offences that are no longer eligible for the program 
will be prescribed in the regulations, which will provide the 
flexibility to change the list in future without additional Act 
changes. Mr. Speaker, the regulations will also provide the 
flexibility to support the poverty reduction strategy by allowing 
low-income individuals to continue to access the fine option 
program in certain prescribed circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, removing traffic offences from eligibility for 
registration in the fine option program will save approximately 
$230,000 a year in administrative costs. The amendments will 
also result in an estimated 1.53 million annual increase in fine 
and victim surcharge revenue collected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will also authorize the 
regulations to improve the flexibility of the new administrative 
process for granting extensions of time to pay a fine. The Act 
was amended in the fall of ’16 to create this new administrative 
process which will move applications for an extension of time 
to pay a fine out of court and into an administrative process 
through the fine collection branch which will reduce the number 
of people attending court. 

Mr. Speaker, ongoing consultation with the court and with the 
municipalities that have identified some tickets issued under 
bylaws. They will need to be handled differently under this new 
process. Expanding the regulation-making authority to allow 
exemptions for affected bylaw tickets and to create alternative 
requirements for those affected tickets will resolve these issues 
and will allow the new administer of process to be implemented 
more efficiently. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will authorize 
regulations to confirm the processes and requirements to be 
followed when a justice imposes a fine or grants an extension of 
time to pay a fine and to authorize justices to continue to order 
immediate payment of fines in certain circumstances. 
 
So that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 59, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I rise in my place, as I normally do on second reading speeches, 
to give the official opposition’s perspective on any particular 
bill that the province has coming forward, Mr. Speaker — Bill 
59, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill gives the cabinet the ability to limit the 
types of offences that can be worked off under the fine option 
program. Now what that’s about, Mr. Speaker, from my own 
perspective, the fine option program, as people may or may not 
know, is a program where low-income people that receive a fine 
through the court system are able to work off their fines through 
hours of work through community programs such as cleaning 
up your community or painting up the local rink or volunteering 
at some programs that help the communities overall, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a wide variety of service that many of these 
people that get these fines can certainly do, volunteer work, and 
pay off their fines rather than paying cash for these services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do need to have reasoned, evidence-based, fair 
assessment of how our justice and corrections system work, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously what we want to do in the opposition is 
make sure that justice is as efficient as possible but not in a 
sense of compromising the fairness aspect of any court case. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that goes without saying. 
 
That being said, one of the things that we want to do is we want 
to be able to talk to a number of organizations and people and 
stakeholders that certainly have their perspective on a fine 
option program. 
 
And it was with a bit of interest, Mr. Speaker, that I paid 
attention to what the minister was saying as it pertains to some 
traffic offences, whether it’s parking tickets or whether it’s 
speeding tickets or whether it’s photo radar tickets, Mr. 
Speaker. I think what’s happening with that particular aspect is 
that there’s a lot of revenues being generated for both the 
provincial government and certainly some of the other levels of 
government throughout the province. 
 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

And it’s going to be really curious for us to find out exactly 
what kind of revenues are being derived from the photo radar 
tickets, Mr. Speaker. What kind of revenues are being derived 
from parking tickets, speeding tickets? Because obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, as you look at some of the evidence that we see, the 
fine option program provided people of low-income 
background the ability to work off their fines. Well this 
certainly takes some of the ability away, and cabinet will decide 
whether you can or cannot. 
 
And the real question we have is, what kind of revenues has the 
Saskatchewan Party government received and the people that 
are being caught either through the photo radar process or 
through traffic offences and parking tickets? It’s going to be a 
real curious effort to find that out, Mr. Speaker. And is this 
another example of how they take away their fine option 
program, Mr. Speaker, and start having some of the parking 
tickets coming directly to the province in the form of cash as 
opposed to fine option? Is this yet another cash grab for the 
province? I would suggest that it is, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
find out those revenues that they’re receiving as of now because 
the people of Saskatchewan would certainly be curious. 
 
So there’s a lot of issues that we have on this particular bill and, 
as I mentioned before, many of my caucus members are in 
contact, networking with the various organizations to get better 
information on this bill and how it affects and impacts our lives, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 59, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 59. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 60, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act 
will amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 to eliminate the 
requirement that lawyers employed by the government pay the 
Law Society insurance premiums. These premiums are 
currently paid by the government on behalf of those lawyers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment would exempt lawyers employed 
by and those on exclusive contract with government institutions 
from the requirement to participate in the mandatory insurance 
program for lawyers operated by the Law Society. Government 
lawyers, like all other government employees, receive good 
faith liability protection as an aspect of their employment, so 
the Law Society insurance is redundant. Justice lawyers who 
are affected by this change have been assured that the 
government will continue to provide this support. The next 
payment is due June 15, 2017. 
 

The Law Society rules provide an exemption for prosecutors 
employed by the Saskatchewan Ministry of Justice and all 
lawyers employed by the federal Department of Justice in 
Saskatchewan. This arrangement has been in place for over 20 
years. Government lawyers across Canada do not participate in 
this type of insurance except Nova Scotia, where they pay a 
nominal amount. The Act will allow for regulations to remove 
certain government agencies from the definition of 
“government institution” at the outset, but allow them to decide 
to participate in the future without a change to the Act if it is 
considered appropriate at that time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, eliminating payment of the insurance will 
save over $200,000 annually across the government. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill 
No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Once again I paid very close attention to what the minister was 
speaking as it pertains to the contents of Bill No. 60, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2017. Primarily from what we can 
glean from the Act itself, Mr. Speaker, this bill simply removes 
the requirement for lawyers employed by the government 
institutions to maintain professional liability insurance. This bill 
will also affect Legal Aid Commission lawyers, in-house 
counsel at the Crown corporations if we still have any at the end 
of the government’s term, in addition to the Ministry of Justice 
lawyers like drafters and Crown prosecutors. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is really an interesting bill, that there is 
obviously discussions that have to occur with the legal 
professional people in our community and certainly throughout 
our province. So it’s very important that we consult with them 
to see how this bill impacts them and certainly their profession. 
There’s been a change. As you know, as the minister alluded, 
20 years ago some of these rules were put into place, and this is 
obviously a new process that they have presented to this bill. 
 
So we’re going to take our time as the opposition to try and 
understand more about the bill, network with the appropriate 
professional legal people, and certainly solicit some of their 
advice so we’re able to make sure that those interests and that 
information is shared as this bill proceeds through the 
Assembly. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 57 — The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s my honour to rise in the Assembly today following in the 
footsteps of the member from Athabasca. This Bill No. 57 is a 
budget bill. It’s one that we knew was coming, and basically 
there’s a couple of things that are happening in this bill. It’s a 
very short bill. But other than raising the amount per cigarette 
of taxes from 25 cents to 27 cents, it’s also changing a 
definition, Mr. Speaker, which I find rather interesting. They’re 
changing the definition from “snuff,” and it’s now being called 
“smokeless tobacco products.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give ’er snoose. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Give ’er snoose. It was a good old saying I 
think back in the Devine days, that a former premier used to 
use. But now he’ll have to say, give ’er smokeless tobacco 
products, Mr. Speaker, because the definition has been changed. 
In that case also, smokeless tobacco products per gram, now the 
tax is being increased as well, and for cigars. 
 
So it’s a very straightforward bill having to do with the massive 
deficit and debt that this government is accruing through their 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. So this is something that 
we can talk about in committee, and we will proceed with our 
questions directly to the minister and the officials in committee. 
So thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 57, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
be sent to the committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 58 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 58 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This bill that’s being presented today is another budget bill and 
it deals with financial institutions here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we know that this government is desperately looking for 
funds wherever they can find it, but I think this highlights some 
of the shortcomings of this government and their understanding 
of how Saskatchewan operates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
what we have is the increase of a tax on financial institutions. 
And this includes the corporate financial institutions who are 
. . . You know, if you look on the Internet, Mr. Speaker, you can 
see that they are doing well and making quite substantial 
profits, Mr. Speaker. But what this bill will also do will impact 
the taxes that are paid by the credit union system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we had a previous Finance minister who had the courage 
to say no to that, Mr. Speaker, even when I think there was 
considerable pressure on him to place that impact on the credit 
union system. But he said no, and I remember him saying that 
in this House a couple of times. Even after I think it was the 
Harper government decided to nail the credit union system, we 
had a Finance minister in this government that had the decency 
to say no, we want to protect our credit union system because, 
Mr. Speaker, he knows what’s going on in small towns. 
 
I was down in my hometown of Lafleche just this past 
weekend, and there was the Lafleche Credit Union still open 
and the TD [Toronto Dominion] Bank shuttered, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think you would see that story over and over again if you 
go through the many small towns in Saskatchewan where there 
still are banking institutions. The pressure that this will put on 
credit unions, because they need that — it’s about $11 million a 
year, Mr. Speaker — and they need that money to be able to do 
the lending that is so critical and so important to the small 
businesses and the farmers in the communities where the credit 
unions are the last ones standing, doing business with farmers 
and with small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that kind of hit is not only going to affect credit unions, 
it’s going to really impact on producers; it’s going to impact on, 
you know, the local pharmacy in the town. I’m thinking of the 
pharmacy in my hometown that my grandpa started. It’s now 
being run by Rhys Frostad and he just built a new building for 
his pharmacy. And there’s a couple of other retail spaces that 
are there now, brand new building. How are they going to 
finance those kinds of things if there’s no credit union there to 
do it, Mr. Speaker? They’re going to have to travel longer and 
farther distances. And again there’s good jobs, and it’s affecting 
just the number of people living in these towns, which . . . 
Every person counts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

So attacking the credit unions is really I think an attack on 
Saskatchewan. If you look at the top businesses in 
Saskatchewan, many of them are co-operative based companies, 
and the credit unions are certainly up there. Affinity Credit 
Union, Conexus Credit Union are two of the largest credit 
unions in Saskatchewan. They are some of the top businesses of 
Saskatchewan, of course Federated Co-op being another one. 
So we look at these very vital pillars in the economic fabric of 
this province, based on those co-operative principles, and we 
need to see them sustained and supported, Mr. Speaker, not 
attacked like we see in this particular budget. So that’s 
something I think that needs to be of great concern to a lot of 
people living in small towns in particular where the credit union 
is a vital feature of their town. 
 
I don’t know if you have a credit union in your small town, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Yes, you do? I think that’s something a lot of 
backbenchers could also attest to. So the importance of these 
institutions, I’m hoping people will speak up and make sure that 
these backbenchers get that message, and also that they pass 
those messages on, Mr. Speaker, to their cabinet members 
because the cabinet members need to hear those messages. I 
know I’m getting messages that backbenchers are getting from 
over there, with real disgust with what they see going on in this 
budget. So I’m assuming that those members will make sure 
that those messages are being forwarded to the front-benchers 
who are making these devastating decisions on rural 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Back in 1938 or ’39, I believe, in my hometown, there was the 
very first rural credit union in Saskatchewan. And that’s in the 
town of Lafleche. And 25 years after that in the early ’60s there 
was actually a movie made about the Lafleche Credit Union, 
and it was called Neighbourly Dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it talked about some pillars of the community of the time. 
This was near the end of the Great Depression. People were in 
dire straits, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They were losing their farms. 
My dad can recall seeing the loads of people going by with all 
their worldly possessions, leaving the farm because they 
couldn’t make it anymore. And one of the biggest problems was 
access to capital. 
 
And the people in my community understood the importance of 
that, and they understood the importance of helping out your 
neighbour. So what they did is . . . They had read about these 
credit unions. They’d heard about them in Germany and they 
heard about them in Quebec. And they thought, well maybe 
that’s something we could try here. So the people in my 
community got together and they found someone. And one of 
the farmers, they tell us in the movie, one of the local farmers 
who had some money said, look, I will give you the capital you 
need to start your lending program. 
 
And it was through neighbours that people were able to buy that 
extra quarter section that they needed to complete their farming 
operation or improve their operation, Mr. Speaker. Without that 
credit union, so many of those farmers would never have been 
able to access the capital they need. And that story can be told 
throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 
wherever we have a community-based banking system that is 
supporting the community. 
 
So this attack on credit unions is unwarranted, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it’s unwise. I think it’s short sighted. But as we say about 
this government, rather than ready; aim; shoot, we have a 
government that likes to say ready; shoot; oh, we should have 
aimed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ah, shoot, as my colleague says. This is short sighted. This is 
going to be devastating in its impact. And I’m afraid the 
desperation of a government that is plagued with 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste is being presented once 
again in this budget bill. 
 
So we’ll have a few questions for the minister and the officials 
on the technical side of this. The actual provisions in the Act are 
quite complicated with very complex tax formulas that are 
being presented, so we’ll have some questions on the technical 
side of it when we get to committee. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will be dismayed and disheartened to see the 
long-term impact of this bill unless of course this government 
sees the wisdom, the backbenchers let the cabinet know that this 
is a bad idea, and then maybe they’ll actually decide to pull the 
bill from the budget bills. But beyond that, we’ll have more to 
say in committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 58, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
standing committee on Crown corporations and central agencies 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Good. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 48 — The 
Education Property Tax Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to enter into debate on Bill No. 48, an Act respecting 
education property taxes and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. And it’s one that we will have to 
take a very close look at, just as I start to go through it. And it’s 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

a complex change to what has been current practice. And 
whether there will be unintentional consequences, we’ll have to 
see. 
 
There are people out there that say they have questions. We 
know that when the Saskatchewan . . . And I quote from an 
article on March 23rd, 2017 from Global News. The title is 
“Sask budget brings significant changes to school division 
funding and decision making.” This is the quote: 
 

Saskatchewan School Board Association President Shawn 
Davidson said they’re looking forward to working with the 
ministry but doesn’t want to see divisions lose their 
autonomy. “The reason why local boards are elected is 
because our ratepayers in our communities want to see an 
elected trustee make decisions about their kids’ futures,” 
Davidson said. 
 

And this is true. So this is going to be interesting how this plays 
out. Now the minister responsible who introduced this bill said 
that people were consulted and are supportive. Just from that 
last quote, I don’t know if that’s necessarily the case. We’ve 
heard this with this government on this side say that they have 
consulted and people are on board, but it wasn’t necessarily the 
case. 
 
You know, when I look through this, it’s . . . [inaudible] . . . 
complex, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, when you look 
through the different sections, it really is quite comprehensive 
in laying out how municipalities collect this education property 
tax and forward it on to the provincial government and what 
will happen if they don’t do it. And all the ifs, ands, or buts are 
covered. But I was trying to find one section that said that they 
are actually going to return that money that’s collected to the 
school boards to administer. 
 
So we have some questions about how does this all actually 
play out. They are definitely clear about the collecting the 
money. But how are they going to spend the money, is the big 
question. And will they be actually spending it or allotting it in 
a way or somehow including the school trustees in a meaningful 
way? 
 
Now we had the Minister of Finance who was very clear that he 
had heard loud and clear, loud and clear that people wanted to 
keep the local school boards, that they were an important 
instrument of democracy in our communities. And they wanted 
to see, as the president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] said, an important way of making sure 
local communities have a way of having some control and input 
over their education system so their kids can really have the 
kind of programs that they think are important. 
 
So there are some real changes here, but you know, when I look 
at the table of contents, responsibilities of the minister . . . and 
of course that one’s really straightforward, section 3. Maybe I’ll 
read it for the people at home. What is the responsibility of the 
minister? 
 

The minister is responsible for all matters not assigned by 
law to any other minister, ministry, or agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan relating to the establishment, 
operation, collection, administration or management of 

school tax. 
 
So that’s it. That’s the long and the short of it. The minister gets 
three lines in this piece of legislation. It doesn’t really spell out 
how the minister will actually administer the school tax, 
whether they’ll keep it at the provincial level. You know, the 
minister said that it will be flowing back, but we have some 
real, real questions, and so what that will really look like. 
 
But you know, some of the other parts in the table of contents: 
 

4 Tax rates 
5 Determining property class 
6 Setting tax rates 
7 [dealing with the] Separate school division bylaw 
8 Notice of tax rates 
9 Levy of school taxes 
10 Payment of school taxes 
11 No municipal fees 

 
Now what is that all about? Well that’s a pretty straightforward 
one. Now I don’t know, because I was quickly looking in the 
situation right now, whether there’s any fees payable to the 
municipalities for their work in this. But it’s pretty clear now 
that no municipalities shall charge a fee to the Government of 
Saskatchewan or a separate board for the services or duties 
required pursuant to this Act. Now that may be the current 
practice. I don’t know. But I haven’t seen it so clearly, so 
clearly articulated. 
 
And I think this is partly in reaction to this government making 
sure that they are not going to be paying anybody anything they 
don’t have to. And then somebody will have to pay for the 
administration and the collection of these fees, because it is a 
fairly complex situation. It’s not an easy thing to do. 
 
And so you have: 
 

12 Recovery of taxes 
13 Municipal payments to the Government of 
Saskatchewan 
14 Correction and adjustment of assessments 
15 Reports from municipalities 
16 Actions to collect taxes 
17 Payment to the Government of Saskatchewan of 
moneys otherwise payable . . . 

 
[15:00] 
 
And so it goes on, but it really doesn’t deal with, so how do we 
ensure that the money goes back to the local school board? It’s 
very clear how the money gets collected, and that nobody will 
be . . . the Government of Saskatchewan will not be charged 
any money for these duties as I think owners, as they are. 
Because they will say any money collected by the 10th of the 
month needs to be turned in, forwarded to the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and then once a year there will be an annual 
report. So it’s not an easy thing, I don’t think, but these are the 
kind of questions that we have in committee down the road. 
 
But the bigger question is, will children in schools be seeing the 
benefit of this? Now this may be argued, well we’re just 
eliminating red tape or something like that. And that’s always a 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

laudable goal if, in the way of doing that, you’re actually 
achieving something bigger, like better schools. Or is this just 
another tax grab by this government? And we’ve seen this 
within the municipalities, that they are . . . Every way that they 
can get a nickel, they will get that nickel, and if they can get a 
dime that’s even better. And if that means ripping up contracts 
from many years ago, then that’s just what they will do. 
 
So it will be interesting to see how this all plays out, because at 
the end of the day people will pay if they feel they are getting 
services for that. But we’re seeing from a government, 
especially in education, where things are actually being actually 
contracted back. It’s getting worse, not better. We’re seeing 
schools where the kids are in overcrowded classrooms. We’re 
seeing programs that will be eliminated or reduced, programs 
that made our schools pretty special. 
 
We see that . . . And people are very concerned. They’re very 
concerned, particularly around the 3.5 public sector wage cut 
that’s coming, and has been told to every sector where the 
people are receiving public wages that there will be a cut. Now 
these cuts have to be negotiated, so we’ll see how that all plays 
out, but this is one that has people rightly worried, rightly 
worried. Particularly in education. What does that mean in 
education? 
 
Now we’ve heard the idea of taking nine days off and not being 
paid for that. Is that what’s going to happen in our schools? And 
the educational assistants who play such a critical role in our 
schools, are they going to be asked to take essentially two 
weeks off, nine days out of the 190 days that they’re in a 
classroom? Are they going to be absent? How’s this going to 
play out? Is this one year or three years? Are teachers going to 
be asked to take a 3.5 per cent wage cut right off the bat, and 
how is that going to be negotiated? And what a way to start 
negotiations off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, saying that we’re not 
even starting at zero; we’re starting at minus 3.5. And why, why 
are we there? 
 
You know, when we look across and we see a cabinet who will 
not take responsibility for the mess that we find ourselves in, 
you know, and we often hear them bemoan the fact that with 
more people there are more services, but there’s actually more 
taxes being collected, more sales tax being collected, more 
income tax being collected — all of those things that are 
happening that should balance out. But the fact of the matter is 
this government has not managed our budgets well, has been in 
fact creating an unsustainable system so that we find ourselves 
here. 
 
But teachers and educational assistants and the people in our 
schools who make our schools work are not the ones who 
created that situation, but yet they have to pay that price of 3.5. 
So families are very concerned as what’s going to be the impact 
for the schools and what’s going to be the impact for the kids in 
the schools. Because when we’re starting to see that kind of 
stress on our school communities, it doesn’t come without some 
consequences. And there’ll be some that we will be able to 
predict and some that we won’t be able to predict, the 
unintended consequences. 
 
And so this seems to be kind of a piece of legislation that 
probably should have been developed in connection with the 

stakeholders so that there would be no surprises. This seems to 
be, you know, what’s odd with this government. They’ve gone 
from the first couple of terms where they wouldn’t consult, but 
at least there weren’t big surprises. Now they seem to be 
operating on the system of the big surprise, the shock and awe. 
Who can believe what they’ll come up with next? 
 
And this has really got people very, very worried. And so when 
we see a government that’s taken this kind of approach to 
having an inclusive democracy where they have stakeholders 
who should be valued, should be consulted, and not afraid, not 
worried about what’s going to be the implication of the kind of 
legislation that is coming down the tubes because they just 
don’t know, they just don’t know what’s going to be happening. 
And so this is really, really worrisome, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And so with this kind of legislation there’ll be many questions, 
and I think probably there will be people at the municipal level 
having a good look over this to say, gee, we get all the 
responsibility of collecting the money. They really laid it out 
very, very clear so there will no mistakes. You know, I’m 
surprised that there’s not a 5 per cent commission for the 
government to accept the money from the municipality that 
they, you know, this is sort of . . . that they should feel lucky 
that they’re actually working in the service. Maybe it would be 
3.5 per cent commission that they would be charged back for 
the honour of collecting this money for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do have grave concerns, the 
direction that education is going. We see a government that is 
working without a vision of what kind of schools do they want 
to create, how do we become . . . And you know, in 
Saskatchewan, we’ve seen some results that have caused us 
concern about how well our kids are doing. The PISA 
[programme for international student assessment] scores that 
recently, that . . . I know there’s a variety of reasons why kids 
sometimes struggle to make the educational attainments that 
they should be. But certainly the kind of things this government 
is doing, in their haste to make sure that in some way they make 
up for their mismanagement, is happening on the back of our 
kids. This is a problem. 
 
And so you know, what we also will see in our tax world . . . 
We are concerned that potentially there could be an education 
property tax hike. And we see that. And who will be setting 
that, and what will be the responsibility, and how far the 
minister and the government hands will reach down the backs 
of the people who will be having to do that decision? 
 
And yet in the hope of this government, I’m sure that they’re 
hoping people don’t make the connection that an education 
property tax rate increase now is really a Sask Party rate 
increase. And that’s hugely important, that people know that 
this will be a Sask Party tax hike. And they can dress it up 
however they may want to do that, but I think that it’s really a 
concern that again, with all the impacts of this budget on 
working families and families with children that are 
school-aged, that they’re very concerned about what this 
implication will be. And so we think that we have real concerns 
about ensuring that the revenues that are collected through the 
education property tax program, those revenues should go to the 
school division in a way that’s transparent and accountable. 
 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

Now it is interesting. The Act talks about how it’s going to be 
very accountable how much money the municipality collects on 
behalf of the province, but it doesn’t talk about the other side of 
the coin, when it leaves the GRF [General Revenue Fund] that 
the money collected within school divisions will go back into 
that school division. What is the plan here? We await cautiously 
what the full plan is here, and will the money all be going back, 
you know. 
 
We just have to say, and I’ve said it once already, that we are 
deeply concerned that monies will be held back and they will 
come up with some excuse to hold money back, and that will be 
used and be redirected to make up for this government’s 
mismanagement, for the scandals that they’ve seen. 
 
And we could go into that whole litany, and whether it’s the 
bypass or GTH or the lean initiative, we can go down the list of 
where they had to find extra money to pay for certain things. 
And so will this be another source of income that they didn’t 
have before but now have their hands on? And we’re not really 
sure what the situation would be. So we think that this is a 
grave concern, and people at home and across the province 
should add this to the list. There’s been many, many concerns 
raised in this budget, and of course they will say . . . 
 
And of course this is the one-year anniversary of the election. 
Today we talked about the list of broken promises that this 
government had in one short year. It’s a very long list, a very 
long list, and of course whether it’s the libraries, whether it’s 
STC that was a year ago safe . . . and the minister will stand up 
and say, but we saw this coming. Well why didn’t you say 
something about it a year ago? 
 
They withheld the budget, said it couldn’t be released because it 
was too complicated. Well we know exactly why it was too 
complicated, because they didn’t want people to know. A year 
ago they did not talk about raising the PST, but I would think 
that they had everything . . . everything was on the table and 
that certainly were some of the concerns, but they did not talk 
about any tax increases. 
 
And here we have a province with about a billion dollars worth 
of tax increases. Didn’t mention that at all, that the tax increase 
will go up and the Finance minister will get up and say, well 
you know, resource revenue’s down. Resource revenue is down, 
to 1.2 billion. Well we saw that and we’ve been talking about 
that for a couple of years now, but for some reason this 
government has been living in a state of denial, or by the river, 
by the river denial. He was saying, no, no, no, it will all bounce 
back; it will bounce back. And finally, finally they had to 
acknowledge, but after the election, after the election, you 
know, and this is something where the budget, the deficit kept 
crawling up, crawling up and you know, the minister just could 
not get a handle on what the actual deficit was. 
 
So that’s why we have some worry about this kind of bill where 
we see them getting access to more cash. And the irony is 
they’re going to ask for all sorts of accountability and 
transparency to make sure that they’re getting every nickel from 
the municipalities, but not the same level of accountability and 
transparency from the provincial government to ensure that 
every penny of that money collected under the education 
property tax regime is actually going to education in our 

schools, in our communities right throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have a big worry, and I think people across 
Saskatchewan are beginning to have that level of questioning, 
that level of mistrust that this government will say one thing but 
you can almost bet a dollar they mean the other thing. And they 
will say, well we did tell you so. It’s like these grants-in-lieu 
that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes. Yes. You know, when 
they said everything was on the table, they really meant literally 
everything was on the table, especially those contracts that were 
signed 70 years ago that, you know, that unbelievably would be 
ripped up by this government. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why we have a concern about 
the education property tax and this new process that seems to be 
one-sided, you know, just three lines about the minister doing 
this and not really laying out exactly what their responsibilities 
are. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are on this side of the 
House deeply, deeply committed to making sure our schools are 
the best they can be, and we know today the schools could use 
more resources, could use more help, could reduce classroom 
sizes. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And we could use more and I particularly . . . And I know I’ve 
talked to people like Eugene Paquin about the issue around the 
hearing, the deaf, and hard of hearing. Those kind of resources 
are just falling away, falling away. And so we are onside to that. 
But we have a lot of questions about a process that sets up an 
Act, this government getting their hands on yet another pool of 
money and there’s no system of accountability or transparency 
in that legislation at all to ensure that every penny collected for 
education goes to education. That’s not in this legislation. I 
don’t see it at all. 
 
So with that I know that there will be many others who will 
want to get into this discussion, this debate over the days ahead. 
So I would move that Bill No. 48, The Education Property Tax 
Act would be adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 48, The Education 
Property Tax Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 49 — The 
Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Education Property Tax Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise again to speak and follow up on Bill No. 49, The Education 
Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act. And of course, 
that is a smaller Act. And we see these often in legislation, 
where there is a smaller trailer that comes along. 
 
Sort of reminds me of the STC bus. Right? You see the bus all 
full. I’ve seen it many times. What do they have? A little pup 
trailer behind. So this is sort of like the consequential 
amendment Act, you know, a little pup trailer behind, that 
pretty much the same kind of luggage that’s in the, or freight 
that’s in the main bus but just a little bit extra. And so they had 
to create a special bill. And so when we go into committee, 
we’ll have probably similar questions to be dealt at the same 
time. 
 
But again for people who have just tuned in the last minute or 
so, we do have a lot of questions. And our goal will be, on this 
side of the House, to ensure that every penny that’s collected 
under education property tax is going to education. And that 
people know that if their tax increases now under this, this will 
be known as the Sask Party tax rate or tax increase. And they 
better make sure that money goes where people can see it’s 
going. So the transparency, accountability part is going to be 
huge. They better make sure that there is a system. 
 
And this government, people have a lot of questions about their 
intent. It’s sad to say that that government, that the integrity has 
been really hammered over some of the surprises they did in the 
last budget, particularly with municipalities in terms of the 
grants-in-lieu and all those programs that they thought were in 
contracts but now are being ripped up. This is not a good way to 
start. So they can have their convoluted processes and hopefully 
will disguise some money that can be, you know, siphoned off. 
 
And I think of last year, the last couple of years where we saw 
upwards of 400 million go from Workers’ Comp back out to 
public, out to the public and to the private employers. Now 
some of that may have, should have gone, but other of, you 
know we’re having a situation now where some of that money 
could have really gone to help out with people who were hurt at 
work. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I won’t speak long about this Bill No. 49 
because it is relatively straightforward, it’s a consequential 
amendment. The meat of the matter really is in 48 and I’ve 
talked a bit about that. So I won’t want to repeat myself too 
many times, but we do have concerns, and we will be sure to 
raise those in committee. But we want to make sure the people, 
the stakeholders who are affected by this, do have a chance to 
raise their issues with us. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The Education 
Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 53 — The 
Provincial Health Authority Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to enter the debate today on Bill No. 53, The Provincial 
Health Authority Act, Mr. Speaker. This is the bill that will 
repeal the regional health authority Act and replace it with a 
regional health authority Act. What it does in essence, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is take us from 12 health regions down to one. 
Under the new provincial health authority . . . So I’d like to tell 
you a little bit about what the bill will do and then some of our 
concerns on this side of the House that we’ve heard from people 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
So under the new provincial health authority there will be a 
maximum of 10 board members. Currently regional health 
authorities can have up to 12 each. Section 2-4 gives the 
minister much broader powers to make decisions on the 
operation of the provincial health authority than before, than the 
minister had before. Section 3-11 allows the minister to appoint 
a non-voting member to the board for the same remuneration as 
a board member, and section 4-5 expands the rules for CEO 
contracts to any prescribed persons. And clause 8-2(3)(a) allows 
for critical incidents to be reported to a prescribed person 
instead of going directly to the provincial health authority, 
while the old legislation required critical incidents to be 
reported directly to the regional health authorities. And section 
10-2 gives cabinet broad powers to suspend any Act or law in 
order to cut health regions. 
 
So there’ll be an opportunity in committee to discuss some of 
the finer points of this. And I’ve got much to say about this bill 
and I will do that here, but I’m looking forward to the 
opportunity in committee to ask some more detailed questions 
about these changes in this bill. 
 
But broadly speaking this bill is taking us from 12 regions to 
one health region at a time where health care is already hugely 
strained. We’ve got front-line care workers, whether they work 
in long-term care or in our hospitals, who are under huge 
pressure, lack of staffing, pressure on health regions already. 
This budget has saw a point seven per cent increase in health 
region funding. For all intents and purposes, that’s a cut when 
you take into consideration wages, Mr. Speaker, when you take 
into consideration energy bills, usage, all those kinds of things. 
Point seven per cent increase — and that is a cut. 
 
And we’ve seen this time and time again from this government. 
This government has downloaded their problems onto the 
health regions and not provided them the funding that they 
need. I think about Saskatoon and Regina where the usage has 
grown exponentially and the resources just aren’t there. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, with this bill is saying, look 
over here, we’re doing something about health care; we’re 
doing something about our lousy record in health care. But on 
the other hand, Mr. Speaker, they are cutting front-line 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

positions, Mr. Speaker. So this is a distraction. The reality is 
what happens with this kind of reorganization . . . So 
administration changes, Mr. Speaker, are not transformational, I 
would argue. But what often happens with this kind of health 
care reorganization is it pulls everybody’s energy and time 
away from the work that they’re supposed to be doing. That the 
work, I might add . . . They’re already under huge stress. Health 
care providers are under huge stress on the front lines, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And despite this bill, when this bill passes, as it will because 
there are 50 of them, Mr. Speaker, and 11 of us — there is no 
doubt this bill will pass. And when this bill passes, and even 
when this new provincial health authority is in place later this 
year, Mr. Speaker, the changes will take years and years and 
years. So people’s attention, instead of being on providing the 
services that they should be, are on the reorganization, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of the issues that have cropped up . . . 
 
Well let’s talk about how this all came about, Mr. Speaker. 
About a year ago, actually a little bit after, prior to the last 
budget, the minister and the Premier started throwing out 
conversation around transformational change, and that wasn’t 
something that they talked about before the election. That was 
something they talked about after the election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they’re proposing that this health care amalgamation, 
moving from 12 to one region, is transformational change. So 
they’ve floated this balloon and talked about this idea at the last 
budget, and the minister had committed to putting a 
commissioner in place over the summer to start investigating 
and looking into this. The summer passed though, Mr. Speaker, 
and there was still no work done on this. And then in the final 
days, I believe at the end of August, the minister did announce a 
panel, a three-person panel of some very qualified and respected 
people to look into this. 
 
But the consultation period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was very 
short — just about a month, maybe slightly over a month, Mr. 
Speaker. I spoke to lots of people in health care, not just those 
who work in health care but users of health care, citizens, Mr. 
Speaker, who had concerns about not having an opportunity to 
have a voice or they were very dissatisfied with the consultation 
process. 
 
And then the government comes up with a report. And actually 
some of the concerns that were also expressed to me is the 
minister was very prescriptive in the mandate for this 
committee. It wasn’t suggesting to the minister or to this panel 
that they should look into how many health regions is the 
optimum number. The mandate of the committee was to cut the 
number of health regions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t want to be prescriptive. I’m not sure if that’s the 
right answer. I do know the right answer isn’t throwing a 
system into flux or chaos, which is what this kind of change 
does at a time when it’s already under pressure thanks to this 
government’s record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Issues around executive and CEO pay, that’s something that 
we’ve been raising on this side of the House for quite some 
time. We saw in health regions under this government that 
executive pay that ballooned, so this government can talk about 

wanting to reduce that. But it’s under them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that it’s increased. RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region], I believe, in a period of about three years, executive 
pay increased by 46 per cent. In Five Hills, it was by 37 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. People were concerned about that. 
 
And last year we had an election and this government had 
committed that they would take $7.5 million in the budget — 
actually this wasn’t in the election; it came up in the budget — 
that they would put that money onto the front lines in long-term 
care because we have a crisis in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
We have huge understaffing issues where you’ve got the ratio 
of patients or residents to health care workers at a rate where 
health care workers have trouble getting patients to the toilet in 
a timely fashion or to get them water or to feed them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this government last year committed to taking $7.5 million 
of executive pay and putting it onto the front lines in health care 
in long-term care. And I can tell you from speaking to people, 
that hasn’t happened yet. That hasn’t happened. So we have a 
government who talks about cutting administration and saving 
money. Well they had an opportunity this last year to do that as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A big thing that I continue to hear from people over and over 
again, and I had an opportunity this fall to travel around to 
multiple communities in rural Saskatchewan and a big theme 
that I heard loud and clear around this, and this was before the 
government had announced its decision around one health 
region, but the thing that I heard loud and clear from people, 
whether it was in Preeceville or La Ronge or North Battleford, 
that they were very concerned about local voices and losing 
their local voice. And in fact, in places like La Ronge, they 
already felt like their decisions, health care decisions, were 
being made further away from them than they would have liked. 
But they fear this move to a provincial health authority and 
those decision-making voices getting farther away than they 
already are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you think about the suicide crisis of young people, or 
you’ve got kids committing suicide, deciding that they don’t 
have enough hope in their life that they chose to take their lives, 
Mr. Speaker. That requires some serious commitment and 
dedication and solutions from people in the North, and the 
financial resources and the supports from this government to 
make that happen. And people in the North don’t believe that 
that’s happening and have not a lot of faith that this is going to 
make that possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to me. This government likes to latch on to the 
quick, easy fix. And obviously health care is incredibly 
complicated. But just a couple of years ago in this House, we 
were having debate after debate about lean, about spending $40 
million on John Black, an American lean consultant, and $6,000 
a day for sensei and translators or all kinds of things, Mr. 
Speaker, wrapped around this government’s lean work. And 
lean was going to be . . . The rolling out lean across the 
province was going to be the health care saviour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And we know from experience — you just need to go look in an 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

emergency room or talk to anybody who’s accessing health care 
— lean has not been the silver bullet. Nor is this going to be, 
Mr. Speaker. And in fact, I argue that it will put additional 
pressure on already a strained system. There’s lots of concern 
from health care workers who are telling me they’re concerned 
about what this is going to look like and how this is going to 
impact the care that they provide. I’m hearing that loud and 
clear. And we’ll have many questions in committee about this. 
 
We have huge challenges in health care, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has failed to address. The end of March, March 
2017, actually — that was just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker — 
our Premier, just a few short years ago, had committed to zero 
waits in emergency rooms by this time. And again, one only 
needs to visit a . . . He did back away on that promise just a 
couple of years ago and extended that, but not that long ago he 
had committed by March, the end of March 2017, that there 
would be no waits in emergency rooms. 
 
We’ve seen around surgery wait times, the one place where the 
government did have some really good progress because they 
put money into it, those waits have had some serious issues and 
had started to climb again, Mr. Speaker. Waits for specialists 
are a huge problem. Access to family doctors continues to be a 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are no shortage of issues. I’m curious around the CEO 
tours, and it’ll be interesting in committee both on this bill, but 
also in Health estimates. So the one thing out of this 
government’s seniors’ care crisis that they had committed to 
doing a few years ago under the former minister were CEO 
tours of long-term care facilities. So I’m just wondering how 
that is going to carry on under this new provincial health 
authority. It gives us a snapshot of what’s going on in long-term 
care, and it hasn’t improved, Mr. Speaker. Our most vulnerable 
citizens, the frail elderly — I think it’s about 7 per cent of the 
population who end up in long-term care, who need to have 
better supports, Mr. Speaker . . . And so I’m curious about the 
CEO tours and how that is going to look like going forward, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Home care and ensuring that . . . So we think about what costs 
in health care, and home care is a really great way to help keep 
people out of hospitals. So we look at our overcrowded 
emergency rooms. We look at our overcrowded hospitals — too 
many people. They’re called alternative level of care patients. 
They shouldn’t be in the hospitals, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
because we’re missing supports out in the community. 
 
We’re missing mental health and addiction support, Mr. 
Speaker. This government had a mental health and addictions 
action plan two-plus years ago, and there’s been very little 
action on that. 
 
So we look at how all these things are connected, mental health 
and addictions and emergency room waits. We look at seniors’ 
care, and many seniors who end up waiting in the transition 
wards in hospitals, which are not homes, for months at a time in 
long-term care. We don’t have proper home care services or it’s 
been whittled back and whittled back, Mr. Speaker. Care for 
chronic illnesses, often people end up in the ER [emergency 
room] because of chronic diseases, whether it’s diabetes or lung 
diseases or heart issues, Mr. Speaker. Chronic illnesses are a 

huge part of the burden on our ERs and our hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. The government hasn’t put the money into those 
preventative, proactive things. 
 
And this moving to one health region again is sort of that, look 
over here; we’re doing something about health care. But really 
they aren’t, Mr. Speaker. We have seen cut after cut. And mark 
my words, as this budget continues to roll out, there will be 
many more cuts across health care. 
 
We’ve been talking the last couple of days about cuts to 
audiology services or spiritual care. Those are small cuts, Mr. 
Speaker, but they have huge impacts. They’re small cuts in 
terms of a budget number, though I believe it’s 1.5 million for 
spiritual care. But you know, when I’ve talked to people in the 
past, since the budget, about what spiritual care does for them 
. . . I’ve talked to people who have used spiritual care who said 
it made all the difference in the world when it came to their 
loved one having a good death, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve spoken to people in health care who have told me those 
spiritual care workers, those professional sort of 
multi-denominational professional spiritual care workers — 
they aren’t clergy; they’re professional spiritual care workers — 
are a huge part of the health care team. That’s what front-line 
care workers have told me, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve seen these 
kinds of cuts. 
 
Oh, we’ve seen the increase to long-term care rates, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget. So we have a government who’s 
saying, look over here; we’re doing something about our lousy 
record. But they are making cuts, Mr. Speaker, and more will 
come. 
 
I look forward to the opportunity, once this gets into committee, 
to ask the minister some very specific questions from all kinds 
of folks that have spoken to me about their concerns around the 
move to one health region. And the bottom line is, this is going 
to put more strain and pressure and stress on an already 
overstressed system that this government, despite years of 
record revenue and an opportunity to invest in some really good 
things, has chosen not to do that. They’ve chosen to try to find 
the silver bullet and invest in things that have made problems 
greater. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to conclude my 
remarks and let this bill move to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 53, The 
Provincial Health Authority Act be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 53, The Provincial Health Authority Act, 
be committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 54 — The 
Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Provincial Health Authority Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This Bill 
No. 54, The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017 is the companion bill to The Provincial 
Health Authority Act, Mr. Speaker, the enabling legislation that 
will allow this government to basically take local voices out of 
health care, moving us from 12 regions, Mr. Speaker, to one 
health region. I’m glad to have an opportunity to just speak a 
little bit more about this decision by the government to do this. 
 
The one thing I didn’t mention on Bill 53, which I think is 
incredibly important, is the 3.5 per cent cut that this government 
will be imposing on health, Mr. Speaker. So I talked about the 
point seven increase in the budget, which for all intents and 
purposes is a cut, but they’re also imposing a 3.5 per cent cut 
across the board, Mr. Speaker. You can’t cut 3.5 per cent out of 
an already strained system and not cause great harm, Mr. 
Speaker. This is only going to make matters worse, and this 
chaos that this move will create for years to come. 
 
So this bill, as I said last time, these two bills will pass and we 
will be down to one health region, but that the change to that 
health region over time will take years and years and years, and 
pull people’s attention away from the good work that they 
should be doing in ensuring that people have access to the 
services that they need. 
 
As the Health critic I would be the first to admit — I’ve talked 
about some of the challenges in health care — I would be the 
first to admit things need to change. I have story after story of 
people who come to my office and tell me their concerns about 
health care. But this administrative change, Mr. Speaker, is not 
transformational, and will, I believe, have the opposite effect 
and will hurt people. But we’ll have the opportunity in 
committee to discuss both Bill 53 and Bill 54, the bill that I’m 
speaking to right now. But with that I will conclude my remarks 
and look forward to time in committee, and I will let this bill 
move to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 54, The 
Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 54, The Provincial Health Authority 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 50 — The Provincial 
Capital Commission Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today and join in the debate around Bill No. 50, The 
Provincial Capital Commission Act. Now this bill mainly, Mr. 
Speaker, repeals The Wascana Centre Act, and I’ll be focusing 
most of my comments on Wascana Park and Wascana Centre, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The park, it’s well known. It borders the southern edge of my 
riding, Regina Douglas Park, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it also 
encompasses the building that we’re sitting and standing in here 
today. It’s a beautiful park. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you go 
around it you’ll see how many different people use it, both in 
the city and tourists who come to the city, and how many 
people use it for many different occasions and reasons. I often 
go for a walk around the lake on Sundays, and in particular 
you’ll see the diversity of our city in full bloom or on full 
display, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at that time. It really is a beautiful 
space, a wonderful community gathering point and a 
well-utilized piece of property. 
 
Now this bill, it will repeal The Wascana Centre Act, which was 
the piece of legislation that created the authority that was tasked 
with the honour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of regulating and 
controlling this beautiful piece of property, and it will replace it 
with the new Act and transfer control from the Wascana Centre 
Authority to the Provincial Capital Commission. 
 
We’ve already been hearing concerns from many stakeholders, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to this change. I’m sure that 
members opposite have also been receiving those concerns, in 
particular members from the Regina region, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This bill will create a very, very significant change in 
terms of who has the power to control, or who has control over 
decisions with respect to Wascana Park and Wascana Centre, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

In particular, and I first of all will talk a little bit about how it 
was under The Wascana Centre Act. Under that legislation, 
cabinet selected 5 out of 11 of the commissioners. So it was 
created in a way so that no matter who was in provincial 
government, no matter who was sitting in this House at any 
particular time, they would never have the ability to control the 
Wascana Centre Authority while there was the ability to have 
five members on there who had a voice, who had a say. The 
control of this very, very important piece of land was never 
politicized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was never in the hand of any 
particular provincial government body. And it’s been working 
very well for the Wascana Centre for a very long period of time, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now under this new legislation, cabinet will select all of the 
commissioners for the body that will be controlling Wascana 
Centre, with two out of five . . . so there’ll be five 
commissioners total, and two out of five of those 
commissioners will be selected by cabinet from lists nominated 
by the city and by the University of Regina, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So there’ll be only one individual there to express the 
desires, wishes, and concerns and interests of the city of Regina, 
and there will only be one individual on the commission who 
will be expressing the desires, wishes, and concerns of the 
University of Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then there will 
be three individuals in addition to that chosen by cabinet. 
 
So not only will whoever is representing the city and whoever is 
representing the University of Regina will be ultimately chosen 
by cabinet, but those other three individuals will also be chosen 
by cabinet, which provides the Sask Party and the provincial 
government of future generations to come with something that 
had never existed before within the Wascana Centre Authority, 
and didn’t exist before for good reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Because as I said, it took the politicization of this very, very 
important piece of land away from any type of . . . any 
government, past or future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that 
changes it. That completely changes this legislation. 
 
So naturally stakeholders are quite concerned about that, and 
they should be. We’ve seen, as we say time and time again, 
we’ve seen years of this government, of the Sask Party messing 
up things that they have control over. We’ve seen years of 
scandal, mismanagement, and waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 
obviously there’s going to be quite a concern if they couldn’t 
handle the provincial budget. If they couldn’t handle this 
province before, I don’t know why we would trust them with 
handling this important piece of property when it’s been served 
so well by the commissioners in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We’ve seen time and time again the Sask Party conducting a 
power grab when they don’t like what they see or when they 
want to take over something that, for whatever reason, they’re 
not happy with. We’ve seen that with NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program], Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re seeing 
that with school boards now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in education 
legislation that’s coming down from this budget this year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And we’ve seen that with health regions as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re seeing — and I laugh a little bit when I say this — but 

we’re seeing a centralization of power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
provincial government. And we’re even seeing it with this 
important, important body of land in this city, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, land that I don’t want to see lost for future generations. 
I want to be able to experience it with my children and my 
grandchildren in the condition that it is now. I don’t want to see 
it . . . I see it as it is, see what could happen with it in the future 
when more government creep happens. 
 
We’re actually already seeing a bit of a privatization creep on 
this land, and I worry about what more will come with the 
provincial government desperate for cash, comes and takes over 
control over this land, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we said before, 
or as I’ve said already, we’ve seen a decade of mismanagement 
by this government in many areas of the province, in many 
different departments, and I worry about what level of 
mismanagement we’ll see when they take over control of the 
Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
As I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re already hearing concerns 
from stakeholders, and I’m sure that we’ll be hearing more once 
more people understand what’s happening with this legislation, 
and once more people have the ability or are able to wrap their 
minds around what’s going on. 
 
And I want to quote actually from one of Regina city 
councillors who has already spoken out against this change, and 
it’s ward 2 city councillor and actually I believe past Sask Party 
candidate, Bob Hawkins, who I believe, thanks to my friend . . . 
[inaudible] . . . ran in 2011 for the Saskatchewan Party. And he 
said, “This was done without consultation and suddenly in the 
provincial budget document. I know no approach to 
consultations with the city whatsoever,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And if they didn’t consult with the city on this major change, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not too sure who they did consult with 
or if they did any consultation whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand from my conversations with 
city councillors that this came as a huge shock to many city 
councillors and they’re all very, very concerned about what this 
is going to mean for the future of our park. 
 
And he also said . . . And I don’t know if I mentioned this 
before. It’s a Global News article dated March 31st titled, 
“Regina city councillor worried about future of Wascana Park.” 
He also said, “We need some transparency here. Transparency 
which is especially important because something as special as 
Wascana Park is an issue,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that’s the concern here and that’s a concern we’re seeing in 
a lot of aspects of this budget, the lack of transparency by this 
government with respect to this legislation in particular. It feels 
like it’s something that we’re going to . . . that the hammer 
might not drop now, but it’s sure probably going to drop in the 
months to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s the worry, is 
we don’t know what sort of major impact this will have. 
 
But by the time the legislation passes, the city of Regina, the 
University of Regina, the people of Saskatchewan won’t be able 
to have a say. The people of Regina won’t be able to have a say. 
This will be controlled by the Sask Party and provincial 
governments to come. And that’s not how this was designed, 
and it was working successfully generations prior. There’s no 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

reason for the change to happen now unless it is nothing but to 
serve as a grab, some sort of money grab by the Sask Party in 
future times to come. 
 
As I’ve said already, we worry about if there’s going to be a 
privatization creep in the Wascana Park, worried about what 
this is going to mean for roads and maintenance, worried about 
what this going to mean for the Wascana master plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, which is included in the legislation. But from 
my reading of the legislation, it looks like there is going to be 
an allowance for changes to be made to the Wascana master 
plan, and that will be outlined in the regulations. And as always, 
we don’t have a copy of the regulations so we don’t know how 
stringent the requirements are going to be for those changes, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the Wascana master plan, as it currently sits, does have 
some requirements for any new buildings or any new structure 
or creation in the park. But the worry is what sort of changes 
are going to happen in the months to come? 
 
With that, I know there’ll be other members on our side who 
will want to join in on this debate, who will also want to 
express the concerns that they’ve heard from stakeholders with 
respect to this terrifying change in this new legislation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So with that, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 
50, The Provincial Capital Commission Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, The 
Provincial Capital Commission Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Marit that Bill No. 51 — The 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s with some gravity that I rise to speak to this bill because 
again we see more privatization on the part of this government 
when we see a government as desperate as this one to nail down 
some money that they can use for fixing the problems that they 
have. It’s always sad when we see again the loss of a 
well-established and actually financially successful Crown 
corporation that has served producers in Saskatchewan very 
well in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, it’s a simple bill. I don’t think there’s a lot to the 
bill itself. It’s basically three pages, two and a half pages long. 
But it just destroys the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. It 
wipes it out, Mr. Speaker. Everything that is owned by the 
corporation . . . It’s still about 900 railcars. I think they started 
with around 1,000 back when it was established. It’s now down 

to 900. All of that property is being transferred and assigned to 
and vested in the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So they’re taking all those assets that are there. I know the book 
value is around 6 million, I think, at this point in time. But I 
think those cars are worth more than that to the people that are 
using them right now. And then basically what this does is it 
gives this government carte blanche now to do what they see fit 
with the railcars themselves. So that’s one side of the equation 
and I’ll talk about that more later. 
 
But I think one of the important pieces of this bill is the fact that 
the money coming from the profits is actually turned over to our 
shortline railway system. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the 
main lines in Saskatchewan used to own all the shortlines for 
many decades. But in the ’70s and ’80s they decided to start 
abandoning these shortline rails and many, many, many 
thousands of miles of track has been pulled out all across the 
province. But for entrepreneurial farmers who were able to get 
some capital together and make a bid for some of these 
shortlines, they were able to purchase them. And we know now 
that some of them are incredibly, incredibly successful and are 
doing very, very, well. But they also provide a really big service 
to the people of Saskatchewan, and you may wonder how that 
might be.  
 
Well what these shortlines do is they protect our road systems. 
We know what kind of beating railroads take when you have 
those big super-B trucks hauling grain down the rural roads. 
And this is an important cost for all our RMs [rural 
municipality] and for our highways system. So for the Minister 
of Highways to cause a burden like this for shortlines is actually 
short sighted, Mr. Speaker, because it means he’s causing a 
burden for all the taxpayers as well. So that’s one of the 
problems with this bill, and that’s just one. 
 
The other thing that we have . . . I have a proud press release 
from the government that came out in 2013 and the headline is 
“Government increases shortline railway grants.” So they 
increased the spending. It was $900,000 that used to be 
$700,000. And this is what the government has said about the 
funding. Here’s the quote from the press release: 
 

“We are happy to once again increase the amount of 
funding available for shortline railways,” Highways . . . 
minister . . . said. “These railways [here’s what he said, 
they] support rural economic development by providing 
grain producers, oil producers and other shippers with an 
effective transportation option that also lightens the load on 
our . . . [railways]. 
 

The other important factor, Mr. Speaker, and indeed the 
president of the Shortline Railway Association has pointed this 
out since the budget, is that that $900,000 was matched by the 
shortline railways. So we’re talking about almost $2 million 
now that’s being impacted by the decision to throw away the 
profits of a very viable and successful Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. So the funding was a 50-50 cost share, and it was 
matched by the privately owned shortline railways as long as 
they were eligible. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. There’s one particular 
railway, Big Sky Rail, which I believe was owned at that time 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

by a company called Mobil Capital Holdings. But a few months 
after this announcement was made, we see one of our local 
companies here, AGT Food . . . I think you’re familiar with 
them. They’re a company that’s built out on Tower Road a new 
facility there, and they’ve actually purchased some land that 
was along Tower Road. They’ve also purchased a shortline 
railway, and that was one of the railways they bought a few 
months after this announcement, Big Sky Rail, amongst some 
other shortline rails in other parts of the country. 
 
So it’s interesting. Now we know that they’re going to get rid of 
that grant. They’re going to take a huge hit on especially some 
of the smaller shortline railways that need this maintenance 
money to keep those railways safe, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a safety 
issue as well. And we’re told by the Shortline Railway 
Association that if this money is gone, it’s going to affect the 
viability of some of those smaller railways which are servicing 
and providing a very important service to the producers in the 
area but, as I said, also to the people who use the roads and the 
highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it kind of reminds me of cutting STC, and it’s almost like 
cutting off your nose to spite your face. And in this case it’s 
making money, so we don’t even have the case that they used 
for STC, Mr. Speaker. But they’re saying, well you know, it’s 
an old program and doesn’t need it anymore, and we’ve got to 
move on, you know. And that’s very different than what the 
government was saying in 2013, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So one of the questions . . . I know the minister made great 
news about the fact that a lot of those cars are quite old. They 
only have 14 years left in their life. Well why stop now? We 
still have 14 years. So what is pushing the government at this 
point in time to throw that money away? And I think we’re 
going to have to ask a lot of those questions in committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think what’s also interesting is we don’t hear the Minister of 
Agriculture weighing in on this. Surely he’s hearing from 
producers and from local RMs about the impact that this is 
going to have on the shortline railways and therefore on the 
producers that use those railways. So there’s questions there as 
well. 
 
The other question is, which one of these shortline railways are 
going to be able to afford to purchase these cars? They have 
questions about how the bidding process is going to be done, 
and we’ll be watching very, very carefully, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about who actually ends up with these cars. Is it going 
to be fair process? Is it going to be one that allocates fairly to all 
of those shortline railways? Or are the more wealthy ones, the 
ones with access to capital, the ones that are going to be able to 
buy these cars with 14 years of life left in them? Are they going 
to be able to buy them to the detriment of the smaller shortline 
railways that don’t have access to capital like some of the larger 
ones do? 
 
Or you know, AGT Food is the highest trading company on the 
Saskatchewan stock exchange right now. They are very 
wealthy, and they will have access to the capital that they need. 
So what happens if they can buy all 900 of them? Is that what’s 
going to happen? 
 

And then of course there’s the lease to CN [Canadian National 
Railway Company] . . . or I forget if it’s CN or CP [Canadian 
Pacific Railway]. Half of those cars are currently leased right 
now for a lot of money, a lot of revenue for Saskatchewan. And 
so that lease will end, and then we have to see what happens to 
those 500 cars. I just want to make sure I’ve got that right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Perry Pellerin, who I’m just quoting now from a Western 
Producer article that came out after the budget: 
 

Perry Pellerin, [who’s the] president of the Western 
Canadian Short Line Railway Association, said the 13 
short lines could use the cars but he doesn’t know if they 
could afford them. As well, the cars have only 14 years of 
life left . . . 
 
The province announced in its budget . . . that 900 
provincial cars would be sold and short-line rail[way] 
companies are first in line.  
 
However, Pellerin expressed worry about other costs.  He 
said the revenue from the cars, which the province leased 
to railways, paid for a sustainability grant . . . [which is 
what I talked about earlier]. 

 
And he said “. . . that’s all gone now.” Oh yes, here we are, 
lease revenues, $2.7 million a year. More than half of the cars 
are leased to CP, the Canadian Pacific Railway, and 46 per cent 
were leased to Last Mountain Railway as of July 31st, 2016. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s important to note that this 
corporation has served producers well, has served the people of 
Saskatchewan very well, was a profitable corporation. It was 
one that serves a very important need. And if the Government 
of Saskatchewan is taking all these profitable cars back into the 
inventory for the people of Saskatchewan, I don’t see why it 
couldn’t be arranged that shortlines could still have fair 
allocation of these cars and that the profits from the cars could 
still be turned over. 
 
So whether or not there’s an actual corporation, the people that 
run that corporation are valued employees. We know that they 
work very hard and that they could certainly do that work as 
public servants as well. It’s not too late for the government to 
decide to actually keep this operation going, maybe not as a 
Crown corporation but maybe as government business, as core 
to the services that this government provides to rural folks, Mr. 
Speaker. And when they talk a lot about core services and 
what’s important, I think this very clearly is one. 
 
And we’ll certainly want to talk to the minister about how the 
assessment was done in terms of transformational change, and 
how this is not part of the core function of government. So we’ll 
be looking again at what kind of rubric did they use. Was there 
a check list? Is there a toolkit? How do those decisions get 
made, or are they simply ideological chain pulling, Mr. 
Speaker, that you know, if they don’t like it, they pull the chain 
and away it goes? 
 
So I don’t see any rhyme or reason to some of the decisions that 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

are being made in this budget, other than we see a government 
that’s desperate and that runs through everything that we see. 
That’s the thread. They’re desperate because of the 
mismanagement and the waste and the scandal that they have 
perpetuated upon the people of Saskatchewan for the last 10 
years. And now, when it comes time to pay the piper, they are 
actually destroying some very valuable Crown corporations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s something that the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to want to weigh in on. It’s still a fairly 
new announcement, although I think many of the main players 
were notified in advance that this was a possible outcome of 
this particular budget. So we’ll be watching very, very carefully 
to see what decisions are made and how they’re being made, 
and whether they’re being done fairly or not especially for the 
shortline railways, Mr. Speaker, who need to be treated fairly in 
this process. 
 
So at this point I think we’ll have a lot of questions for the 
minister in committee, so I would conclude my comments on 
Bill No. 51, The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal 
Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Highways that Bill No. 51, The 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 51, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corporation Repeal Act be committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 52 — The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say I’m 
pleased to wade into the debate on Bill No. 52, The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. But as an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon who 
knows the value of the Meewasin Valley Authority, it’s with a 
bit of sadness that this debate is happening here today. The 

Meewasin Valley . . . I’ll tell you a little bit about what this bill 
is about and then my impression of what this bill means to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and Saskatoon in particular but the 
broader province as well, and some of my own experiences with 
it. 
 
So this bill in particular removes the provincial government’s 
statutory or legal requirement to fund the Meewasin Valley 
Authority with $740,169 and the U of S’s obligation to provide 
$574,000, while maintaining the city of Saskatoon’s 
requirement to provide $556,700. So it’s removing the statutory 
requirements of the province, and the university will not have to 
fund the Meewasin any more. And it’s just on the city of 
Saskatoon to do that. 
 
It also removes the requirement that the province, the city, and 
the university contribute at least $500,000. And then there’s a 
few housekeeping amendments to modernize language like 
replacing “his” with “his or her” and correct cross-references to 
other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meewasin Valley Authority came out of the 
Moriyama plan. The plan was in 1978. It was a 100-year plan 
for the Meewasin Valley project, and the piece of legislation 
came before us in 1979, so almost 40 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see in this budget actually the government hammering 
organizations and institutions that have been around for many 
years — the Grain Car Corporation, STC, things that benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The vision for Meewasin, I’ll tell you a little bit about it from 
their web page, Mr. Speaker: 
 

[The Meewasin Valley Authority Act was] created in 1979 
. . . is a conservation agency dedicated to conserving the 
cultural and natural resources of the South Saskatchewan 
River Valley. It is the means by which the three 
participating parties (City of Saskatoon, Government of 
Saskatchewan, and University of Saskatchewan) have 
chosen to best manage the Meewasin Valley in the South 
Saskatchewan River Basin. The creation of the Meewasin 
is based on the concept that the partners working together 
through a single agency — Meewasin — can accomplish 
more than they could individually. 

 
I think it’s that partnership that has seen our riverbank thrive, 
see development balanced with conservation, create a real gem 
in the city of Saskatoon. We can see the University of 
Saskatchewan and development that’s happened when there’s 
new buildings built. There’s certain requirements that are in 
place, Mr. Speaker, that maintains the character of our beautiful 
university campus, the conservation of prairie, all kinds of 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The mission statement of the Meewasin Valley Authority: 
 

. . . exists to ensure a healthy and vibrant river valley, with 
a balance between [that] human use and conservation by: 
Providing leadership in the management of its resources; 
Promoting understanding, conservation and beneficial use 
of the Valley; and 
Undertaking programs and projects in the river valley 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

development and conservation . . . 
 
When I think about investment in the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, some of the things that jump to mind are tourism. 
The river valley really is the selling feature of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. And as a Saskatoon resident, Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . 
Not that Wascana isn’t beautiful, but I would argue it’s the river 
valley in Saskatoon that really makes that city a wonderful 
place. Having a river flow through it that has had really great 
stewardship by the three partners has served citizens in 
Saskatoon very well. 
 
I think about tourism. So when we attract conferences to 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, one of the things people like, they like 
to know that you’ve got great restaurants, good services to 
ensure that you can hold your conference at the right facilities. 
But having a beautiful city in a river valley that is maintained in 
the way that it is, is a huge draw for tourism, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re bringing in people from out of province or around the 
world. 
 
But I also think about that need to attract to our university and 
to our province the big brains of the world, Mr. Speaker. When 
people are looking at relocating, there’s all kinds of evidence 
. . . Well part of it is around cultural corridors, but the things 
that people are looking for when they come to a city, or the 
things that attract them, that Meewasin and the river valley is a 
huge part of that. The historic, the cultural components, the 
ability to . . . Running along the river, biking along the river, 
those kinds of things attract people to our city who contribute to 
our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also need to point out that we just had . . . So we had an 
election a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and there was not a word 
about this leading up to the election. Nobody talked about . . . 
None of the Sask Party candidates, the Premier, nobody talked 
about, none of the Saskatoon Sask Party MLAs who were 
running talked about pulling money from Meewasin. It emerged 
a few months later when last year’s budget in June came out 
where everything was on the table. 
 
But you know what we had even more recently, Mr. Speaker? 
We had a by-election in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Meewasin, Mr. Speaker. And I know I knocked on doors in 
Saskatoon Meewasin, which like many of our constituencies 
has a piece of the riverbank. I actually live . . . The Meewasin 
Valley Trail is about 500 metres from my house. I can walk 
through Holiday Park to behind the sanatorium where the trail 
winds up behind it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Many of our constituencies have a piece of that wonderful 
riverbank in them, and I know Saskatoon Meewasin is one of 
those constituencies. And I know when I was knocking on 
doors, I didn’t hear a single person mention that this money was 
going to . . . that nobody said we are doing the wrong thing with 
Meewasin. None of the Sask Party members talked about this in 
their campaign, and that was just a few short . . . well weeks 
ago, actually. Was it about five weeks now, Mr. Speaker? 
 
People in Saskatoon love the river valley. You take a walk on a 
summer night and it, that trail, from my neck of the woods up in 
Holiday Park to Silverwood, the other side of the bridge, Mr. 
Speaker, out to Whitecap, and past the university, there are 

people riding their bikes, skateboarding, walking, people taking 
photos, people just enjoying nature. It’s really a beautiful 
opportunity. 
 
You can either be in sort of the hub of the downtown centre and 
have . . . You can have the beautiful spray park along the 
riverbank or you can be in a much more natural setting, have 
the opportunity to canoe on the South Saskatchewan, and you 
sure can appreciate the beauty of the Meewasin Valley. 
 
And cutting this money to the Meewasin Valley Authority, or 
the statutory requirement . . . So we have two pieces here. This 
is a government who in this budget cut almost half of the 
money from the province. It was a $409,000 cut, which is 
almost half of the money that they were expecting, their 
statutory funding. And then they’re removing the statutory 
funding so the Meewasin will now rely on grants. So it will be 
up to the whim of this government to decide that perhaps next 
budget the Meewasin will get zero, at a time when this 
government is already downloading more and more pressure 
onto the cities, whether it’s by cutting library funding or the 
grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker, which are a huge piece. 
 
Just reading a news article from just not more than a few days 
ago: “For the city of Saskatoon to take over the MVA, funding 
would cost $1.58 million a year, or a property tax increase of 
nearly 1 per cent,” the report says. It suggests that the MVA 
[Meewasin Valley Authority] . . . So that’s an increase. I would 
argue that the Meewasin Valley Authority, much like Wascana 
here in Regina, is a benefit to all people in Saskatchewan. 
Obviously those of us who live 500 metres away from the 
Meewasin benefit every day, but I think people from across this 
province benefit from having these jewels well maintained and 
high-functioning partnerships. When you pull the money, Mr. 
Speaker, it creates a huge problem. 
 
I just want to mention a few things about the Meewasin. The 
Meewasin Trail ranked as the top feature of Saskatonians that 
they like about walking in Saskatoon. So the Meewasin Valley 
trail is their favourite part of walking in Saskatoon. We’ve got 
the Beaver Creek Conservation Area. Anybody who has a child 
in Saskatoon likely has had their child attend the interpretive 
centre out there or the opportunity to go cross-country skiing 
there in the winter. There’s some cabins that you can stay in. 
Beaver Creek is just a few kilometres outside of the city, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The interpretive centre there opened in 1984, and it’s a 
microcosm of the Meewasin Valley. It’s located where a prairie 
creek meets a prairie river, and it contains one of the few 
uncultivated short grass prairie sites in Saskatchewan. The 
beavers that live there play an important role in keeping the 
creek habitat teeming with wildlife. Beavers build dams that 
flood waters upstream, creating beaver ponds, and many plants 
and animals make their homes in these sheltered ponds. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So kids get an opportunity . . . Well adults as well, but it’s 
really a wonderful educational tool. I know many people who 
take their kids out there, who’ve had the opportunity to spend a 
weekend out there cross-country skiing. 
 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

We’ve got the skating rink in downtown Saskatoon, which is 
part of Meewasin, and it’s probably one of the most visited 
sites. Thousands of people come to that skating rink every 
winter, Mr. Speaker, right with the historic Bessborough right 
next to them. It’s really quite a beautiful thing to do in the 
winter. 
 
We’ve got the Meewasin northeast swale, and these are just 
some parts and pieces of it. It’s one of the largest pieces of 
unbroken prairie, riparian, forest, wetland in the Saskatoon 
region and contains patches of rare fescue. And one of the parts, 
just reading a little bit about the swale, the Meewasin is 
monitoring the swale over the long term. So they did a bioblitz 
to see sort of the biodiversity in 2011 to get a baseline, and 
helped identify critical areas that were important for 
biodiversity. And they’re using that as a monitoring tool, sort of 
for the broader perspective, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the northeast 
swale. 
 
We’ve got Cranberry Flats. Again if you’ve got kids and you 
don’t have a lot of money, the reality is I see this cut to the 
Meewasin really hurting people in Saskatoon Riversdale. I live 
in one of the more socio-economically diverse constituencies 
probably in the province. I have some much more affluent 
people who live in Montgomery, but the reality is there’s some 
very poor people who live in my constituency as well. 
 
You know, not everybody can afford a trip to a regional park. 
Not everybody can afford to drive up to Waskesiu or head down 
to Cypress Hills. And sometimes the river valley and the 
activities of the river valley and the parks, whether it’s Gabriel 
Dumont Park or whatever, might be the social outings and the 
summer holidays for some of my constituents, and I think 
people across Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And it benefits 
everybody. 
 
But I see this government’s decision to remove the statutory 
funding and impose a cut on the Meewasin Valley and put it in 
jeopardy, and put this wonderful partnership in jeopardy down 
the road, will impact people who live in Saskatoon Riversdale 
and elsewhere, people who don’t have money to go on those 
holidays elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that I used to love before I had kids was 
canoeing. And I would like to tell you that I kept up canoeing 
after my oldest was born, but she didn’t like to leave home very 
often. She was a bit of a homebody, which is ironic now as she 
has a bit of a travel bug and is living thousands of kilometres 
away from me. 
 
But when she was little . . . Before she was born I was an avid 
canoeist, and one of the things that the Meewasin had put 
together, a really wonderful eco-canoe guide, like all along the 
South Saskatchewan you could take a self-guided canoe . . . 
There was a map from Gardiner dam to the Forks where the 
North and South Saskatchewan rivers meet, Mr. Speaker, and 
the Meewasin Valley Authority had helped put that together. 
And there’s nothing quite like canoeing into Saskatoon, putting 
in at Poplar Bluffs, which you can’t anymore. 
 
Poplar Bluffs was a part of Meewasin, but because of the river 
valley and the flow of the river, it’s a very steep drop-off. So 
the Poplar Bluffs canoe launch is closed now, but it was really 

nice to be able to canoe into the city at night. You’re kind of 
like a . . . It just is one of the most lovely experiences you could 
have with the lights on the bridges, and nobody can really see 
you in the water, and you can hear all the activity going on. 
 
But the canoeing piece, Meewasin helped develop this 
eco-canoe guide. But I think, I didn’t realize that the Meewasin 
offered interpretive canoe tours, and they: 
 

. . . provide an opportunity for participants to learn about 
the South Saskatchewan River from the river on 
Meewasin’s ten-passenger voyageur clipper canoes. Tours 
depart from Beaver Creek Conservation Area, paddling out 
onto the South Saskatchewan for two to three hours, 
allowing paddlers to experience those of the early 
voyageurs. 

 
So in light of the fact that I haven’t canoed much, that actually 
. . . I hadn’t known that they did that. And I thought that was 
pretty wonderful. But you know what? It says here that: 
 

Canoe Tours run from May into the Fall and 
pre-registration is required. [But their] Meewasin canoe 
tours are now done for the 2016 season. Contact Meewasin 
in the spring of 2017 to find out if and when the canoe 
tours will resume. 

 
So I think they saw the writing on the wall after the last budget 
and the former minister’s comments around Meewasin. But it’s 
so sad. This really wonderful . . . We’ll wait and see, Mr. 
Speaker, if they’re able to maintain these canoe tours, but I’m 
not so sure that that’ll end up being a priority of the Meewasin 
now with reduced money. We’ll wait and see, but . . . 
 
No doubt the Meewasin Valley and the authority, the three 
partners that manage the Meewasin so very well for the citizens 
of Saskatoon and the people of Saskatchewan, will be hurt by 
this government’s decision. And as a resident of Saskatoon and 
a person who represents the constituency of Saskatoon 
Riversdale, it’s incredibly sad. And I think members opposite 
are undoubtedly hearing from folks who aren’t happy about this 
as well. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s a shame that this government 
doesn’t see the benefit of the Meewasin Valley Authority, an 
organization that was visionary, that has been around for almost 
40 years, that is a unique partnership. And I think the minister 
actually said that in his notes, that he pointed out that the MVA 
funding model is relatively unique. Well I don’t know what’s 
wrong with being unique, Mr. Speaker, and supporting 
something really good. But with that, I would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 52, The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

Bill No. 55 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 55 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Always good to be recognized by yourself in this Assembly and 
to take my place and to speak my piece on this case, Bill No. 
55, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 
Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
It’s an interesting state of affairs, Mr. Speaker, when legislation 
such as this comes forward where in terms of the royalty regime 
that we have in this province has been apparently lacking and 
not up to the job, Mr. Speaker, and wherein this legislation 
comes forward with the aim of should an audit of mineral 
and/or oil and gas producers be found that royalties have not 
been paid when necessary, a penalty and a subsequent interest is 
now applied. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting thing that it’s a state of 
affairs where such legislation is needed to be brought forward. 
And I guess I’m looking for, and maybe we’ll get this in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, but I’m looking for a better accounting 
of what has been lost in terms of the inadequacies of the royalty 
regime that this legislation sets out to remedy; what has been 
the dollar figure of the impact of that inadequacy to the people 
of Saskatchewan; in terms of the abundant resources of this 
province, what have the people of Saskatchewan been 
shortchanged; and what is the dollar figure that can be attached 
to the negligence on the part of this government when it came 
to making sure that royalty and taxation amounts were being 
properly paid. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s an incremental estimate of general 
revenue of around $4.5 million annually that this, if I’m 
understanding the minister’s second reading speech of April 3, 
2017 correctly, that that will return to the general revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But you know, we do want to find out, you know, how long has 
this been going on. When did this first come to the attention of 
the members opposite? And in terms of what is the dollar 
figure, in terms of damage that’s been done to the owners of the 
natural resources of this province — the people of this province, 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — if this will in fact 
be up to the job of making sure that we’ve got a royalty and 
taxation regime worthy of its name, or whether or not, you 
know, what other sort of losses are anticipated, and whether or 
not this will do the job? 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of having a competitive 
royalty and taxation regime as regards natural resources or, you 
know, any other economic activity, certainly you want to have a 
system that is efficient, that is fair, that is competitive, that is 
effective, Mr. Speaker. And as regards the natural resources and 
non-renewable resources and the attendant revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, in particular, it’s not just a job that this government’s 

been tasked with by the people of Saskatchewan, but of course 
as a non-renewable resource these are revenues that we’re 
holding in trust for the next generation, and the generation after 
that. So it’s important we get that right. It’s important that we 
see these things clearly. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for more 
information from the minister when it comes to a better 
explanation of the regime that . . . or the shortcomings of the 
royalty and taxation regime that this particular piece of 
legislation sets out to correct. Mr. Speaker. I know that some of 
these questions are better addressed in committee where you 
can have that more complex, more fulsome exchange, Mr. 
Speaker. So in that regard, I am ready to end this stage of the 
bill’s consideration and request that the members opposite 
move on this for committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Energy and Resources that Bill No. 
55, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 
Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. To which committee shall 
this bill be committed? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 55, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Economy — Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 56 — The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to be able to rise today to enter into the debate on 
Bill No. 56. We had second reading yesterday from the minister 
responsible for this bill, and he gave a few brief comments 
about the intentions here. 
 
I think on the surface — no pun intended — this is a very 
straightforward bill inasmuch as levies that were formerly only 
applicable to wells under this Act are now being extended, the 
levies are being extended to pipelines as well, and so the 
language in the bill had to change. 
 
You know, it’s interesting though to see how this bill or this 
Act, The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, is not a new Act, and 
it’s been around in Saskatchewan for a long time. I know it was 
under The Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1978, so it’s at 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2017 

least that old. And I’m not sure when it actually was brought 
into being. It’s an old piece of legislation that has seen many, 
many revisions over the years as we see the oil and gas patch in 
Saskatchewan going through changes as well. 
 
One thing that always is surprising to me is the name itself, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Act. And I sometimes wonder if that 
isn’t a bit of an anachronism that perhaps . . . I’m surprised the 
name hasn’t changed over the years because if you look at the 
index for the Act, there’s all kinds of things going on here. But 
mainly it’s about, if you look at some of the headings, there’s 
the creation of the board, the Oil and Gas Conservation Board, 
but also how to get licences for having a well site, how to 
get . . . 
 
There used to be an oil and gas revolving fund, but that’s gone. 
The Oil and Gas Orphan Fund is managed under this Act; oil 
and gas production and limitation and allocations of production 
are handled under this Act. Pooling, drainage units, unit 
operations, and then of course all of the offences and penalties 
that would be applicable if individuals who have licences for 
wells are not following the law. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So I’m not sure . . . I used to know why the word 
“conservation” was in that Act, but I forget, and I’m just 
thinking it doesn’t seem to work. And I’m not sure why, when 
we’re bringing bills forward for change, why they’re not 
changing the name. But that’s just an aside, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
What I do want to talk about just briefly today before we take a 
closer look at the implications of this bill in committee, just a 
couple of the comments that the minister made yesterday. He 
indicated that, first of all, the changes to create an “admin levy” 
instead of a “well levy” are being assessed against well licences 
and pipeline licensees. Consultation with the industry on the 
supporting regulations which implement the changes to the 
“admin levy” will occur over the next few months for 
implementation this year. 
 
So one of the things we don’t know about this, Mr. Speaker, is 
what this will mean in terms of collection of these levies, or 
basically a tax on these wells. Is it going to go up? Is it going to 
go down? What sort of budgetary line items will this affect, and 
how much more money will the government bring in? Or 
perhaps they’re lowering the fees? We don’t know. And will 
they actually see a decrease in the collection of the fees for 
administration? 
 
And as you can imagine, I know that the Ministry of the 
Economy and the oil and energy . . . I don’t know what the 
name of the sector is now, but energy, the sector for the 
Ministry of the Economy has a number of staff, and that proper 
oversight for managing that industry does take considerable 
resources. And, Mr. Speaker, with the addition of pipelines now 
and the requirement for licensing of pipelines, we know there is 
going to be an additional demand on the resources that the 
ministry will need to properly enforce the law. 
 
I’ve heard a number of complaints, you know, from mostly in 
the southeast area of the province where there aren’t enough 

officials right now that are able to enforce the law, and in fact 
some officials are, you know, finding it difficult to enforce the 
law because of certain restrictions that are being placed on 
them. So there’s some real concerns where people live. 
 
And I think I talked about this recently. I spoke to a gentleman 
who was, before Christmas, was knocked out by sour gas in his 
yard, right where he lives. And he’s so scared now about that 
happening that they can’t even have their grandchildren come 
visit them in their own home, because they’re so terrified that 
this sour gas could actually kill. Because as you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it does kill. So despite trying to find out where 
it came from, they’re having real difficulty with that, and it just 
seems like they’re not getting the help they need. And I know 
other people have a lot of concerns about venting and flaring 
and sour gas in other parts of the patch, especially down where 
the Bakken play is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s fine to extend this levy or this tax to pipelines in addition 
to wells. It’s fine to change the name to an administrative levy. 
But the question is, will this government be able to enforce? 
Will this government be able to have the proper oversight that is 
needed? And I think a good example of that is, and the minister 
himself raised this, is ongoing regulatory activities related to 
pipeline approvals and inspections. 
 
We know right now that the public can’t even get a copy of the 
ministry’s report on the Husky pipeline spill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Apparently it’s completed. And despite the fact that 
the Privacy Commissioner suggested that it should be released 
last December, even though it is going forward for prosecutorial 
consultations, that report should be released and the public 
should be able to have access to that information. And so again, 
what’s going on? We’ll have to ask in committee. We’re going 
to have to ask a lot of questions around where that report is at, 
what the findings are. And certainly there’s no reason for the 
ministry to say we shouldn’t be releasing this, because I think 
the Privacy Commissioner was very clear. 
 
Also we had asked for a number of other inspection records 
from other pipelines, and we weren’t even able to get those 
through the freedom of information process, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So it’s very frustrating from the public side to know 
what’s going on. Can we have confidence in the inspection 
process? Is there enough resources being applied? And I think 
we know that because of the auditor’s report on pipelines . . . I 
think back in 2012 and it was reviewed again in 2014, and I 
believe it’s up again for review soon. There are still 
recommendations that haven’t been met from the 2012 report. 
And although the government has allocated some resources — I 
think one truck and maybe one or two more staff — to doing 
the pipeline inspections, I still think if the public were to 
examine closely what’s happening, if we could get that 
information, it would show that there needs to be more attention 
paid to that. 
 
Obviously, and we’ve always said this, the oil and gas industry 
is incredibly important to our economy. But we need to be sure 
that people are safe, that the air we breathe is safe, that the land 
we live on is safe, and that the water we drink is safe, Mr. 
Speaker. And we saw with the Husky pipeline spill last summer 
that it jeopardizes 70,000 people’s source of drinking water. So 
this is not something to be taken lightly. 



April 4, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

And although we know the administrative levies will change 
because pipelines will now be assessed this tax on pipelines . . . 
and you know, Mr. Speaker, a levy is a tax, so we can use those 
terms interchangeably. So putting a tax on pipelines for 
licensing may make sense, but it just depends on whether it 
raises actually the amount of money that is required for proper 
administration. So as I indicated, we’ll have a number of 
questions in committee in relation to that, and I look forward to 
that discussion with the minister and his officials. So that would 
be the extent of my comments today on Bill No. 56, The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Energy and Resources that Bill 
No. 56, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 56, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:38.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2091 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2091 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2091 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2091 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2091 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2092 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2093 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2093 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2093 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2093 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2094 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Construction Week 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2094 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2094 
 13th Annual World Class Players Cup Held in Regina 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2094 
 Three Minute Thesis Competition at University of Saskatchewan 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2095 
 Campbell Senior Boys’ Basketball Team Wins Title 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2095 
 International Wood Collectors Society Honours Saskatchewan Resident 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2095 
 New Schools in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2096 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2096 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2096 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2096 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 
 Changes to Taxation 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2098 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2098 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2098 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2098 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 
 Support for Children With Autism 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 
 Provision of Hearing Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2100 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2100 
 Intent of The Interpretation Amendment Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2100 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2100 



 

 Effect of Taxation Change on Price of Beer 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2100 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2100 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 
 Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2101 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2102 
 Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2104 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ...................................................................................... 2104 
 Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2104 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ...................................................................................... 2105 
 Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2105 
 Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2109 
 Bill No. 53 — The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2109 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ........................................................................................................... 2112 
 Bill No. 54 — The Provincial Health Authority Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Provincial Health Authority Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2112 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ........................................................................................................... 2112 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2112 
 Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2114 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2116 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2116 
 Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2119 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2119 
 Bill No. 56 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2119 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2121 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS

