






















































Hansard: April 13, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 75A  THURSDAY, APRIL 13, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2249 
 April 13, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
once again to introduce a group of grade 12 students from F.W. 
Johnson Collegiate. There’s 38 of them here this morning 
watching routine proceedings. Glad to have them here. And 
once again their teacher is Mr. Scott McKillop, and the 
educational assistant along with them this morning is Denise 
Neel. I look forward to having a meeting with them after 
question period. I ask all members to help me welcome them 
here this morning. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you and to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce the whole Steinley clan has 
joined us here today at their Legislative Assembly: our newest 
addition, Jameson Steinley, and there’s Claire Steinley up there, 
and Nickson Steinley who came to visit Dad at work today. So 
Dad will be on his best behaviour. 
 
And I’d be remiss if I did not forget the glue that holds the 
Steinley family together, which is my wife, Larissa. She is an 
amazing mother. She is also taking her M.B.A. [Master of 
Business Administration] full time, taking her M.B.A. And 
she’s on mat leave right now, but she is an amazing woman and 
helped me to the position I’m in. And I think we all realize that 
our spouses are our major supporter, and I just want to say 
thank you very much. Thanks for coming to your Assembly, 
and I love you all very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m not sure if I can top that as an intro, but 
probably now is a fitting time to introduce my loving wife, 
Danielle, who is also up there with the member’s spouse. I am 
so grateful that the support that I receive through her. I, and all 
members, we could not do our work without the support of 
loved ones. And luckily today she’s joined with my two sons, 
Jacob and James, and my father-in-law, Bernie Broughton, who 
has been a great help when I’m down in Regina. And he steps 
in and helps out a fair bit when I’m down here, so I’m very 
appreciative of that support. Please everyone welcome them to 
their Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce a number 
of individuals that are seated in your gallery. With us today, 
Andrea Belloli who is from Milan, Italy. Also accompanying 
him is Riccardo Macchi from Milan as well. Bruce Thompson 
is from Calgary and Roxanne Kaminski from Saskatoon. 

Roxanne is known to many people on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are representing Amec Foster Wheeler, 
which is an international engineering company. They’re here to 
meet some individuals at SaskPower to provide and share some 
information with regard to some clean energy projects, cogen 
facilities, carbon capture projects, which I know is near and 
dear to my good friend across the way. They are a member of 
the First Nations Power Authority and currently in discussions 
with some First Nations groups in Saskatchewan regarding 
some clean energy projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to specifically mention Roxanne who’s 
joined us today. I’ve known Roxanne for a very long time. She 
was my legal assistant at the McKercher firm when I was 
practising. She had the good sense to leave though, Mr. 
Speaker. She went on to get her finance degree from the 
University of Saskatchewan. She has been very, very supportive 
of me throughout my political career, having organized 
campaigns at city council, school board, and city council, and 
lastly my Co-Chair for my last campaign here to come to the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. So I want to thank her for all her 
support and her friendship over many, many years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to, if I could, ask members of the Assembly to help 
me welcome all these individuals to the Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thanks to the member opposite for introducing the gentlemen 
from Italy, very pleased to welcome you to Saskatchewan and 
wish you all the best in your endeavours to find out more about 
what’s going on here. 
 
Certainly we know that reducing carbon emissions is a very 
important thing in this global world that we live in, and it’s a 
responsibility of all of us to make best efforts to do that, to find 
efficient and the most inexpensive ways to reduce our global 
carbon emissions. So I think you’ll have an interesting visit and 
wish you well on all that. 
 
Roxanne, welcome as well. And you know, it must have been 
hard working for the Minister of Justice but you survived, so 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. And would all 
members please welcome these guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
see in your gallery a friend of mine, an individual who had 
worked in the House business and research office, Tom 
Richards. We lost him to the University of Saskatchewan 
College of Law, but I understand things are going well. So I 
want to welcome Tom to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Maymont. 
I so do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to present a petition. The people that have signed this 
petition are opposed to the Sask Party plan to scrap and sell off 
the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like all 
of us to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company] provides a vital service to seniors, to workers, to 
families all throughout the province; and that by scrapping STC 
out of the blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Saskatchewan Party is sending a clear 
sign about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps drive the economy with its parcel 
service that serves farms and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the page I am presenting today is signed by 
people primarily from Saskatoon. And as we do each and every 
day, we present page after page after page of petition to help 
defend and protect the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
And on this particular page, as I mentioned, they’re primarily 
from Saskatoon, but however this petition is signed by many 
good people from all throughout our province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 
today to present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 
49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people who have 
signed this petition would like to bring to our attention the 
following: Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a brand new definition 
for privatization that would allow this government to wind 
down, dissolve, and sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum, as they’re 
required to do under the Crown corporation protection Act. 
 
In 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations returned 
almost $300 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 

hospitals. And we know those dividends should go to the people 
of Saskatchewan. We know also, Mr. Speaker, our Crown 
corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across 
the province, good mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, and that 
under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations would be exempt from corporate income tax as 
long as less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by the 
government.  
 
Now this proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to 
be sold without being considered privatized. So we know that 
this short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act 
and start protection jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the citizens who have signed this petition 
today come from the city of Moose Jaw and the town of Craik. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity. And we know the undersigned 
residents of the province want to bring to our attention the 
following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity; and that all women should be paid equitably; and the 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth, and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Centre of Policy Alternatives found that 
in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 cents for 
every dollar a man makes, and in Regina women earned on 
average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. According to 
most recent StatsCan data, the national gender wage gap for 
full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that this Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from Saskatoon 
and Warman. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to reverse cuts to Saskatchewan libraries. Those who 
have signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: to the fact that the Saskatchewan government has cut 
funding for regional libraries in half, or by 3.5 million, and 
eliminated funding for libraries in Regina and Saskatoon. This 
drastic funding cut will have a devastating impact on libraries, 
especially regional libraries where many people depend upon 
them. 
 
They also point out that libraries are a vital part of communities 
across Saskatchewan and that they provide services that enrich 
the lives of many. They also point out that libraries are about 
more than just borrowing books. Meeting rooms are used by 
community groups. Library staff host educational programs and 
clubs, and publically accessible computer terminals are 
essential to many. They also point out that these cuts will have a 
disproportionate impact on rural communities where libraries 
are vital community spaces, and that potential closures or 
reductions in services will severely impact our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan renew its 
commitment to the invaluable programming, educational 
opportunities, and public spaces that our libraries provide 
across this province and restore the $4.8 million in funding 
for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 budget. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by thousands of 
people from across the province. The pages that I present today 
are signed by people from Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling on the government to restore funding 
to post-secondary education institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 
the Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
Saskatchewan Party financial mismanagement. They point out 
that Saskatchewan students already pay the second-highest 
tuition fees in Canada, Mr. Speaker, something that comes to us 
by way of Statistics Canada; that this budget cuts $36.8 million 
from post-secondary education; that this budget cuts $6.4 
million from technical institutions; that funding for the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships has been cut 
by $8.2 million. And it also points out, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling 
their first home plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
immediately restore funding to Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary education institutions and to stop their 
damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 

from Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction of 
having the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate 
partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
[10:15] 
 
One in three Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 
work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct 
and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Employers are 
responsible for providing safe workplaces. Mr. Speaker, 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation, and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Easter and Passover Greetings 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
acknowledge Easter and Passover. The message of Easter is a 
powerful one, a message that speaks of the ultimate sacrifice 
made for everyone, coupled with the hope of all humanity that 
comes with Christ’s resurrection. 
 
Tomorrow churches of countless traditions will join together in 
recognizing Good Friday, the day that two millennia ago saw 
the trial and death of Jesus Christ. Yet, Mr. Speaker, on Sunday 
morning, churches will once again be filled as we celebrate the 
hope of life that came with the resurrection of Jesus. This hope 
is one that fills hearts with new life and joy, knowing that even 
though despair may come, the hope that Sunday morning is 
coming. I would wish Christians across the province and around 
the world a very Happy Easter. 
 
Further I would also like to acknowledge that this week is 
Passover, a holy week for people of the Jewish faith around the 
world to gather with loved ones and commemorate the exodus 
of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt. I would like to 
extend my best wishes to the Jewish community during the 
special time of Passover. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all go home for the weekend and Easter 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

break, I ask all members to join me in celebrating the renewal 
that comes with spring and the opportunity to spend time with 
all our loved ones. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Brainsport Receives Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence Award 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand in 
the House today to recognize Brainsport, a local business within 
my constituency and this year’s SABEX [Saskatoon 
Achievement in Business Excellence] Awards winner for 
community involvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brainsport truly exemplifies business excellence. 
Founded in July of 1991 by Brian Michasiw, Brainsport was 
opened with the goal of becoming the best running store in 
Canada. Through dedication, the support of family and friends, 
and over 25 years of operation in the city, Brainsport has grown 
into a staple of the Saskatoon running community, known city 
wide for providing quality products and outstanding customer 
service. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is not all that Brainsport has to offer. One 
of the pillars of the Brainsport philosophy is their commitment 
to supporting their community. Brainsport is dedicated to 
creating a positive environment for people to express their 
enjoyment for running. They host a variety of clubs and 
organize multiple running-related events throughout Saskatoon. 
They have a shoe donation program which delivers gently used 
shoes to Kenya, Mozambique, Peru, and to northern 
communities in Saskatchewan. And they have also created the 
community room, a space offered to community groups looking 
for a place to hold meetings free of charge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this award for community involvement is 
definitely well deserved, and I would like to ask all members to 
join me in congratulating Brainsport for receiving this year’s 
SABEX Award for community involvement, and in thanking 
this valuable local business for their contributions to Nutana 
and throughout Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Victoria Hospital Holds Second Annual Doctor’s Gala 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to announce that the Victoria Hospital Foundation 
in Prince Albert successfully raised $45,000 at their 2017 
second annual Doctor’s Gala this past Saturday. Dr. David 
Stevens, a practising ENT [ear, nose, and throat] doctor and 
member of the Victoria Hospital Foundation, and a friend of 
mine, was this year’s deserving honouree. 
 
The foundation is focused on enhancing and enriching the 
quality of health care that is provided through the Victoria 
Hospital by fundraising for new equipment that will advance 
the services and treatments for its community. This foundation 
plays a major role in the community and provides supports so 
that the current needs of the hospital are met and future 

upgrades carefully planned. Our government has made record 
investments in hospitals across the province and we value our 
partnership with foundations which involve communities in 
fundraising and awareness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s gala was excellent and brought together 
both staff and the community to share a night of celebration of 
its accomplishments, enjoy some live entertainment, and 
fundraise so that this hospital can continue to serve its 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker I ask all members to join me in congratulating Dr. 
Stevens and the Victoria Hospital Foundation on a successful 
event, and thank their hard-working staff and volunteers for 
giving their time so selflessly to a deserving cause. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Drop Everything and Read Protests 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, thousands 
of people across Saskatchewan dropped everything and went to 
their local MLA’s [Member of the Legislative Assembly] office 
and read over the noon hour. All over the province, over 5,800 
participants in 89 communities from every corner of the 
province, from Swift Current to Prince Albert, Carnduff to 
North Battleford, people took their frustrations directly to their 
elected leader’s doorstep. Mr. Speaker, it was an epic protest, 
and I was pleased to participate alongside my NDP [New 
Democratic Party] colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are upset. The Sask 
Party budget eliminates the entire funding for libraries in 
Regina and Saskatoon, and regional libraries across the 
province are taking a $3.5 million hit or 58 per cent of their 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, citizens of Saskatchewan have taken to social 
media and put pen to paper to voice their outrage. This protest 
had not one but two top-trending hashtags on Twitter. In 
addition to 10,000 signatures on a petition out about this cruel 
Sask Party cut, there have also been thousands of emails and 
handwritten letters arriving in MLAs’ offices daily. 
 
I was especially fond of the event in Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker, where children read to a donkey. We all know that 
donkeys can be stubborn, but that didn’t stop people from trying 
to educate one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has inflicted devastating and 
completely unexpected cuts to the provincial library system, a 
system that up until budget was the envy of Canada. I invite all 
members to join me and thank the organizers and participants of 
this sustained and growing protest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

2017 Paragon Awards 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

7th was a day to recognize great businesses here in Regina with 
the 18th annual Paragon Awards ceremony hosted by the 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce at the Queensbury 
centre. 
 
The Paragon Awards represents the recognition of members of 
the local business community that have demonstrated 
exceptional performance in a number of specific areas. These 
companies have worked hard to grow their business but also 
make the community a better place to live and work. 
 
The categories and award recipients for this year are: young 
entrepreneur, Three Farmers; community involvement, St. John 
Ambulance; marketing and promotional achievement, Dutch 
Growers Home & Garden; export achievement, O & T Farms 
Ltd.; customer service excellence, Viterra Inc.; environmental 
excellence, Namerind Housing Corporation; diversity, Miller 
Thomson LLP; new business venture, Rosie the Flower Truck, 
Wascana Flower Shoppe; community alliance, Deveraux 
Developments, Street Culture Project. And the business of the 
year award went to Conexus Credit Union. 
 
Congratulations to the nominees and recipients for their hard 
work in innovation. Their commitment to business excellence 
serves to strengthen not only Regina but all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce and all the 
deserving recipients of the 2017 Paragon Awards. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Mâmawêyatitân Centre Nears Completion 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to highlight this government’s commitment to 
education in our province with funding for the brand new Scott 
Collegiate in North Central Regina, in the member for 
Elphinstone’s constituency. Many in Regina will be familiar 
with the school, myself included. I spent many days there when 
I was employed by Regina Public. Built in 1924, Scott 
Collegiate is the oldest surviving high school in Regina and it’s 
been a fixture of the community for nearly a century. As 
beautiful and as the old building is, it’s showing its age and it’s 
definitely in need of replacement. Talk of building a 
replacement facility began in 2003 when the members opposite 
were in government. However, it’s often too often the case; it 
was all talk. 
 
I’m pleased to say that progress is nearing completion on a new 
facility that will house a high school, a child care facility, a city 
recreation complex, a public library, and a community policing 
centre. The Mâmawêyatitân Centre is the name that was chosen. 
It’s meant in the Cree language, we all come together. This new 
facility will be a centrepiece for the North Central community 
and our government is very pleased that this much-needed 
facility will be open in the fall and will benefit the city of 
Regina. 
 
While the NDP just talk, on this side of the House we’re getting 
it done. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

International Companies Participate in Mining 
Technology Explore Program 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Four international 
technology companies have travelled across the globe to 
Saskatoon to showcase their mining technologies and 
innovations as part of Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority’s mining technology Explore program. 
This event was held for technology start-ups looking for 
opportunities to seek business ventures in the Saskatoon region. 
 
The four winning companies who were selected for the 2017 
Explore program came from the United States, Ontario, 
Australia, and Chile. And these companies, along with industry 
leaders, attended the Saskatchewan Mining Supply Chain 
Forum, a networking opportunity from April 3rd to 5th. Most 
importantly, local industries were given the opportunity to 
network and collaborate with new innovators. Applicants were 
reviewed by the Explore selection committee, consisting of 
representatives from Saskatchewan mining organizations and 
the Ministry of the Economy, and they were extremely 
impressed by both the quality and scope of this years 
participants. We are committed to welcoming new innovators to 
this province and encourage international and local 
collaboration. 
 
Our government’s efforts are paying off. The latest 
manufacturing numbers for February were released today and 
manufacturing shipments were up by 22.7 per cent from last 
year, seasonally adjusted. Saskatchewan ranks second in 
percentage growth among the provinces and saw a point four 
per cent increase month over month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organizations like SREDA [Saskatchewan 
Regional Economic Development Authority] are doing their 
part to attract business to our province, and our government is 
making sure that we have an investment climate that allows 
innovators to flourish and investments to grow. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s budget 
has broken trust with Saskatchewan people. Damaging, broken 
promise after broken promise, and a Premier that won’t be 
straight with Saskatchewan people on issue after issue, day after 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your word still matters in Saskatchewan. To the 
Premier, as it relates to the . . . his GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] land scandal, he once told . . . claimed that he had an 
appraisal that justified the exorbitant, wasteful price paid to his 
supporter. Why did he say that, and why won’t he come clean 
with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the individual in 
question isn’t his or hers or anyone’s supporter. It was someone 
who made a transaction, Mr. Speaker, that’s been well 
canvassed by the Provincial Auditor at our request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moreover, I’d invite the hon. leader to consider 
the fact that he doesn’t have to worry about an appraisal for the 
land; he can consider an actual sale. There has been a sale of 
this land at the GTH that highlights . . . about $256,000 per 
acre. Mr. Speaker, given that the land in question, the price was 
just over $100,000, even when you add the servicing costs, the 
taxpayers, the taxpayers are making money. The taxpayers are 
making money on this land transaction. Members opposite will 
stand up and say, well, talk about the money that’s lost. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this actual sale is evidence that there’s money 
being made at the GTH on land sold. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, moreover, yesterday we produced evidence 
with NDP documents from before 2007’s election that highlight 
clearly that they had approved $33 million worth of investment 
into the GTH. I think it was the right move on their part. They 
didn’t get that job done either, the GTH project, but they 
approved $33 million. Since then it has moved forward. It has 
attracted new businesses to the city of Regina and the province 
of Saskatchewan. There are hundreds of new jobs out there, Mr. 
Speaker, and now the GTH is selling land at a higher value than 
the original purchase cost plus the servicing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[10:30] 
 

Provincial Economy and Job Numbers 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course he dodged 
the answer. And secondly, with nonsense like that and with 
math like that, it’s pretty clear why we’re in this mess in the 
first place, Mr. Speaker. You know, in this budget, and answers 
like that, we have a Sask Party that’s flailing and failing. But 
it’s Saskatchewan people who are being forced to pay the price, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They might try to laugh it off or to heckle, and they even brag 
about poor job numbers, Mr. Speaker. But let’s look past their 
spin. Between February and March, thousands of people lost 
their jobs. The Sask Party will cherry-pick statistics and try to 
torque the numbers, but what good does that spin do for the 
5,100 more Saskatchewan people looking for work, Mr. 
Speaker? What good does it do for those working at STC, or 
those working in our libraries, those working in our classrooms, 
those working in the front lines of health care or in seniors’ 
care, Mr. Speaker? Or the thousands of public servants, Mr. 
Speaker, who are threatened day after day by minister after 
minister with their livelihoods, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This budget attacks jobs, Mr. Speaker, and it hurts our 
economy. Can the Premier explain how do massive layoffs, 
threats, and hiking taxes on small businesses help the 40,000 
Saskatchewan people looking for work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to talk 

about job creation in the province of Saskatchewan and the 
record of this side of the House versus members opposite when 
they had the chance to visit their economic damage on the 
province and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But first let me just say this. He had a math question earlier on 
related to the land transaction. And I want to be very clear. The 
land’s purchase at 103,000 an acre, 80,000 to service it — 
maximum, but let’s say 80,000 to service it — and we’re selling 
it for 256,000. That’s a profit for the taxpayers. And if 
somebody wants to talk a little bit about math, he might want to 
begin at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to jobs, here are the job stats from the 
province of Saskatchewan the last two months. Two months in 
a row posted of year-over-year growth, Mr. Speaker, including 
two months ago where Saskatchewan led the country. And we 
did this, Mr. Speaker, coming out of a time, in the midst of a 
time of low commodity prices. Weekly earnings in the province 
of Saskatchewan are up. Drilling for oil is doubled, Mr. 
Speaker, the number of wells drilled now doubled at this point. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today, as the member has mentioned, the 
manufacturing stats are out. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
working hard to create the right environment for a diversified 
economy. In fact the budget he refers to will leave us with the 
lowest manufacturing income tax rate in Canada. But, Mr. 
Speaker, even in advance of that, we have been seeing a 
diversification in the economy. 
 
And I’m happy to report to the House that our manufacturing 
exports are up 23 per cent. That’s second-best in Canada in the 
face of trying times, Mr. Speaker, contributing to what has been 
the second-best job creation record since we were elected on 
this side of the House versus under the NDP, dead last in the 
country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier has doubled 
the number of unemployed people in Saskatchewan. He can 
huff and puff, and he can spin all he wants. But here are a few 
other facts, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is one of only three 
provinces which lost jobs in March. Off-reserve unemployment 
for Saskatchewan First Nations climbed over 20 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. And the construction industry was one of the hardest 
hit sectors with 1,800 jobs lost month to month, 4,600 jobs year 
to year. And to make this problem worse, Mr. Speaker, the Sask 
Party is hiking taxes on construction — the epitome of a 
job-killing tax — at a time where we need jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Construction Association calls it “a tax on 
growth.” Absolutely expect to see construction jobs lost at “. . . 
an even more concerning pace.” In fact, just released is that 92 
per cent of Saskatchewan construction companies are saying 
that this budget hurts our economy and hurts business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at a time where we need jobs, how can this 
Premier stand there, brag, and spin this budget at a time where 
the CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] says 
it has just made it tougher for businesses to grow in 
Saskatchewan? 
 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

The Speaker: — I would like to commend members that we 
have respectfully listened to the question. Now let’s be 
respectful and listen to the answer. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, foundational to our growth 
plan, Mr. Speaker, has been competitive taxes, has been an 
aggressive approach to infrastructure investment, and has been 
fiscal probity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we laid out a three-year plan 
to get this province back to balance. That’s fundamental to 
long-term and sustained growth in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s fundamental to keeping taxes low — taxes for families, 
taxes for businesses. And in fact in this budget, as a result of the 
three-year plan, when it’s fully implemented we will have the 
lowest income tax rates in the country, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have 
the lowest rates for job-creating businesses, and we’ll have the 
lowest manufacturing rate, by far, in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have just come through some historically low 
commodity prices and even, given that, this economy is creating 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. The last jobs report was out just on Friday. 
Two thousand jobs created year over year. We’ve lost a few 
part-time. Six thousand new full-time jobs, year over year. The 
month before that, 8,000 more jobs created in the province of 
Saskatchewan than a year ago, in the midst of this commodity 
challenge. We see manufacturing numbers like we saw out 
today — 23 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, second-best in the 
country. We see weekly earnings on the rise, Mr. Speaker. And 
I would just make this point. We will see in the months ahead 
what’s going to happen in the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I invite members to stay tuned for I think what will be a 
very positive economic year in the province, building on current 
success, some important announcements right around here in 
Regina. And when those happen, Mr. Speaker, I’ll look forward 
to the support and encouragement by my hon. friend. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Support for Health Care 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, smart management of our 
economy can strengthen the government without job-killing 
taxes and without job-killing cuts. But after a decade of blowing 
through the good times, the Sask Party still doesn’t seem to get 
it. They’re slashing everywhere without a clear plan. They just 
went searching for money and didn’t think of the jobs or 
services that people rely on that would be lost. 
 
The most recent cut we’re hearing about is 10 per cent from the 
funding that Health gives to community-based organizations. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the Canadian Mental Health 
Association; the Lighthouse in Saskatoon; Hope’s Home in 
Regina, a place that provides much needed care for children 
with complex medical needs; the Autism Treatment Services in 
Saskatchewan. After all of the other Sask Party cuts, how can 
they be cutting this last line of defence, these crucial 
organizations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s no secret 
that this was a very difficult budget. Health is approximately 40 
per cent of the budget. There’s no way that we can get the 
financial affairs in order without it having some impact on 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the organizations the member opposite 
spoke of do very good work. Our officials are diligently 
working through where the appropriate places are to save 
money. Mr. Speaker, we don’t take any of these cuts lightly, but 
it’s important that we focus on the core services in health, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why you see some program cuts, some funding 
cuts, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going to ensure that, moving into 
the future, that the core services in health care in this province 
are protected and continued. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, they’re giving directions for cuts 
in this budget that will hurt the most vulnerable people in our 
communities. And when health regions requested clarification 
from the ministry, the ministry said that they had none to give 
and that they should wait until they could get further 
clarification. It sounds like the Minister of Health has been 
taking notes from the Minister of Education: shoot first, aim 
later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these cuts are very serious. People’s lives are 
being affected. Will the minister admit they rammed through 
this budget with no plan for implementation? And at the very 
least, can he and his colleagues commit to holding off on their 
cuts until they can get themselves and a plan together? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll gladly take advice from 
my colleague, the Minister of Education, Deputy Premier, who 
does an outstanding job on his file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is simply this. The health regions in 
this province have until June the 1st to file their budgets. Mr. 
Speaker, much of that funding comes from the health regions. 
Once those budgets are filed . . . They have broad targets that 
they need to meet in order to keep our spending in check, Mr. 
Speaker. But once their budgets are filed on June the 1st, the 
ministry officials will go through them. Nothing has been 
approved yet. We will consider line by line the expenditures 
and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be very cautious about how 
we deal with programs. We recognize that many of those CBOs 
[community-based organization] provide outstanding service. 
But again, Mr. Speaker, as I said, Health is about 40 per cent of 
the budget. If you’re going to get the spending in order for the 
government, Mr. Speaker, there will be an impact on Health. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the lack of clarity from this 
government is astounding. They throw down heavy-fisted cuts 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

and demands, but they have no idea how they’ll implement 
them, or what they are doing. And they’ve taken no time to 
measure what the impacts might be. The Education minister 
admitted that he doesn’t know how much of the $250 million 
cut to the public service will come from Education. He said this 
is “. . . one of the reasons we need to seek some more clarity 
before we go back to our employer partners.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are clearly not putting our kids first; they 
aren’t even a consideration. They’ve decided to cut and that’s it. 
They don’t care that it’s our kids that are being forced to pay for 
their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. So can the Education 
minister tell us today if he has taken the time during the last 
couple of days to speak with the Finance minister and get some 
clarity? Exactly how much of the quarter-billion-dollar cut to 
workers will the education system take? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, in the education sector there are 28 
school divisions. There are in effect 28 different employers. We 
owe it to them to give them some detailed specifics, some 
clarity in what we’re asking them to try and achieve. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to give them a path forward. We indicated 
that we wanted to do that, and in the next few days we’ll be 
communicating with the school divisions to make sure that 
we’re able to give them appropriate guidance and direction. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the divisions I’m sure will want to work with 
us to try and achieve that. 
 
The goal of all of this is to try and make sure that the resources 
that we have will remain committed to the classrooms so that 
we can do the very best for the children in our province. And 
that should be the goal of all of the members in this House on 
both sides. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — So the answer is no, Mr. Speaker. The Finance 
minister sits right over there; this shouldn’t be that difficult. 
And he sits with him in cabinet. Mr. Speaker, this answer to this 
question certainly shouldn’t have waited until after the budget 
was done. 
 
These Sask Party cuts will mean job losses and fewer resources 
in our kids’ classrooms — teaching assistants, teachers, 
counsellors, psychologists, speech and language pathologists — 
people who support our kids in the classroom. They’ll be kicked 
out the door. The least that this government making the cuts 
should be able to do is give them a number, and they should 
have been able to provide that clarity from the start. 
 
The Education minister committed to this, and I quote: “I don’t 
wish to see anyone go into the bargaining table without a clear 
set of directions, a clear mandate, and some options that are 
available.” Mr. Speaker, can this minister update us and let us 
know if he has followed up with his employee groups and has 
let them know what exactly is on the table? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we of course want to work 
with the divisions to give them specifics of how they approach 
bargaining. We’ve always done that through the public sector 
bargaining commission. We do those things, matter of course 
every . . . [inaudible] . . . But if the member opposite wants to 
know the details of it, she can find them at page 46 of the 
budget where it says the target for this is 3.5 per cent, or $250 
million spread across all of compensation for employment 
across government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the simple answer. We 
will work to try and achieve those savings all the way across. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the goal of this is once again to make sure 
that we commit resources to the classroom to help and educate 
our children so that they can do the best in life, so that we’re not 
shipping them off to Alberta once again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Again it’s clear they don’t have a plan, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s the same with their cuts to library funding, 
and it’s hurting communities across this province. People are 
speaking out, and the minister is acting like he’s shocked by 
how communities are reacting. The minister was surprised 
when the interlibrary loan program was cancelled. How is that 
surprising? He’s cutting the funding, Mr. Speaker, and he’s 
saying that he’s surprised that libraries just don’t simply go 
about replacing the Sask Party cut with money from their 
municipalities. Is he serious, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They cut funding to our cities, towns, and villages, and all of 
the ministers are careful not to say that they are for more tax 
increases. But the Minister of Government Relations last night 
actually said, “You won’t get me on the record.” But, Mr. 
Speaker, some municipalities are increasing their taxes to save 
their libraries. So will the minister admit these cuts are Sask 
Party cuts and that these tax hikes are Sask Party tax hikes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget there are 
two and a half million dollars for regional libraries, $975,000 
for northern libraries, $2.4 million for CommunityNet, 
$100,000 for multitype database, $100,000 for out-of-province 
interlibrary loan, one and a half million dollars in literacy 
initiatives including family literacy programs, community 
literacy, and summer literacy camps. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the people in this province the 
importance of the interlibrary loan system. We know in a 
smaller library that’s something very important. We are having 
ongoing discussions with the library system. I have some 
meetings later today on that. And, Mr. Speaker, we understand 
and appreciate that that is an important program, and we’ll want 
to do what we can to try and maintain that program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

Regulation Changes Regarding Status of Villages 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, that 
minister sure loves lists, but the list that people who live in 
Saskatchewan villages want is the list of villages that the Sask 
Party will be shutting down. Some villages — and we don’t 
know how many yet — will lose their title and rights as a 
village and will be forced to amalgamate into their local RM 
[rural municipality]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has changed regulations. Notice of 
the cuts have been sent out. But last night when the Minister of 
Government Relations was asked about any changes of this 
kind, she said she knew nothing about it. In fact she directly 
said this directive was not coming from her ministry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s going on over there? We have a copy of 
the notice that went out. It’s public information. So why did the 
minister not have the information last night? Can she tell us 
today how many villages will be affected by this cut? How 
many Saskatchewan families will be affected? And how much 
does the Saskatchewan government hope to gain from this cut 
to our hometowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, one of their members 
asked this question in committee last night; it is true. I had a 
number of officials with me. None of the officials know what 
they’re talking about. So if he wants to give one of those letters, 
I would like to take it to the officials because they said they 
didn’t issue any letters from Government Relations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Funding for Education in the North 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister came up 
north to meet with NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher 
education program-Northern Professional Access College] 
stakeholders, she said she had a positive experience. But after 
that, students, teachers, and others came here to protest her 
visit. Now she says she doesn’t want to get involved with the 
so-called transition because it needs to get its legs. And she says 
that process is positive. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts aren’t clear, but students are 
worried. And in my community, when the minister says things 
are positive, you can understand why people get worried. So 
can the minister commit to northern students and their families 
that she will ensure that all of her and Northlands’ commitment 
about programs and access will be kept? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, as we know, this decision was 
made a month ago, and I understand the emotion around it. I 
suppose every transition has some kinks, but it’s important to 
stay positive and work together on this process and not feed 
division, Mr. Speaker, in the best interest of students. Because 
what we see from Northlands is a very positive attempt to 

welcome students, new and returning, and it has said, and I 
quote, “remaining students will be automatically accepted.” 
 
The college is getting information out about enrolments in the 
new program, taking out radio ads to get the word out to 
students, and just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, it met with our two 
universities. We have every faith that the advisory committee 
and all the parties involved, including NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program], through this transition process, Mr. 
Speaker, will work together in the best interest of students in 
the North. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Labour Code Provisions and Saskatchewan 
Transportation Employees 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last year at about this time, that 
government was getting ready to celebrate 40 years of 
NORTEP, Mr. Speaker, only to sign a deal for five more years 
with NORTEP that they were reneging on months later. And I 
guess that’s not forgotten, Mr. Speaker, nor will it be. So if the 
minister wants to talk about kinks, that is not going to be 
forgotten by northern people. 
 
Another group of men and women that are not going to forget 
the broken promises of this government, Mr. Speaker, are the 
224 men and women that work for the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. The Sask Party, heartlessly and 
without warning, took away their livelihood. 
 
These are dedicated workers who have questions, and the 
government promised to provide staff with more information. 
The Sask Party promised that a meeting would be called to 
provide staff with an update, “no later than April 13th.” Mr. 
Speaker, let me help that government out — that’s today. The 
STC employees have heard nothing, and they don’t know about 
their severance. They don’t even know about their last day of 
work, Mr. Speaker. And I hear some laughing over there, which 
again speaks volumes of the approach of this government on 
too many fronts. 
 
Can the minister admit that his sell-off is damaging to 
Saskatchewan people, and will he at least have the decency to 
give STC employees straight answers to the questions that they 
have? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
before, Mr. Speaker, I mean it was a very difficult decision as it 
affected the 223 employees of STC, Mr. Speaker, and they were 
very hard-working employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve spoken with our legal counsel, again I’ll 
remind the members opposite, the legal counsel for STC, and 
they assure us that we’re following the Canadian Labour Code 
and that the employees of STC will be advised appropriately as 
to the outcome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, winding down STC has been very difficult, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’re very happy to see that other people, other 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

businesses out there, other organizations out there are stepping 
up and looking to fill that need that is coming for some of these 
people, Mr. Speaker, with several announcements in the past 
week, one out of Saskatoon, out of Warman-Martensville, and 
one out of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. And so we’re optimistic that 
we’ll see additional groups step up and take advantage of that. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 
— before and after the election, I might add — called STC an 
essential service, said that it was almost like a utility, Mr. 
Speaker, said that it filled a need that Saskatchewan people 
valued and the work that STC was doing. 
 
But again we see that promise broken. And again we see here 
today that even when it comes to getting the word to the 
employees of that corporation, the 224 hard-working men and 
women of STC, Mr. Speaker, they can’t even keep their 
promise when it comes to getting the word by today. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that they’ve consulted with legal counsel and 
I’m sure they’ve got a bunch of arguments as to how this is not 
another broken promise. But can he at least keep his promise to 
the workers to tell them what’s going to happen with their 
future as of today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again I’ll mention to the members opposite it was a 
very difficult decision. Those 223 employees of STC, they were 
hard-working employees. And, Mr. Speaker, our legal counsel 
advises that we are following the steps of the Labour Code and 
that those employees will be notified appropriately of their 
severance and other circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it was nice to see that other organizations 
are stepping up to fill the void, to fill the void, Mr. Speaker, for 
those people, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the question to the 
member opposite and I’m sure that the employees will hear 
appropriately. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 604 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 

Victims of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 604, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Victims of Domestic 
Violence) Amendment Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Regina Douglas Park that Bill No. 604 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I’ve been informed that Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 10:56 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s consent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 47 - An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 

Legislative Assembly, 2017/Loi de 2017 
réduisant les traitements à verser aux 
membres de l’Assemblée législative 

Bill No. 65 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 57 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

Bill No. 58 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 

Bill No. 66 - The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative de 2017 sur les victimes d’actes 
criminels 

Bill No. 67 - The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:58.] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
[11:00] 
 

Initiatives for Safe Highways 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to read into the record the motion that we will be discussing 
today in our 75-minute debate: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the actions taken by this 
government to make Saskatchewan highways safer for 
everyone through initiatives such as adding blue lights to 
tow trucks, introducing tougher impaired driving laws, and 
investing in infrastructure projects such as the Regina 
bypass. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a motion that I can see each and 
every person within this House being in support of. It talks 
about safety. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start my discussion 
with the reasons why we come here, the reasons why each and 
every one of us as elected representatives put our name on the 
ballot. Mr. Speaker, the reason why most of us, and probably 
each and every one of us, do is because we want to serve. We 
feel that we have something to offer the residents of 
Saskatchewan, and so that is why we put our name on a ballot. 
We work hard to become elected, and we serve in the House. 
 
Each and every one of us want what’s best for our province. We 
want to create an environment that is safe to ensure that each 
and every one can live to their full potential, to be able to enjoy 
the fruits of their labour, to make sure that our children have 
safe environments to become educated in, to live, work, and 
play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has worked hard to ensure that 
our highways are safe. This coming weekend is a very holy 
time in Saskatchewan and across the world. For members and 
individuals of the Christian faith, it is what is considered 
probably, besides Christmas, one of the most holy times. It is 
when Jesus rose. And it’s with that, that people gather together 
to spend time with their families. And the members of the 
Jewish faith gather together in Seder in Passover to spend time 
reflecting within their communities and with their families the 
importance of this time of year. And for the members of the 
Sikh community, they celebrate tomorrow Vaisakhi, which is 

spring, which is a time of renewal, of planting, and optimism. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a time in our province when people will 
be going and spending time with their families, travelling 
through different communities. And so the motion is in fact 
very timely because we want to make sure that people realize as 
a government we have moved forward to ensure that our 
highways can be as safe as possible. 
 
One of the things that was very moving earlier in this session 
was a piece of legislation that in fact it was quite remarkable. 
Within one day, legislation was introduced and moved through, 
and that was the changing of the lights, the colours of the lights 
on tow trucks, to both amber and blue, because roadside safety 
on our highways is so important for our tow truck drivers who 
go out to help people. 
 
So it was, like I said, I think each and every one of us can take 
great pride in ensuring that this legislation was brought forward, 
but also too that we sent a message. We sent a message across 
Canada that in fact we value people who put their . . . You 
know, you wouldn’t think that a tow truck driver would be 
putting themselves in harm’s way, but in fact they are when 
they go out to a community or to the roadside to be able to help 
someone, and a lot of times that will be in a storm and so 
visibility is poor. And so we fully believe that changing of the 
lights on the tow trucks will signify that there is someone here, 
someone is working on the side of the road, and please take 
care. 
 
But also too something that we have done . . . And it’s not that 
we only enact legislation when someone is injured or maybe 
have lost their lives, but it does send a message to all of us. It 
wasn’t that long ago that young 18-year-old Ashley Richards 
lost her life. She was a flag person killed while working on a 
highway construction site. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is why it’s important as legislators, as 
members who have come together, to have the ability to make 
changes to make people’s lives better and safer and to make 
their workplaces safer. So in fact that was one of the reasons 
why the orange zone was implemented on construction sites 
along the highways, to ensure that people pay attention when 
they’re hurrying. And a good example is this weekend when 
someone is going to visit family, spend time with family over 
this Easter weekend, that if they encounter construction sites, 
that in fact they do pay attention. 
 
So it’s considered the orange zone on the highways, but also 
with that there is also the 60-kilometre, triple-fine zone, where 
workers are employed right on the site. So, Mr. Speaker, our 
government has been paying attention. We want to ensure that 
Saskatchewan employees are respected when they are working 
on a work site. So I think that some of the work that has been 
undertaken has been really significant. 
 
A good example is the Regina bypass. The Regina bypass has 
been called for, for numerous years, way before our government 
formed office because most people, when they come through 
that area east of the city of Regina, when they’re travelling 
down that highway, I think they absolutely must shudder 
because the amount of traffic that is on that section of road is 
incredible. So it was incumbent upon us to move forward with 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

this project. 
 
And so I know that some of the members opposite have not 
been in support of the Regina bypass, but in fact the purpose of 
the Regina bypass is to save lives, and that is the whole . . . It is 
an intrinsic part of this motion. It’s creating safer highways for 
our residents and our visitors in this province, and so the Regina 
bypass will in fact be able to accommodate this. It’s the largest 
infrastructure project that has ever been undertaken by this 
province, and the amount of employees that have had the 
opportunity to work on this project is incredible. 
 
We’ve also undertaken twinning a highway within that area. 
But also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Ministry of Highways has 
also undertaken to ensure that there’s passing lanes constructed 
on very heavily trafficked highways, high-traffic highways. Mr. 
Speaker, on a twin highway, the amount of accidents is reduced 
by 45 per cent. On a high-traffic highway that has numerous 
passing lanes, accidents are reduced by 35 per cent, but the cost 
of utilizing passing lanes is 15 per cent of the cost. So I think 
that we should be very pleased and proud that our government 
has chosen to ensure that our highways are made safe by having 
passing lanes be constructed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that our government has 
undertaken to ensure that not just on our highways but traffic in 
general is done in a safe manner, is to ensure that cell phone 
usage and texting is illegal when a person is driving a vehicle. 
And the amount of accidents that occur because someone has 
their phone up to their ear, or is busy looking down texting, it’s 
incredible. 
 
I can share an interesting story with you in that a friend of mine 
was . . . He drives a fairly nice car, and he was parked at a . . . 
stopped at a red light, not parked, but stopped at a red light. 
And there was a horrendous crash into the rear end of his car, 
and he was jolted and the whole . . . And so he got out, and here 
was this young woman who jumped out of her car, and she had 
just slammed into the back of his car, and she says, “I was so 
busy trying to take a picture of your cool car, I forgot to stop.” 
Now you may think that that’s kind of . . . But you know, that 
gentleman had some neck injuries and back injuries based on 
this accident. But also the difficult part was that this young 
woman didn’t feel that she had been in the wrong. She says, “I 
was trying to take a picture.” 
 
So you know, I think it’s so important that . . . I know that our 
government is implementing an information with public service 
announcements and advertisements on the importance of safe 
driving, and not texting and driving, and not using your cell 
phone held in your hand to your ear. So I think that, like I said, 
sometimes people feel that, really, are those that important? But 
in fact they are, because enacting this kind of legislation, in 
fact, saves lives and it creates a safer environment for all of us. 
 
Another thing that our government has brought forward is 
stiffer impairment fines. Drinking and driving in Saskatchewan, 
it’s absolutely . . . It’s a record that we should all be ashamed of 
because the high record of drinking and driving in this province 
is . . . it’s staggering. So I think that, I know that a lot of time 
and energy was spent on saying, how do we address this? How 
do we create safer driving conditions by enforcing stronger 
impairment fines? So that is what our government has 

undertaken. 
 
I know that it hasn’t been always looked upon maybe in the 
brightest of lights because there’s some industries that feel that 
harsher drinking and driving laws are going to in fact be 
detrimental to their business. But, Mr. Speaker, lives matter and 
so that’s why it was so important that we enact this kind of 
legislation to say that in fact drinking and driving is not 
tolerated in this province. Being impaired is not acceptable. 
 
I just saw yesterday, in fact, or maybe it was this morning that 
an organization at Regina Beach has now a van and they’ve got 
. . . So that in fact if people have the opportunity to go to that 
facility, to the Yacht Club, have a glass of wine or two with 
dinner, they don’t even consider getting behind the wheel and 
driving home, but in fact they have been offered a ride home. 
So I think that’s, you know . . . There’s a proactive way of 
ensuring that people be respectful. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, if we want to talk about safety on our 
highways and thinking of people in Saskatchewan, creating an 
environment where we know that if accidents do happen, our 
province has brought STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] to Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, when you 
attend an event where you realize that STARS is there to help 
people, that’s where we realize that we are making 
Saskatchewan a safer place to be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I have read the motion into the 
record and I am moving the motion. But do I have to move it 
and read it again? Okay, I’ll do it: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions taken by this 
government to make Saskatchewan highways safer for 
everyone through initiatives such as adding blue lights to 
tow trucks, introducing tougher impairment driving laws, 
investing in infrastructure projects such as the Regina 
bypass. 

 
I so move. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rochdale 
has moved: 
 

That the Assembly recognize the actions taken by this 
government to make Saskatchewan highways safer for 
everyone through initiatives such as adding blue lights to 
tow trucks, introducing tougher impaired-driving laws, 
and investing in infrastructure projects such as the Regina 
bypass. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s fair to say that in Saskatchewan one thing we’ve got no 
shortage of, Mr. Speaker, are highways and byways and the 
many roads that take the people across this great province. 
 
And as the member opposite pointed out, this is the time of 
year, Mr. Speaker, when folks are coming down those roads to 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

get home, to be with family, to be with loved ones. And it’s a 
time when we’re reminded, too painfully, that when it comes to 
safety on those roads, when it comes to things like drunk 
driving, when it comes to things like general traffic safety, Mr. 
Speaker, that we face a challenge in Saskatchewan that is in too 
many ways worse than even in the rest of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that as different of the McCalls make 
their way home and get to those tables, that there is always . . . I 
think of the prayer that my father often gives at these times 
when there are those that can’t make it in and . . . the prayer for 
safety, Mr. Speaker, for the travelling. And I guess I am 
mindful of those things as we approach this debate. 
 
And I’m also mindful of some things, that the member who has 
moved this motion knows about loss that can happen in a life. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, as I’m of an age where I know 
something of the story that the member wasn’t talking about, so 
I’ll not get into it. But I’m of an age where I know that story 
very well. And so when the member talks about safety on the 
highways and our wish for folks to make it home in good health 
and safe and sound, I know that she’s saying that from a place 
that few of us can imagine, Mr. Speaker, let alone know. So I 
just want to say that off the top, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 
is very much at the heart of the matter in a debate like this. 
 
It was a week ago right at this time, Mr. Speaker, when we 
gathered to pass the amendment to The Traffic Safety Act in 
terms of enabling tow truck drivers to use the amber and blue 
lights on their vehicles, and the kind of safety that we hope that 
will afford them. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as a member 
of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, that when the government 
puts forward something that makes sense, that we think is 
productive, that we think is helpful, that will improve life for 
Saskatchewan people, that we will do our best to support that. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s not an everyday occurrence where 
you have expedited passage of a bill, or where you see that bill 
then again today be given Royal Assent and moved forward and 
hopefully have that positive impact on people’s lives. It’s a 
good day. 
 
And we’ve seen that in different circumstances around other 
measures in the history of this House, Mr. Speaker, where 
opposition members have participated in the Traffic Safety 
Committee. And you know, certainly there were measures 
brought forward at that time that were supported. There were 
measures that came forward in a minority opinion. There are 
times when we’ve seen the, again the orange zone. And now 
former members of this Assembly, then minister of Highways, 
Wayne Elhard, and the then member from Coronation Park, 
Kim Trew, were able to come together for families who had 
experienced the loss north of the city here, Mr. Speaker; for 
highway workers, to try and put as many safeguards in place as 
is possible to ensure that going to work should mean that you’re 
coming home at the end of the day, that great risk to your life 
shouldn’t be an everyday occurrence. 
 
So when we see measures like that, Mr. Speaker, come forward, 
we’re very happy to do what we can to come in alongside and 
to make those changes that will hopefully provide greater 
safety, provide greater peace of mind for all those moms and 
dads out there that are waiting for their loved ones to come 
home, and those husbands and wives. And that, you know, God 

willing, some of these measures will see us to a place where 
folks aren’t getting that call late at night with terrible news 
about what has happened to a loved one. 
 
And we approach that in earnest, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a 
fair amount of this resolution that we’re in agreement with and 
that we’re, you know . . . I think the record will show where 
we’ve been able to work co-operatively and in support, we have 
done so, Mr. Speaker, with that goal of greater safety for 
Saskatchewan people firmly in mind. 
 
There are some aspects of this motion, Mr. Speaker, as regards 
infrastructure or decisions that have been made by the 
government, or not made, Mr. Speaker, where there are some 
things there that we do not support, where we will be jealous of 
our ability to ask questions to ensure that public dollars are 
being spent as efficiently and as effectively as is possible; that 
when a government makes a promise about something, that you 
can count on it and it not get, you know . . . If a project’s going 
to cost be it $400 million or $1.2 billion, that there should be 
some assurance that that is the end of imposition on the public 
purse and that the price tag should not be . . . Going forward, 
that these infrastructure deals should be done in the light of day 
and should be transparent and accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, you need drive no further than 
various highways in this province where the Ministry of 
Highways has seen fit to put up signs alongside the road saying, 
you know, X number of kilometres, X amount of expenditure, 
Ministry of Highways, Government of Saskatchewan. And you 
know, that’s as it should be. Folks should know what they’re 
paying for, know what they’re getting in return. 
 
That’s not the case in too many ways with the Regina bypass, 
Mr. Speaker, where the price tag continues to climb, where it’s 
a bit of a black box in terms of the accountability. And 
commercial sensitivity is proclaimed on a 30-year deal as part 
of its P3 [public-private partnership] conditions. And in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker, we retain the right of any good opposition 
to ask questions and to hold that government to account. 
 
But again I return to where I started, Mr. Speaker. This is an all 
too common experience for the people of Saskatchewan — to 
experience loss, to experience death on our highways —and far 
too many families know what it’s like to get that call about the 
fate of a loved one. And where there are measures that we as 
legislators can come together to make changes, to provide 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be there. 
 
But where there are questions around choices being made, 
where there are questions around the proper expenditure of 
public dollars, we’ll be there to ask those questions as well. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If I might, 
I’d like to give you five numbers: 53, 60, 43, 72, and 67. Those 
five numbers represent the people that have died as a result of 
drunk driving in this province in the last five years — shocking 
numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should have to 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

remember that many people on this day for something that is 
absolutely within our control. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, aside from those people, there are five 
other numbers I’ll give you: 660, 756, 613, 560, 578. These are 
the people that were injured as a result of impaired driving 
accidents. Mr. Speaker, these are not just numbers; these are 
real live people. They’re friends. They’re family. They’re 
mothers. They’re fathers. They’re sons. They’re daughters. 
They are people that are important in our lives every day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my comments I will 
absolutely be endorsing and supporting the motion by the 
member from Regina Rochdale: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions taken by this 
government to make Saskatchewan highways safer for 
everyone through initiatives such as adding blue lights to 
tow trucks, introducing tougher impaired driving laws, and 
investing in infrastructure projects such as the Regina 
bypass. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2014, 33 per cent of fatal collisions 
involved drinking drivers. It’s surprising to me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . no, I guess it isn’t. When we took the action this 
year on impaired driving laws, the calls that we received, the 
feedback that we received, many obviously were very, very 
supportive. But I think we probably all heard from people that 
were questioning to a certain extent where we were going with 
that. And the member across or a member earlier mentioned 
that somehow this might affect someone’s business or 
whatever. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to give you a specific 
personal example, I received a call from a gentleman that I’ve 
known for quite a number of years, who is probably my age, 
give or take. And he was commenting that it’s very common in 
his environment to go to curling, was the example he used, and 
after a game to have two or three or four beer and then drive 
home because it was just on a grid road and just a few miles. I 
wonder how many of those accidents, how many of these 
people that we’ve lost were just on a grid road and just within a 
few miles. I think statistically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so many 
people have died on our roads and highways within just a few 
miles of home. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do have a terrible record for drinking 
and driving in this province. And I would be surprised if some, 
if not all of us, have in our lives been engaged in one way or 
another in a drinking and driving experience, whether we were 
the party in question that was doing it or we were in a vehicle 
where we allowed it to happen. 
 
And yet it’s interesting. We all know people who have died or 
been injured in drinking and driving accidents, and we do it. 
We’ve done it ourselves. We’ve been engaged in that activity 
either as the driver or as the passenger. We need to be asking 
the question why. Why are we still doing this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I was looking across this morning at the young people 
that were up in the gallery, and it’s interesting to me that the 
young people today understand this issue much better than 

people of my vintage. They understand the importance of a 
designated driver, and we don’t. We don’t. 
 
We need to be thinking and talking about that this weekend in 
our family gatherings when we’re probably going to have a 
glass of wine or two and we might have a drink or two, and we 
need to be talking about who is going to drive home. And that 
person needs to be congratulated and recognized for saving 
lives. 
 
I wonder about those students. How many of them will have to 
deal with a death in their family or amongst their friends from 
drinking and driving? The Speaker and my colleague had their 
young families in the House today. We don’t want those small 
children to face a future without a parent, without a brother, a 
sister, an aunt, an uncle. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a huge challenge in this province. I 
wanted to talk briefly about the other issues that are mentioned 
in this motion, how important the tow truck driver legislation is. 
And I congratulate the Minister Responsible for SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] on the initiatives that 
he’s brought forward this year. 
 
And I need to remind people: things like the orange zone — the 
member opposite mentioned the orange zone — think about it. 
The difference of one or two or three minutes in your travels, 
that’s what we’re talking about when you slow down for an 
orange zone or have to make that stop. You know, we think 
about the No. 1 Highway coming into the city. Two, three, four, 
five minutes in your lifetime is all we’re talking about when 
you’re slowing down for an orange zone. Is that so difficult to 
do? 
 
The Minister of Highways is continuing our efforts on 
construction and improvement of our highways, and that is so 
important to safety. The Regina bypass is mentioned 
specifically, but we’re also making significant investments 
across the province through the MREP [municipal roads for the 
economy program] program and many others, a quarter of a 
billion dollars over the last 10 years. I won’t get lost in the 
statistics, but they’re all out there for us to see. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion is about people. It’s about 
people’s lives. As I said earlier, it’s about fathers, mothers, 
brothers, sisters. We need to change the culture in this province 
around safety on our highways. We need to be thinking about 
that every day. And I’m as guilty as everybody else is, I am 
sure, on each and every one of these issues of not being that 
good driver that we should be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say again, I fully support and endorse the 
motion made by the member from Regina Rochdale. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise and join in this debate today. I want to thank all 
of the members who’ve had the opportunity to speak so far on 
this matter. You can tell the tone is a little bit different today 
than what you normally see at a 75-minute debate because this 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

is a serious, serious issue, one that I think has affected all of us 
at some point, and I commend everybody for taking this matter 
as serious as it deserves. And I want to thank, as I said, all of 
the members for their discussion, in particular the member who 
just sat down, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, who gave 
a very moving speech and spoke to the challenges we have 
around the culture of safety in driving, in particular in our 
province. So thank you for that. 
 
The timing to have this discussion, as has been discussed 
before, is very apt. We’re moving into a long weekend, Easter 
weekend, which is, as is Saskatchewan tradition, the time when 
we travel to or people travel to us. Family members are moving 
about the province to spend time with loved ones. And this is 
the time when it gives us the opportunity to stop and be 
reflective of the things that matter the most: family, loved ones. 
And sometimes we can often get distracted by things that are 
going on in our lives and feel rushed to go to the next event or 
the next commitment we have and forget to actually take a 
moment to enjoy the time we have with our families and with 
our loved ones. So I appreciate that this is the topic of the 
75-minute debate today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have family that’s on the road to Canmore right now to visit 
my sister, and I know my partner and I will be driving to Indian 
Head this weekend to visit his family, so I know I’m no 
exception to the movement that we all seem to do during long 
weekends to go to visit loved ones. So this is a particularly apt 
time to have this discussion, and it gives me the opportunity as 
well to pause and send out good thoughts for my loved ones 
that they reach their destinations safely during this long 
weekend. 
 
As an opposition member, when we have the opportunity to 
work with government, it’s not often, but it has happened on a 
few occasions recently, and as the member from Regina 
Elphinstone had already said, it’s a nice, it’s a good day in the 
legislature when we can stand up and endorse and consent to 
legislation that’s important for the people of Saskatchewan, and 
allow for its expedited passage. 
 
One particular one that we actually saw receive a Royal Assent 
before entering into this debate was Bill 65, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, which allowed for the inclusion of amber 
lights for tow trucks, red lights for tow trucks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We stood in the House, I believe it was last week, 
when family members of the individual who passed away, the 
tow truck driver who passed away, came into the House and 
watched that legislation go through. 
 
It’s unfortunate that this legislation and legislation like it is 
usually sparked over the death, the tragic death of somebody in 
this province, and unfortunately it’s tragedies that tend to spark 
change. We’re sad for the reason why we had to pass the 
legislation, but we were honoured to join in with the 
government members to pass that legislation. 
 
And similarly, with the legislation around increased penalties 
for impaired driving and distracted driving that was passed the 
last time we sat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were happy to see it 
come through. It was actually . . . A portion of it was called on 
by members on this side previously, after a traffic safety 
committee that I think issued its report prior to my election. But 

there was a dissenting minority opinion that my colleague from 
Saskatoon Riversdale penned that well endorsed, I believe, the 
committee report, felt like it needed to go a few steps further in 
terms of making sure that we are protecting everybody and 
we’re doing all we can. I believe one portion of that, dealing 
with the three-day vehicle impoundment, is now in fruition in 
the new legislation. So as I said, we were quite happy to see that 
happen and to consent to that. 
 
I think we all can stand up in the House and speak to . . . This is 
a small province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so impaired driving has 
affected, in some ways, everybody in this House through one 
way or another, and the damages that it can have on those who 
are left behind are quite devastating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also wanted to mention that not only, as the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena had mentioned, not only does it seem like 
there’s a bit of a generational change that is happening, and I 
hope to happen. And I come from a younger generation than 
his, but there is still . . . but I don’t think my generation is any 
more, is any more . . . My generation still struggles with it as 
well, is what I’m trying to say. And I hope that the generation 
that was sitting behind me this morning learns from the 
mistakes of my generation as well. 
 
But there are some . . . As the member had mentioned, this is a 
societal change that also needs to happen. And there have been 
some bright lights in recent memory, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
do want to mention. The member from Regina Rochdale spoke 
about a program that occurs in Regina Beach. 
 
The Leo’s group of businesses, the Leopold’s group of 
businesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who operate several 
restaurants and bars in Regina and now Saskatoon — and I 
believe they’re expanding out of province actually — had a 
very impressive program that occurred in December. They 
operate Leopold’s restaurants and Vic’s Tavern that is 
downtown. And they were offering free rides, a free shuttle 
service for anybody who was utilizing their establishment on 
the weekends during the month of December. It might have 
started even earlier actually, but over the holiday season, I 
would say. 
 
And their entrepreneurial spirit actually spearheaded other bars 
in Regina to take up that challenge and other bars started to do 
the same things. I know there was a bar in particular in the east 
end, whose name escapes me at the moment, who also did a 
similar thing. And I know there’s some desire or motivation to 
see if this is something that can be done on a more regular basis 
than occurs now. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So this is, it’s heartening to see that even restaurants and bars 
are seeing the tragedy that impaired driving has on our society 
and are looking towards ways of creating a better, a more safer 
environment for everybody. 
 
So I did want to give kudos to Vic’s and Leo’s group of 
business for doing those kinds of things. And I did not know 
about the program that was operating at Regina Beach, so I was 
happy to see that as well. And I do hope that this will spur more 
discussion around the need for a societal change as well as more 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

opportunity for businesses to also recognize that things need to 
change in our community. As that I see my time is up, so I will 
leave it at that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my honour and pleasure to represent the good folks of Gardiner 
Park and also join with my colleagues from Rochdale and 
Kelvington-Wadena and across the floor who have given 
excellent speeches about this very serious matter, this very 
serious part of our province. Certainly there are challenges 
remaining, as has been canvassed by my colleagues. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have, we’re obviously a very large land 
mass. We have a lot of exports in Saskatchewan, of course, and 
a lot of the ways we get them to market is on our highways. 
And we have the most kilometres of highways anywhere in 
Canada, relatively small population to pay for it. Of course we 
have more and more Saskatchewanians every day, it seems. But 
we have very difficult winters, and that causes dangerous 
situations in terms of folks having to travel in those conditions, 
and also in construction season. It’s quite short, and of course 
you can’t pave streets and roads at minus 30, so there is that 
short construction season. And so those are the challenges 
we’ve had. 
 
We’ve overcome a lot over the years from not only this side 
but, as mentioned earlier, by the previous government. And of 
course there’s always more work to do. I think of my colleagues 
here. I’m very fortunate, being a Regina MLA. It just takes me 
about 10 or 15 minutes, depending on traffic of course, to get 
home. But I know several of my colleagues, when they leave 
here this afternoon they’re travelling many, many hours just to 
get back to their home. And we always think about their safety 
and their ability to get home safely, so that’s always certainly 
top of mind. 
 
And I think safety . . . As we mentioned some of the things our 
government’s done in the last few years, it’s certainly spent a 
lot of money on some of the things that already have been 
talked about and directly mentioned in the motion by the 
member from Rochdale. Of course the Regina bypass; I usually 
talk about that project in my speeches. I usually get up during 
the budget debate and talk about that, how important that is, and 
right at the top of it is of course safety, and that’s primary. 
 
I’ve been to . . . don’t go out to White City quite that often or to 
Balgonie, but I know a lot of folks do. A lot of my friends 
commute that way. And particularly coming back into Regina, 
for years as the population’s increased, it is quite a dangerous 
scenario as turning left, going back west on Highway No. 1, 
there’s always a long lineup even in non-peak times. And just 
timing it to get across . . . I know there’s been some 
improvements there, but of course the ultimate improvement is 
overpasses, which are coming — thankfully, finally — at 
Balgonie, White City, with long merge lanes. And so that 
answer’s finally coming after long last, and I’m sure we’ll see 
many fewer accidents and on top of that fatalities on some of 
that. 
 
We have seen . . . Certainly a very devastating thing to lose 

somebody for any reason, of course, but when you expect them 
to be home and they’re not able to come home because of an 
accident. Just yesterday on Ring Road here in Regina, it was 
closed off because — I don’t know a lot of the details, I admit 
— but somebody passed on the highway just yesterday on the 
Ring Road. 
 
And you know obviously it’s tough on the family and the 
person, but if it’s a one-person accident as I believe this one 
was, that can be pretty devastating, I think, on the driver of the 
vehicle that survived, and, you know, the thoughts that they go 
through. And so it affects a lot of people, as was mentioned by 
my colleagues. It’s been mentioned several times before that 
probably everybody in here has been touched by some sort of 
death on our Saskatchewan highways. 
 
A few of the things we’ve been able to do: passing lanes, 
divided highways along No. 1, and the interchange at south 
Lewvan — all those things. Rather than having a stop, traffic 
lights allows traffic to move more freely, but most importantly 
more safely. Excuse my . . . if that English was not quite proper, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know one thing I was interested in finding out, so I did a little 
research and I’d heard that the photo radar pilot that had gone 
on in the major cities, along Ring Road, Circle Drive, on the 
turnoff in Moose Jaw, there has been some success in that area. 
So legislation that allowed that pilot project to go ahead is 
certainly good to see. And from the information I saw there was 
a decrease of speeds, which I think . . . 
 
And anecdotally as well, my wife takes Ring Road every day to 
get to work, Ring Road north, and of course everybody in 
Regina or anybody passing through Regina will know, and I 
think anecdotally, and the numbers I have here show that there 
has been a decrease in speed. You always see, once in a while, 
somebody trying out their new sports car on the Ring Road. But 
I’ve seen that, and of course that helps safety, those reasonable 
speeds on high-traffic areas. 
 
And so those have been a success and particularly in school 
zones, I know that there has been good work in the photo radar, 
in the schools. People are accepting of it. According to SGI they 
want to see more of that, more photo radar. And the numbers 
have shown that speeds have decreased. People are getting the 
message in those zones. There are signs everywhere. 
 
And the proceeds from the folks that do speed through those 
zones, they get ticketed of course, and that money has gone 
towards paying for the program. I believe that it just became net 
positive in revenue just late in 2016, but 25 per cent in the 
municipal location, 25 per cent of it goes to administrative costs 
and three-quarters goes to the municipality and hopefully those 
municipalities will use that money to in turn increase safety, 
particularly in those school zones. 
 
I know that some of the schools in my area, the one particularly 
on Dewdney Avenue, Ferguson, they narrowed the road 
actually. They sort of expanded the sidewalks. Dewdney east is 
a fairly busy road and so I understand that helps students get 
across. It’s not as far for them to get across. Motorists might 
realize that, you know, that this is a little bit of a different 
profile of the road and things like that. 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

Of course traffic lights, pedestrian lights, those are other things 
that I’ve seen gone in, and removing impediments so folks can 
see. 
 
One thing that used to kind of get me a little hot under the 
collar, Mr. Speaker — it still does — but when my kids started 
going to school and I’d go with them for a while and watch 
them, and they’re waiting to cross the street, and a car wouldn’t 
stop for young kids to cross the street. I was, you know . . . So 
there is more work to do, more education that needs to get out 
to folks that are motorists. 
 
And I know, the driver training, that’s a rigorous program SGI 
puts on. And of course that’s something . . . And of course, Mr. 
Speaker, we never want to have somebody speeding through a 
school zone, particularly around those dismissal times, at noon 
— and of course in the morning, 9 o’clock — and afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker. So SGI again, as I mentioned, has done good work 
in that area in terms of the fines from the photo radar pilot. 
 
The automated licence plate reader, that’s an interesting 
program. Very, very cool technology, I’d say. A traffic officer 
can go to any, can go to any parking lot, for example, and 
automatically read all those licence plates to see if somebody’s 
been convicted of a DUI [driving under the influence] or is 
driving without a licence, and they can arrest that person or 
suspend their licence or whatever’s appropriate. So $800,000 
for that. 
 
Five hundred thousand dollars more for increased checkstops in 
our province, 60 more officers, particularly, to look at this area. 
The RID program, report impaired drivers, there’s information 
that is on signs and on bottles of liquor that’s been purchased, a 
number you can call if you see an impaired driver. Public 
service announcements, those happen all the time, and those are 
very important, Mr. Speaker. The police officers do good work 
in our province. 
 
So I think our government has moved significantly on 
improving road safety in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is my 
pleasure to rise and enter into the 75-minute debate that has 
been noted doesn’t feel much like a debate. I think there’s a lot 
of agreement from both sides of the Assembly about the 
importance of safety on our highways and taking measures to 
promote safety. 
 
As the SGI critic, it has been my pleasure to work with the 
minister on a couple of occasions and gain the support of this 
side of the Assembly for a couple of the motions that we have 
noted here today: most recently of course, the addition of blue 
and amber lights to tow trucks in the province. And that was a 
measure that saw no debate from our side of the Assembly, and 
certainly was something that we were willing to support. And 
again express our sympathies to the family of Courtney 
Schaefer, but also to all of those who have been injured or lost 
their lives or had near-misses on our highways. Tow truck 
drivers for sure, but all of those who are out on our highways 
ensuring safety. 

I think of snowplow operators as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
first responders, both volunteer and paid first responders. And I 
know that they attend to some very horrific scenes on our 
highways, and anything that we can do to ensure that that is a 
less frequent occurrence is certainly something that I think we 
can all agree upon. 
 
One of the other recent points that we were able to agree to 
expedite legislation was around the increased measures around 
drinking and driving and distracted driving in the province. And 
certainly that was something that members on this side had 
called for, for a long time. It predates my time here in the 
Assembly. 
 
I know back in 2013 there was a report, the Special Committee 
on Traffic Safety final report which came out back in August 
30th of 2013, agreeing with a number of those measures. In fact 
my colleague, as has been mentioned, my colleagues from 
Cumberland and Riversdale had presented a minority report at 
that time calling on some increased measures on top of that 
which was recommended officially in this report, specifically 
around the impounding of vehicles. 
 
[12:00] 
 
I’m just going to move back to that here. And for a very good 
reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they had noted that policies that 
had been implemented in British Columbia and Alberta had, at 
that point already, had a very dramatic effect on fatalities. There 
were some changes, but three-day impoundment was found to 
reduce fatalities in BC [British Columbia] by 50 per cent and 46 
per cent in Alberta in a fairly short period of time. So that was 
something that we were certainly in agreement with and happy 
to work to expedite passage of that bill. But again the report 
came out in 2013, and we didn’t see that bill until quite 
recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I will leave that there. 
 
In terms of our agreement, it has been mentioned that many of 
us, our colleagues, will be on the highways probably pretty 
soon heading back to our families and to our friends. And I 
would like to wish everyone safe travels, and not only to 
members here but to people across this province. 
 
I know I have family coming in from, I believe tomorrow, from 
Carnduff. My other family around the province will be 
travelling in. And it’s something you think of when you know 
that your family is on the highway, as has been mentioned, you 
know, with commuters. 
 
My mom commuted along No. 6 and 39 for many years, and 
there were a lot of close calls. And unfortunately I have friends 
whose parents didn’t make that trip safely, and family members. 
And so I know I’m in no way special there. There are people, 
unfortunately, probably in every chair of this Assembly who 
have been impacted by injury or death on our highways. 
 
And I think it really is the role of all members here to do what 
we can to ensure that those numbers are as low as possibly we 
can make them. And that requires working together. That 
requires evidence. That requires good drafting of policy. That 
requires consultation and all of those things that go into crafting 
quality legislation and policy in the province, such as we saw 
proposed back in 2013, such as we saw with the addition of the 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

blue and amber lights on emergency vehicles. 
 
Legislation is part of it, but there’s also the responsibility of 
each of us and each person in this province to behave in a way 
on our highways that is safe. It has been mentioned reducing 
speed in the 60 zones. That is incumbent upon every person 
who gets on that highway to be aware of it. 
 
The drinking and driving, that you will get no disagreement 
from members, I’m sure, in any seat that the drinking and 
driving in this province is a problem. It’s a long-standing 
problem. It is a problem that some people don’t even see as a 
problem, I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that it’s 
past time that we change that perception. 
 
And I think that there has been some hope. I know my 
colleague from Douglas Park — I’m not quite of the same 
generation, but maybe the one above — there was a start of a 
recognition, you know, talking about designated drivers and 
talking about impaired driving in a way that my father’s 
generation, that simply wasn’t of the same consideration. And 
as a parent of a very reluctant driver on one hand, and one who 
starts driver’s ed next week, this is something that is certainly 
on my mind. And you know, measures to ensure their safety on 
the highways, and all children, is of course something that we 
would encourage. 
 
So with that, I’m noting that 10 minutes has flown by, and I will 
conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
government is doing the right thing investing in highways, and 
this year’s budget includes $1.1 billion to build, operate, and 
maintain highways in our province, including the Regina 
bypass. 
 
To the member from the youngest generation, Regina Douglas 
Park: do you support and acknowledge the Regina bypass 
initiative as a worthwhile investment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Part of our 
job as legislators is to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan’s 
tax dollars, which we’re all entrusted with, their hard-earned 
money, are done so economically and efficiently. And we won’t 
apologize on the opposition side for asking questions about 
whether or not tax dollars are being used economically and 
efficiently, and frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we won’t stop. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In this 
time where the commission for the Inquiry into Missing and 
Murdered Indigenous Women is getting their work underway, 
one of the things that is brought to the . . . that is part of that 
conversation is the way that indigenous women are able to 

move safely about a place like Saskatchewan. 
 
And there have been those in the decision to wrap up, privatize 
the Saskatchewan Transportation Company who have brought 
forward questions about what is there to be learned from the 
circumstance on the Highway of Tears outside Prince George, 
where women hitchhiking who had no other choices around 
transportation would disappear. So to the member from 
Rochdale, what consideration was made of that aspect of public 
safety in terms of the decision around STC? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That was a 
very . . . Thank you for that question. Safety is always foremost 
in our mind, and ensuring that safety on our highways is 
something that our government takes very, very seriously. And 
the motion that was brought forward to this debate talked about 
the importance of what we’re doing for tow truck drivers, what 
we are doing to implement laws for impaired driving, and 
investing in the infrastructure of the Regina bypass. So I’m 
more than pleased to enter into a discussion in regards to those 
aspects of this debate, but the STC debate could be held at 
another day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of 
the legacies of the members opposite is the billion-dollar 
pothole they left when they were voted out in 2007. I was a 
professional driver on those roads during that time, so I 
experienced the terrible state and neglect of our highways. You 
can’t build an economy, Mr. Speaker, without investing in 
highways. 
 
Our government is committed to investing in highways. 
Including this year’s budget, we will have invested $7.4 billion 
since 2007. Those improved roads also mean improved safety 
for drivers. My question is for the member from Regina 
Lakeview. How did your party think it was possible to build 
Saskatchewan’s economy without investing in highway 
infrastructure? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good question. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that 
there are a couple of measures here that I would like to respond 
with. 
 
First of all, there’s the amount of money spent, but that doesn’t 
necessarily translate into quality or quantity. When you’re 
spending $2 billion on one project alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and at a cost of 10 times what it costs to pave any other 
kilometre of road, I think that that bears consideration and is 
something that certainly people around this province . . . Well 
the former minister has something to say about that, Mr. 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

Speaker, but these are questions that people around this 
province want to know. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
independent Information and Privacy Commissioner has ruled 
twice that the Sask Party should release the documents related 
to the GTH-CP [Canadian Pacific] land deal right beside the 
Regina bypass, but the Sask Party continues to flout his rulings. 
How can the member for Regina Gardiner Park justify this lack 
of transparency? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The GTH isn’t 
mentioned in the motion, but of course the bypass is. And this is 
the same policy as the NDP had, Mr. Speaker, to deal with 
commercially sensitive information, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
long-standing policy. If you release it without permission from 
other third parties, the province risks getting sued for that. That 
would only be good for other members of her profession, Mr. 
Speaker. So this is the same policy that’s been at the top of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s been like that for many years, 
and I’m sure it will continue. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
municipal governments of the White Butte region have 
provided their full support of the Regina bypass. They have 
been actively involved in the review of alternatives, both on 
location and design, as this bypass will significantly affect and 
make great improvements to the safety of the people living in 
and travelling through their communities. They strongly argue 
that any delay in this project will result in more loss of life, as 
well as added expenses to taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Do you agree that these bypasses 
will help our highways stay safe and that . . . [inaudible] . . . 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear the end of 
the member’s question, but certainly in terms of, what is a 
bypass generally, you know, that’s something that’s been called 
for, for a very long time by the communities in question, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Where we get into questions, Mr. Speaker, is how that bypass is 
being built, how it’s being implemented, how that project is 
being moved forward, Mr. Speaker. And the way that we’ve 
seen the scope change, Mr. Speaker, the way that we’ve seen 
the price tag change, and I guess I find it interesting. 
 
I hear the member from Regina Walsh Acres yelling from his 
chair. And, you know, I guess I would refer individuals to his 

website so they can check his defence of the Regina bypass out, 
Mr. Speaker. And once they do that, maybe they’ll find out why 
that member wasn’t participating in this debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Sask 
Party’s own documents show that the average cost to twin, 
grade, and pave Highway No. 16 was no more than $1.3 million 
per kilometre. The minister’s own documents show that the 
average per kilometre for the Estevan bypass was $1.2 million 
per kilometre. The Sask Party’s P3 bypass project is costing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers more than 10 times those amounts. 
How can the member from Kelvington-Wadena explain any of 
this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank 
you for the question. I think anyone who has had the experience 
of driving around the bypass project in the last few months 
would easily recognize how complicated that particular project 
is. There are 12 overpasses, 40 kilometres of new four-lane 
highway, 20 kilometres of resurfaced four-lane highway, 55 
kilometres of new service roads, twinning of about 5 kilometres 
of Highway 6, and I could go on and on statistically about the 
Regina bypass project. 
 
But anyone who has looked at that project at all would 
understand the scope of it, the amount of work — 8,200 
employees working at that project, 95 Saskatchewan companies 
working at that project — and it’s about safety. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 
[12:15] 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 602 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Wotherspoon that Bill No. 602 — The Election 
(Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise into the House and enter into this debate on Bill No. 602, 
An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996 to provide fairness and 
accountability in election fundraising. 
 
And this is a very important bill to be discussing. We’ve raised 
the issue. It’s been raised many times over the last few years. 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

And I will refer to our leader’s, official Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments made just prior to the budget on March 
16th. But even more so now, post-budget, is this bill before us. 
And it’s one that we have invited the government to join with 
us and take a look at how we can make our election fundraising, 
funding much more appropriate, much more transparent, much 
more accountable. But they have not sought to do that. In fact 
they’ve decided to defend the status quo, and I’ll talk a little bit 
about that a little later on. 
 
But we see a budget before us that was passed where clearly 
many people had a lot of questions about who the master is of 
this government. On one hand you have tax cuts to corporations 
that cost $38 million, tax cuts to the wealthiest in this province 
that cost $38 million. And the question to many people in this 
province is, who are the people that that government is listening 
to? And if you look at the fundraising they do and what’s been 
reported in the media, you sure have a lot of questions. 
 
And I think this is one that many people will reflect over in this 
break that we’re coming into, that maybe we should make 
ourselves more accountable to the people of Saskatchewan and 
not to the large corporations, not to the large unions. Let’s get 
them out of election funding and make it more appropriate to 
what really the rest of the country is doing, because there’s just 
too many questions. 
 
And as I say, with the budget that we have before us, where 
people ask questions about STC, they ask questions about 
libraries, they ask questions about funding to municipalities and 
schools, our health care system, Meewasin, Wascana Park — 
all of those things, the question really is, who is this 
government really listening to? Who is this government really 
listening to? And so I just want to just review quickly to the 
folks at home what Bill 602 does. 
 
It says, and I’ll read the preamble because, you know, we do 
this every two or three weeks and people may not know: 
 

WHEREAS Saskatchewan’s election financing laws 
currently allow for unlimited contributions from 
corporations and unions; 

 
AND WHEREAS Saskatchewan election financing laws 
currently allow for unlimited contributions from 
out-of-province donors; 

 
AND WHEREAS the federal government and the 
governments of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec and Nova 
Scotia have already banned corporate and union donations 
to political parties; 

 
AND WHEREAS Saskatchewan people deserve a 
democratic system that is free from the influence of 
corporate, union, and out-of-province donations; 

 
THEREFORE HER MAJESTY . . . [enact the following.] 

 
And what we talk about is we define the contribution as a: 
 

. . . gift, loan, advance, deposit or other form of assistance, 
but does not include a loan from a chartered bank, trust 
company, or credit union where the loan is to be repaid in 

full with interest. 
 
But we talk about: 
 

Section 239 is repealed and the following substituted: 
 

“Eligible contributions and Form of Contributions 
 

239.1(1) No person shall make a contribution to a 
registered political party, a candidate, or a constituency 
association unless that person is a: 

(a) individual who is a resident of the province of 
Saskatchewan, 
(b) registered political party; or 
(c) constituency association. 

 
It goes on to say that: 
 

(2) In one calendar year, an individual’s total combined 
contribution to registered political parties, candidates, 
and constituency associations shall not exceed $1,275. 
 
(3) No person shall make a contribution to a registered 
political party unless the contribution paid out of moneys 
to which that person is beneficially entitled. 
 
(4) No person shall make a payment by or on behalf of a 
registered political party unless it is by or through the 
chief official agent of that party. 
 
(5) No person shall make a contribution to a candidate 
unless the contribution is paid out of moneys to which 
that person is beneficially entitled. 
 
(6) No person shall make a payment by or on behalf of a 
candidate unless it is by or through the candidate’s 
business manager. 

 
And then it goes on to:  
 

(7) Subsections (4) to (6) do not apply to any payments 
made by any person if: 

 
(i) the liability of the person is was lawfully incurred 
by that person; and 
(ii) no part of that payment is repayable to that 
person. 

 
Section 242 is repealed and what that really is, section 242, I’ll 
just take a minute to explain, is that: 
 

No business manager and no chief official agent of . . . 
[any] registered political party shall accept a contribution 
from a contributor who resides outside Canada, unless that 
contributor is a Canadian citizen. 

 
And so what we’re really saying is people have to live in the 
province, and their donations are limited to $1,275 and that no 
contributions from corporations or unions would be accepted. 
 
Now this is really critical because I said that people really are 
asking, who are the political masters of the Sask Party? And I 
just want to take a reference back to . . . One of the news stories 



April 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

that really shone a light on this was back in November 1st, 
2016, by CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news. And 
the headline was “Saskatchewan the ‘wild west’ for campaign 
finance laws, says Alberta group.” And I’m going to quote from 
this. It’s from a story by Adam Hunter on November 1st, 2016: 
 

Since 2006, the Saskatchewan Party has accepted more 
than $3 million in out-of-province corporate donations, 
with more than $2 million coming from Alberta companies 
alone, according to a new database. 

 
And this is a quote from Duncan Kinney, executive director of 
Progress Alberta. I don’t think anybody . . . And I quote: 
 

I don’t think . . . [anybody] would be cool with a Calgary 
Stampeder putting on a Roughrider jersey, showing up in 
the huddle and then participating in the plays . . . 

 
He said he was motivated to look into the donations to the Sask 
Party coming from Alberta after a speech the Premier of 
Saskatchewan had made at the Calgary Petroleum Club in June. 
That would have been June 2016. He says, and I quote: “I think 
people who live in Saskatchewan should know that millions of 
dollars of out-of-province money have flowed into their politics 
since 2006.” 
 
And there is a list, there is a significant list of who is behind the 
donations. Here we go. Kinney said the major contributions 
come from oil and gas, bank, and construction companies. And 
here’s a sample of that list that’s on that database that is in the 
public domain: Crescent Point, $126,924; PCL, $88,817; Penn 
West, $83,348; Cenovus, $68,108; Encana, $50,557. And he 
points out in 2000 alone, Canadian Western Bank donated 
$200,000 to the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So there’s lots of questions. And those are the numbers that are 
real, and that’s what they’ve taken. That’s what they’ve used to 
finance their elections. And so when we see some of the 
initiatives in this current budget — the tax cuts to the 
corporations, the tax cuts to the wealthiest — there is probably 
a connection here, and we say we can fix that. We can draw 
away that veil that this government tends to like to pull back. 
Don’t look over here, but there are things to look at. 
 
And this is what some of the people are saying. Kinney goes on 
to say: 
 

Saskatchewan is the wild west when comes to campaign 
finance laws. It has the worst campaign finance laws in the 
country and it beats out British Columbia by a nose, simply 
by the fact that Saskatchewan allows registered charities to 
donate and B.C. does not. 

 
But this is somebody, I think, that it’s worthwhile taking a listen 
to. Duff Conacher, the founder of Democracy Watch agreed. 
And I’ll just read this, agrees with Kinney’s assessment that 
Saskatchewan is the wild west when it comes to party donations 
because of its limited laws. He says and I quote: 
 

“Saskatchewan is one of the worst — if not the worst — in 
Canada for political finance system.” 
 
Under the current rules, Conacher said there is nothing 

stopping a foreign-owned company based in Canada from 
paying for political influence . . . 
 
“They don’t have the same interests as people who live in 
the province,” he said. 
 
“It amounts to the best government money can buy instead 
of the best government that voters want.” 

 
He pointed to Quebec as having the world’s best party donation 
laws, as it allows individual donations to a maximum of $100. 
 
So I think we really need to take a look at this. We need to have 
this debate. We need to act on this bill. We can make this bill 
happen. And I think, as I said, particularly post-budget where 
people are asking, who are the masters of these folks over here 
when they take in this kind of money? When they take in this 
kind of money and they give goodies while other people . . . the 
tax cuts to the wealthiest and the corporations, and while they 
take away from the libraries, the schools, health care, the 
hearing aid program, STC, all of that. And you wonder what’s 
really gone over there. 
 
They use the two arguments. The Minister of Justice has used 
two arguments. He talks about the lobbyist registry, fair 
enough. But you know, it’s interesting how long that lobbyist 
registry . . . We came back after the election in 2011, had to get 
going on that, had to get that done, had to get that done. And 
they sat on that for five years, five long years they sat on that 
until they were shamed, publicly shamed into enacting it. They 
didn’t hurry into that at all.  
 
And then they used the other one, that corporations from out of 
province are very welcome to . . . [inaudible] . . . because 
they’re actually acting on behalf of their workers in the 
province, which I think is very, very naive. I think if the 
workers in the province would say, would you like . . . Do you 
think that corporations should have a 1 per cent tax cut that 
results in 30-some million this year? I think the employees 
would say no. I think we’d rather have the hearing aid plan. 
We’d rather have the libraries. We’d rather have STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a naive attempt by this government 
to defend their coffers and the system that has been rated in 
Canada as one of the worst, one of the worst. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our leader says this is really about democracy. And it 
really, truly is, truly is about democracy, and we try to make it 
better all the time. And it’s like how we stepped up to work 
with them on the lobbyist registry, but all of a sudden it stalled. 
We don’t know why it stalled for five years. 
 
But again, I am very happy to support this bill. I think it’s the 
right bill that we need to act on before the end of this session. 
And I hope we can have a vote really quickly on this further on. 
Today I would like to adjourn the debate on Bill 602. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 602. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2017 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday, April 24th at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:29.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2249 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2249 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2251 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2251 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2251 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Easter and Passover Greetings 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2251 
 Brainsport Receives Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Award 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2252 
 Victoria Hospital Holds Second Annual Doctor’s Gala 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2252 
 Drop Everything and Read Protests 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2252 
 2017 Paragon Awards 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2252 
 Mâmawêyatitân Centre Nears Completion 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2253 
 International Companies Participate in Mining Technology Explore Program 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2253 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2253 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2254 
 Provincial Economy and Job Numbers 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2254 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2254 
 Support for Health Care 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2255 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2255 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2255 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2256 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2256 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2256 
 Regulation Changes Regarding Status of Villages 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2257 
 Funding for Education in the North 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2257 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 
 Labour Code Provisions and Saskatchewan Transportation Employees 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2257 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 
 Bill No. 604 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Victims of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Initiatives for Safe Highways 
  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2259, 2266 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2260, 2266 
  Nerlien ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2261, 2267 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2262, 2266 
  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 2264, 2267 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2265, 2266 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2266 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2266 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2267 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 602 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2267 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


