






















































Hansard: March 09, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 55A  THURSDAY, MARCH 9, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1613 
 March 9, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce to the House today in your gallery, I think 
there’s about 20 — I’ve got about 20 names here so if I miss 
anybody or if I include anybody, I apologize — but it’s 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll be meeting with them later on this afternoon, the Health 
minister and myself. About 12:30, we’ll be outside doing a flag 
raising in recognition of their 100th anniversary of the SRNA 
[Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association]. And I’ll be 
joining them tomorrow, I believe, for their gala to bring 
greetings and visit with them there a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With us in attendance, on my list, are Joanne Petersen, Carolyn 
Hoffman, Cheryl Hamilton, Betty Metzler, Donna Brunskill, 
Marlene Smadu, Signy Klebeck, Lionel Tancrede, Joanna 
Alexander, Terri Belcourt, Barbara MacDonald, Barbara 
Fitz-Gerald, Donna Marin, Linda Muzio, Trevor Wowk, Regan 
Bussiere, Julie Szabo, Lesley Stronach, Victoria Kos, and 
Cheryl Weselak. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly and thanking them for the work that 
they do each and every day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming the guests from 
the SRNA here today. And on the occasion of your 100th 
anniversary of serving the people here in Saskatchewan, thank 
you for all that you do. You do wonderful work. We’ve had an 
opportunity to sit down as a caucus and meet with the SRNA 
and hear the issues and concerns and your goals for providing 
better care to the people of Saskatchewan. So your voice is a 
very welcome one in those discussions about how we do better 
here in this province for our citizens. 
 
So thank you for all that you do. And congratulations on behalf 
of the opposition on your 100th anniversary, and here’s to the 
next 100 years. With that, I’d like to ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these folks to their legislature as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce, sitting in the west gallery, a 
great friend of mine. His name is Mike Hughes, and he joins us 
. . . He actually flew in last night from Brisbane, Australia. And 
he was supposed to be here Tuesday night, but apparently there 

was some sort of a weather issue that happened. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mike Hughes is one of New Zealand’s most 
celebrated endurance athletes. He’s one of the best cyclists 
they’ve had. He’s also a great triathlete. We met at the world 
championships of the Hawaiian Ironman in I guess it was 1985 
— but apparently it was a sport back then, Mr. Speaker — and 
yes, we raced together all over the world. And it’s great that he 
took a few days to reroute over here, Mr. Speaker. And with 
that I’d like all members to welcome Mr. Hughes to our 
legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Association, who is decrying this government’s 
increase last year to the per-prescription fee by $5, Mr. Speaker, 
for the seniors’ drug plan. They point out that a budget is 
upcoming and they’re very worried and concerned about what 
that’s going to look like for prescription fee costs, among other 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that this $5 per-prescription fee affected 120,000 
seniors by approximately, on average, $80 a year, Mr. Speaker. 
And they also talk about how this impacts people who are 
making difficult decisions every day between paying their rent 
or filling prescriptions, Mr. Speaker, making hard choices: do 
they pay the utilities or do they get their necessary 
prescriptions? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s more than 1,000 signatures on this 
petition. The pages I am tabling . . . I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and immediate action to end this discrimination of all 
people afflicted with illnesses, especially seniors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition, the pages that I’m tabling today, are 
signed by citizens of Loon Lake, Makwa, Barthel, Meadow 
Lake, Meota — many places, Mr. Speaker — Unity, among 
others. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here 
with citizens that are opposing the carbon tax that’s being 
forced on us by the federal Liberal government, also the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] provincially support wholeheartedly. I 
will read the prayer: 
 

To cause the government to take the necessary steps and 
actions to stop the federal government from imposing a 
carbon tax on the province. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good residents from the 
town of Bladworth and Davidson. I so present. 
 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present yet another petition 
around the Prince Albert bridge, Mr. Speaker. And the need for 
a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been more clear 
than it is today and many days after today and many days 
before today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince 
Albert, and businesses that send people and products through 
Prince Albert require a solution. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 
come from all throughout Saskatchewan, and we have 
submitted page after page after page to this government. And 
the people that have signed this particular page, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Canwood and from the city of Prince Albert. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse program. The 
people who have signed this petition want to bring to our 
attention the following: in April 2014, the minister of Social 
Services said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take 
pressure off of existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police 
cells, while keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold 
winters.” On the very same day, the then minister of Health 
said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental health 
and addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
This government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. The estimated savings for the government 
with the announced cuts in September was under $1 million, but 
the subsequent ER [emergency room] costs alone could be 
several million dollars. In 2015 the Provincial Auditor called 
upon the minister of Social Services to provide the correct 
amount of assistance, not to revoke this essential service and 
thereby putting the most vulnerable at extreme risk. 
 
These ministers are now trying to place the responsibility for 
repairing budget deficits on those who experience addictions, 
unemployment, and poverty, and who are living from day to 
day without proper services. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 

of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the people signing this petition want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity, and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
reported that in Saskatoon, 2016, women earned on the average 
of 63 cents for every dollar that a man makes; in Regina, 
women earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man 
makes. According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national 
gender wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every 
dollar a man makes. Like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, the residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan are concerned because Prince Albert mobile 
crisis unit has had to close its door during daytime hours, 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime 
closure of Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has put stress on 
Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients, putting a lot of 
clients’ needs at risk. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition are from the 
city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those who signed this petition would wish to 
draw our attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the 
second highest rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. Sexual 
child abuse has lasting impacts throughout the victim’s lifetime, 
and these impacts include PTSD [post-traumatic stress 
disorder], depression, anxiety, panic attacks, low self-esteem, 
decreased school attendance and achievement, as well as 
decreased productivity throughout the lifetime. 
 
Victims of childhood sexual abuse are four times more likely to 
commit suicide. As a province, it is our shared responsibility to 
protect children and youth, to educate them, as every child has 
the right to be protected and safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Education immediately take concrete steps and action to 
develop and implement Erin’s law. Such legislation would 
ensure that a comprehensive health education program be 
developed and implemented in the K to 12 system, along 
with appropriate staff training. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina. 
And I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
again today to present a petition opposing Bill 40 and a 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 
per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum. 
 
In 2015-2016 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations 
returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, 
and hospitals. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. Our Crown corporations 
employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across the province 
and this short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of 
Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[10:15] 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
The individuals signing the petition today come from Prince 
Albert. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Remembering Master Corporal Alfred Barr 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We often have the 
privilege to stand up and do a member’s statement about great 
events or honouring individuals who have made our 
communities a better place. Today is no different. I want to 
recognize Master Corporal Alfred Barr of the 435 Transport and 
Rescue Squadron, who lost his life in a training accident near 
Yorkton this past Wednesday. Master Corporal Barr was based 
out of Winnipeg but was from Lethbridge. 
 
The work of the search and rescue squadrons and technicians is 
not easy work, Mr. Speaker. However Master Corporal Barr 
gave the ultimate sacrifice while training to save another’s life. 
His social media pages are filled with stories of going out on 
calls with the SAR [search and rescue] team. One of the most 
memorable was his role in saving a family of four after a boat 
suffered mechanical issues in Hudson Bay. This mission was a 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us owe our lives to the first responders, 
and we must never forget their sacrifices that they’ve made in 
their careers every day. I would like to ask all members to join 
me in thanking Master Corporal Alfred Barr for his service to 
our country and offer condolences to his family, friends, and to 
the SAR community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Coldest Night of the Year Walk in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year, Prince 
Albert, along with many other Canadian cities, took part in the 
Coldest Night of the Year walk on February 25th to raise 
money for homeless people across Canada. In fact, fellow 
colleagues across the province also attended this event in their 
home communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first year that the walk was held in 
Prince Albert, and over 60 walkers participated. I personally 
had a team of 15 walkers, and I’m proud to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that my team received the award for the most money 
raised by a team and an award for the most money raised by an 
individual team member. In Prince Albert, all money raised 
through the Coldest Night of the Year was donated to Prince 
Albert Community Meals, a non-profit organization that 
provides food to those who are hungry, homeless, and less 
fortunate. 
 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, because of the government’s callous cuts and 
failure to create jobs, homelessness is a growing number in 
Prince Albert. Caring and compassionate organizations like 
Prince Albert Community Meals are becoming more and more 
essential, which is why it was so fulfilling to walk in support of 
Prince Albert Community Meals and all they provide to my 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the organizers and the participants of the Coldest 
Night of the Year walk, and to thank Prince Albert Community 
Meals for helping Prince Albert’s most vulnerable. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

World Wheelchair Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An exciting event 
for curling fans is under way in PyeongChang, South Korea. 
The World Wheelchair Championship is an elite event, with 
teams represented from around the world. And as expected with 
any global curling championship, Canada will be well 
represented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s Team Canada includes a Moose Javian 
constituent of mine, Marie Wright. The other members of the 
team include Jim Armstrong, Ina Forrest, Mark Ideson, and 
Ellis Tull, and they are led by coach Wayne Kiel from 
Balgonie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marie’s story, like that of many others on the 
team, is one of bravery and overcoming challenges. She took up 
wheelchair curling when a team needed a female athlete, and 
from there she knew she found her game. Make no mistake; 
wheelchair curling is an elite and competitive sport, and the 
world championships will demonstrate that. The whole team 
has been working hard and, with the diverse set of skills on the 
team, they are a formidable force on the ice. And as I speak, 
they are in a tiebreaker for a playoff position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this Assembly to 
join me in wishing Marie, Jim, Ina, Mark, Ellis, along with 
Coach Wayne, good luck in this competition. All of Canada is 
cheering you on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Heritage Language Day 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Heritage Language Day, officially 
known as International Mother Language Day by the United 
Nations, is held on February 21st of each year. This day is 
dedicated to the celebration of linguistic diversity around the 
globe. 
 
This year the theme of International Mother Language Day is 
Towards Sustainable Futures Through Multilingual Education. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s essential that all learners have access to 
education in their mother tongue so they can strive and maintain 
a sustainable future. 
 

We must take the time to promote the preservation of languages 
used by people around the world as well as languages that are 
local to us here in Saskatchewan. In fact, local languages play 
an especially important part in promoting a sustainable future. It 
is through the mastery of local languages, especially minority 
and indigenous languages, that culture, values, and traditional 
knowledge are transmitted; which is why, Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s cuts to heritage language schools are such a 
shame. Language is a powerful instrument of preserving and 
developing our heritage, and without proper funding, we risk 
taking traditional knowledge away from Saskatchewan’s future 
generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me today 
in recognizing heritage languages around the world, the local 
languages that are unique to our province, and the good work of 
the local groups like Saskatchewan Organization of Heritage 
Languages that help ensure our valuable linguistic and cultural 
traditions live on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Wilke, Saskatchewan in Hockeyville Top 10 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 9th, 2015, 
the town of Wilkie lost a staple in its community when the local 
rink caught fire. Since that date, local teams have had to travel 
to neighbouring towns of Unity, Cut Knife, Biggar, and 
Battleford. And although community spirit remain high, any 
hockey parent or fan knows how tiresome it can be to travel to 
all away games. 
 
Luckily this past season, hockey was brought back to Wilkie 
with the town’s rink repairs being partially done. We realize 
that improvements still need to be made, which is where the 
Kraft Hockeyville comes in. Now in the top 10, the Wilkie 
community rink is eligible to win up to $100,000 in arena 
upgrades as well as hosting an NHL [National Hockey League] 
pre-season game. Mr. Speaker, winning this grant would mean 
the world to Wilkie for years to come and set this community 
up as a destination for our young hockey stars. Voting for the 
grand prize takes place on March 12th and 13th and, unlike our 
elections, you can vote as many times as you like. And I would 
encourage all members to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $100,000 in arena upgrades can go a long way for 
a community. I can think of no place or community more 
deserving than Wilkie, Saskatchewan to be named Kraft’s 
Hockeyville. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Emergency Crews’ Response During Blizzard 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, as residents of Saskatchewan, we 
all expect winter weather to be cold, snowy, and icy, but 
Monday night’s blizzard was out of the ordinary. Everyone in 
Saskatchewan was trying to keep warm in the blizzard 
conditions, which included gusting winds of up to 90 kilometres 
an hour and near zero visibility. But some communities had an 
extra shock when their power went out. Approximately 5,000 
SaskPower customers were affected at one point or another 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

during the blizzard. Residents in Ogema, Coronach, Big 
Beaver, Radville, Tribune, Viceroy, Minton, Ceylon, and 
surrounding areas were without power Monday night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being without power in the winter is not only 
inconvenient, it can be dangerous. That is why SaskPower 
crews were out in the worst weather to ensure that power would 
be restored as soon as possible. As winds died down yesterday, 
crews were able to fix the problems and all residential 
customers have power. 
 
Emergency crews do their best to fix power problems, but we 
encourage everyone to be prepared for winter storms by having 
an emergency plan and emergency kits with enough supplies to 
last a couple of days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
SaskPower crews and all other emergency workers who 
responded during this blizzard. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatchewan Women’s Basketball Teams Vie for 
Canada West Championship 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s two 
universities are representing our province at the Canada 
Interuniversity Sport women’s basketball championship. Both 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskies and the University of 
Regina Cougars had incredible records through regular season 
play, and as the playoffs came around, both teams qualified for 
a spot at the national championships taking place next week in 
Fredericton, New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although this is a unique scenario, their skill and 
dedication to the game make both teams formidable. They will 
be put to the ultimate test when they play each other next 
Saturday for the Canada West championship, and the winner 
will continue on their quest for the biggest prize, becoming 
national champions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dedication and hard work of these elite 
athletes is an inspiration to the entire province, and the fact that 
they are playing at the highest level of university sport in 
Canada speaks to the great talent we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t share who I’m going to be cheering for, 
but I would ask all members to join me in congratulating both 
the Cougars and the Huskies on amazing seasons and wishing 
them both the best of luck for their game on Saturday. And also 
I’ll wish the winner of the first game luck as they will continue 
their journey for a national championship. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land 
Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again I’ve 
asked a very straightforward question of that Premier. He’s 

failed to answer it. There’s no excuse for him not to provide an 
answer. We hope that he will here today. When did that Premier 
find out that the original seller of the land involved in the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal was the former landlord of 
the minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of the GTH has been 
explored extensively here in the legislature but I think more 
importantly by the Provincial Auditor. It was our government 
that asked the Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of this 
Legislative Assembly, to do a full report, and the Finance critic 
opposite, the member for Nutana, is saying the government shut 
it down. The government asked for the Provincial Auditor to do 
this work. Then the government indicated to the auditor that she 
would have the full co-operation of the government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we took an additional step. We indicated to the 
Provincial Auditor and her team that they could have access to 
cabinet documents. That does not happen in every 
circumstance. The reason we did that, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
knew there was, in terms of the allegations presented by 
members opposite, there was nothing there. 
 
There were problems with the acquisition; that, the auditor has 
noted. She made recommendations in terms of better 
coordination by government, better policies in terms of 
acquiring land especially at a time of rapidly escalating land 
prices and processes. We’ve accepted those recommendations. 
 
She went on to say in the media after she tabled her report — 
her extensive report that included on her team, by the way, 
someone with forensic auditing capabilities — she went on to 
say there were no red flags in terms of the kind of conduct 
that’s alleged every day by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
We welcomed the report. We will implement those 
recommendations and, Mr. Speaker, I hope members opposite 
will also support the work of the auditor in this regard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s not just passing strange that the 
Premier won’t answer that question. It’s weak. It’s pathetic. He 
goes on with a bunch of nonsense and bafflegab, but not an 
answer to a very straightforward question. When did the 
Premier of Saskatchewan find out that the landlord, that the 
individual involved in this land scandal, was the landlord for the 
minister responsible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, all of the personalities 
involved, including the one that actually sold the land to the 
government of the GTH — which is not the person the member 
has referenced — when all of those personalities became known 
to the government in great detail, when the matter has become a 
public issue, and when government has responded, Mr. 
Speaker, on the auditor . . . The auditor’s report is quite clear 
that, in one instance where the identity of someone who was 
wanting to sell land to the government would not be revealed 
because it was a numbered company, the government simply 
wasn’t going to proceed. And, Mr. Speaker, the auditor has 
canvassed these issues. 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

I know the Leader of the Opposition makes these allegations 
and characterizes people in the House, and certainly myself 
included . . . Fair enough. That’s part of debate. But the fact of 
the matter is, I hope that he recognizes that, unlike members 
opposite when they were in government faced with an issue like 
this, we voluntarily asked the auditor to look at all of these 
questions, all of them. And the Provincial Auditor did precisely 
that. And on the Provincial Auditor’s team we are informed, the 
committee was informed, Mr. Speaker, on her team was 
someone with forensic auditing capacities, Mr. Speaker. And 
she went on to say on an open-line show after the report was 
tabled, in terms of what he continues to allege, that there were 
no red flags, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are also 
looking at the matter. We’ve indicated we’ll co-operate with the 
RCMP. I think we should let them do their work, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to the work being done and the recommendations 
that might come from that. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no one’s buying this 
revisionist history of this deal that wasted millions of dollars 
and that stuck millions of dollars into well-connected friends of 
that government, ripping off taxpayers, ripping off nuns. 
 
And this is a very simple question to the Premier that people 
expect an answer to, and maybe he can stand up and this time 
they will save the bafflegab. A straightforward answer: when 
did the Premier of Saskatchewan find out that the original seller 
of the land in the GTH scandal, that he was the landlord for the 
Minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all of the 
overblown rhetoric in the world doesn’t change the fact that the 
auditor looked into this matter, Mr. Speaker. The auditor had 
full authority to look into all aspects of the transaction of the 
issue. She had access to all of the cabinet documents involved. 
She had access to all of the individuals of whom . . . she 
interviewed all of those individuals, Mr. Speaker. What she said 
at the conclusion of that audit on an open-line show, and I 
quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work so there were no red flags there. 

 
Those are the words of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
The members opposite may be heckling from their seats; they 
may not like the conclusion that the auditor came to, but that is 
her conclusion. We gave her full authority to look into the 
matter. She did a very thorough job by her own account, by her 
own testimony before the committee, and we accept the 
recommendations that she made and those recommendations 
have been implemented. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Members’ Compensation 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pathetic and weak that 
the Premier of Saskatchewan can’t answer that very basic 
question about his involvement and knowledge of this GTH 
scandal. But maybe he’ll tell Saskatchewan people why he 
thinks that hard-working Saskatchewan people should pay the 
price for his mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
You know, at the end of the day, the GTH scandal was caused 
by that cabinet, by that Premier. Sure it was the friends of that 
government that got even richer off the deal, but it was 
hard-working Saskatchewan people and their dollars that were 
being played with, that were wasted. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why will he not commit to 
cutting the number of MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] in this Assembly? Why won’t cabinet fess up and 
step up and show some responsibility and take a bigger pay cut? 
And why won’t he admit that a 3.5 per cent salary cut for us as 
MLAs, our salary, is a very different thing than attacking the 
work and the jobs of hard-working Saskatchewan people that 
are working hard to have food on the table and a roof over their 
heads? Mr. Speaker, why won’t that Premier take a genuine 
look in the mirror for their cuts? Why won’t he scrap his 
desperate attack on workers in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Here’s the question, Mr. Speaker. Why 
won’t the members opposite show up to the Board of Internal 
Economy to support the reduction to MLA salaries? We gave 
them two opportunities yesterday. There was a meeting at 
8 o’clock. They refused to show up to the meeting. We had 
another meeting at 4 o’clock which I invited them to yesterday. 
They refused to show up to the meeting despite the fact 
government members showed up. I just indicated to the NDP 
caucus Chair we would like to have another meeting at 
2 o’clock this afternoon. I guess we’ll see whether they show up 
to that meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the government is 
proposing that we’re going to have a 10 per cent reduction in 
caucus office budgets. They asked for more reductions, Mr. 
Speaker, so we’re putting an additional 10 per cent of our 
caucus office — which for folks listening, that’s the political 
office of the government and the opposition — 10 per cent 
additional cut to that. Will they show up for the meeting at 
2 o’clock, Mr. Speaker? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a bunch of nonsense again. The 
members of this opposition will take a 3.5 per cent pay cut. 
What we’re demanding of that Premier that hasn’t been straight 
with Saskatchewan people, that has caused the waste and the 
scandal, is that that cabinet step up and pay 20 per cent, at least 
20 per cent of their bonus money, Mr. Speaker, just for sitting 
around the table. You know, at the end of the day, it’s that 
cabinet that authorized the $11 million that were wasted in the 
GTH scandal. 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

You know, it was also that cabinet that authorized the 
$1 billion-plus overrun with the Regina bypass, with almost 
$2 billion going to a company, a conglomerate from France and 
beyond. 
 
You know, it was that cabinet, that Premier, that caused deficit 
after deficit after deficit, and that won’t even be straight with 
Saskatchewan people as to the true state of our finances. You 
know, and it’s that Premier and that cabinet that came into 
office with 20,000 people unemployed, now sadly having 
40,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the Premier finally do the right thing? Will he call on his 
cabinet colleagues to take a 20 per cent pay cut, show some 
leadership, show some responsibility? And will he scrap his 
indecent attack on Saskatchewan workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question was 
kind of all over the map, but let me address a couple of items. 
Firstly the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you for the 
members opposite for the assistance. We just sold some land at 
the GTH, Mr. Speaker, for $256,000 per acre. They repeatedly 
cite the figure of us having bought the property for $103,000 
per acre. You know, there were servicing costs involved, Mr. 
Speaker, but there was clearly . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. $256,000 per 
acre is more than $103,000 per acre. 
 
With respect to cabinet costs, Mr. Speaker, this cabinet has 
reduced travel by 70 per cent from the time when those 
members opposite were in government. The cabinet has been 
reduced in size from the time that those members were in 
government. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing a reduction in 
MLA salaries, a reduction which those members refused to 
show up to actually implement. They claim that they support it. 
They’re going to have another opportunity this afternoon to 
show up and do that. In addition to that, we are proposing a 
further reduction, Mr. Speaker, of 10 per cent for caucus office 
budgets. So we’re hopeful that the members opposite are going 
to show up to vote for that as well this afternoon. 
 
So this government is clearly leading by example, Mr. Speaker. 
We are finding efficiencies in how we’re doing things in this 
Assembly. I know we’ve already approved a budget of minus 
5 per cent reduction for the Legislative Assembly itself. So 
we’re hopeful the members opposite are going to show up this 
afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

State of Provincial Finances 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier and that Finance 

minister love to hear themselves talk and rant, but they sure 
don’t like to look at what they have done. Mr. Speaker, deficit 
after deficit after deficit after deficit after deficit after deficit — 
I’m almost done, Mr. Speaker — after deficit. And we don’t 
even know how much this next deficit will be. 400 million? 800 
million? 1.2 million? 1.4 million? 1 billion? 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I feel a bit like an auctioneer here. It 
would be funny, but the costs of their mismanagement, their 
scandals, and their waste is all too real — billions of dollars. 
And they’re making Saskatchewan people pay the price, Mr. 
Speaker. Why won’t they come clean and tell us how much the 
deficit will be? Today, not on the same day as their next budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have stood in this Chamber and said time and time and time 
again that we have a revenue problem in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a situation . . . Well they’re all laughing over 
there, Mr. . . . 
 
This is the gang that supports the carbon tax. At least they did 
support the carbon tax when the Finance critic went to 
Edmonton last year in support of the Leap Manifesto. The 
member from Meewasin supported the carbon tax up until last 
Thursday and now has come down here, Mr. Speaker, and has 
compromised his principles in the first week of no longer 
supporting the carbon tax because that outfit told him it’s not 
politically supported here in the province, Mr. Speaker. So he’s 
changed the position. That’s not good leadership material, Mr. 
Speaker, because the people of Saskatoon Meewasin obviously 
voted for him based on his principles. Now he’s come down 
here and changed that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a situation in this province — $1.2 billion in resource 
revenue down. What this member says, and has said time and 
time again, Mr. Speaker, this Finance critic has said that we 
need to increase spending in health care and education by a 
minimum of 6 per cent. That’s what she said on budget day last 
June. That would be an additional $500 million of taxpayers’ 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. Will she correct that today? Does she still 
believe that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — All I could say, Mr. Speaker, is wow. This 
minister is raising the whole definition of alt facts to a whole 
new level. Mr. Speaker, that government would be a lot . . . or 
that response would have been acceptable if it wasn’t coming 
from a government that has added $3.5 billion to the debt in just 
two years. The finances are a mess because they cut first and 
they measure later. It was said they cut important supports, but 
they didn’t know how much they’d save. With health care, they 
cut local voices but they didn’t know how much they’d save. 
With the people who clean this building, Mr. Speaker, they cut, 
but they don’t know how much they’re going to save. 
 
Even with Bill 40, they want a backdoor way into selling off 
our Crowns without asking the Saskatchewan people. But they 
didn’t realize this would cost the Saskatchewan people even 
more than privatization. If they sell more than 10 per cent, 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

they’re going to be on the hook to pay corporate income tax to 
Ottawa. So why? Why, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party so intent 
on sending money to Ottawa instead of supporting 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we should compare 
records in office, Mr. Speaker. We should compare records of 
our record in office versus their record in office, Mr. Speaker. 
We have 13 new long-term care homes in this province versus 
1,200 long-term care beds shut down by the members opposite 
when they were in office, Mr. Speaker. We have 3,000 more 
nurses of all different designations working in this province, as 
opposed to over 400 nurses being fired by them when they were 
in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a new children’s hospital being built in Saskatoon. We 
have a new mental health correctional facility being built in 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. What did they do when they 
were in office? They shut . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I 
know you’re not proud of your record, but you should listen to 
it. They shut down 52 hospitals in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
including the Plains Health Centre. 
 
We have, I think, 40 new schools being built, have been built or 
being built in this province, Mr. Speaker, since this government 
came to office, since this Premier came to office. They shut 
down 176 schools when they were in office — one a month, 
Mr. Speaker — and fired over 400 teachers in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our record here. We are going 
through some difficult financial times. Nobody, nobody is 
disagreeing with that, Mr. Speaker. We will deal with that with 
a plan to deliver a balanced budget come March 22nd. You can 
be assured of that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Intent of Bill No. 40 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t need to define, 
redefine, or ill-define a word that everyone already understands. 
The members opposite are searching desperately for a fig leaf to 
cover up their desperate sell-offs. But you know what? They’re 
coming up short. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, their arguments just 
don’t stand up. 
 
The Sask Party’s desperate sell-off of our Crowns is 
self-serving, but will be punishing to our province. Let’s be 
clear. They have not taken Bill 40 off the table. They want to 
change the law so they can sell 49 per cent of each of our 
Crowns to private companies from who knows where. 
 
Saskatchewan jobs are at risk. If the Sask Party was really 
serious about listening to the people of Saskatchewan and 
leaving our Crowns public, they would scrap Bill 40, but they 
have refused. They have refused to commit to our Crowns. 
They have refused to commit to workers. They have refused to 
commit to Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, here’s another 
chance. Can this government commit to not selling our Crowns 
and commit to scrapping Bill 40? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of the opposition can stand every day and ask that 
question and the answer will be the same every time I stand up. 
And the answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation which we brought forward will 
define the word “privatize,” Mr. Speaker. Nowhere in the Act, 
nowhere in The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act is 
that word defined. And even members on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, have stood and said there’s many 
definitions for that word. 
 
So it really draws the question, Mr. Speaker: why didn’t they 
define that word when they brought that legislation onto the 
floor of the House when they were on this side of the House? 
What was their motivation, Mr. Speaker, for not defining it? 
Because I refuse to believe, Mr. Speaker, I refuse to believe that 
it was nothing but an intentional act on the part of the New 
Democrats when they were on this side of the House not to 
define that word for their own purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So somebody should be asking the question. Somebody should 
be asking the questions of the members that were on this side of 
the House that are still over there. What was their intention by 
not defining the word in the first place? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Usage of the Weyburn Court House 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn not long ago, 
cabinet ministers attended a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the 
renovations to the Weyburn Court House. The ministers were 
pleased to do the photo op at that time. They were pleased to 
boast about spending $8.4 million. 
 
The former minister of Government Services said, “Due to the 
commitment of the community, this facility will remain a vital 
part of Weyburn for many years to come.” The member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and the Minister of Energy also said, “It’s 
important for the community to have the court house functional 
and active.” 
 
This is more than a little strange, Mr. Speaker, because 
fast-forward a couple of years and this beautiful courthouse 
now sits idle almost all week. Meanwhile the people of 
Weyburn and area must go to Estevan for most court services. 
My question to the minister: how does any of this make sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, to correct the premise of the question, the Weyburn 
Court House is not closing, Mr. Speaker. Provincial Court 
continues to be held in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, to the service of 
the people of the city of Weyburn and the surrounding 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have done, in consultation, is moved a 
number of the Queen’s Bench services out of Weyburn, which 
will now be performed out of Estevan, Mr. Speaker. We feel 
that that’s in the best interests of the administration of justice, 
Mr. Speaker, and we have done that in consultation with the 
court, Mr. Speaker, and with my Ministry of Justice, Mr. 
Speaker. So to correct the record, the courthouse is not closing. 
It’s a beautiful building adorning the downtown of Weyburn, 
Mr. Speaker, and it will be operational for many years to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Youth Suicides in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 
months we’ve been asking this government for real action on 
the suicide crisis in northern Saskatchewan, and those 
attempting suicide as well. And for months youth in the North 
have been left to suffer in silence. The counselling and supports 
that are so desperately needed in the North just aren’t there. 
Each time we have another suicide, the ministers offer their 
thoughts and condolences. And, Mr. Speaker, thoughts and 
condolences are nice, and I’m sure they’re meant to be sincere. 
But words only go so far. Will the minister today commit to 
providing good and continual supports to northerners facing this 
crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Athabasca reflected my sentiments exactly. Of course we offer 
our thoughts and prayers to these people that are suffering these 
terrible tragedies up in the North, Mr. Speaker, and we will 
continue to do that, as well as the member opposite. I know he 
probably has a knowledge of the families that are affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government we’re very aware of the 
challenges that are faced in the North when it comes to different 
situations. Sometimes it’s recruitment and retention issues, Mr. 
Speaker. But this government’s been working very hard with 
the community leaders in the North to try and find some 
answers. There’s no easy answers to a situation like this, 
especially when it comes to mental wellness and suicide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last month — I think it was February 22nd — 
a group of ministers went up to La Loche and met with the 
leadership up there, the mayor, had some good conversations 
and some strategic planning I believe, and had some ideas that 
were discussed. I also just met with the mayor of La Loche and 
the New North executive just over a week ago I think, February 
27th, in P.A. [Prince Albert] and we discussed many of these 
very challenges, Mr. Speaker, and how we can move forward. 
They’re coming up with some good ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the ministry’s been working with the region, implementing 
more resources, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased the clinic times 
available at the La Loche facility and we have increased more 
resource there, Mr. Speaker. And I’d be happy to answer in 
more detail in the next question. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Vulnerable Children and Youth in the North 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the North is left 
woefully short when it comes to getting the needed support. 
Prince Albert was short 30 social workers — 30 workers, Mr. 
Speaker — and 15 of those worked directly with children and 
youth. Mr. Speaker, this is a region that needs more support, not 
less. The Premier has made commitments to support the North 
and address the suicide crisis, but now they’re threatening more 
cuts. One thing is clear: what won’t make the situation any 
better is cutting a day of work from each social worker every 
month. The government sees dollar signs, but the people in my 
community won’t get the services they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to lose another youth to suicide 
and substance abuse. Will this government commit to not 
cutting social services and mental health and addiction services 
in the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member opposite for the question. Obviously the 
situation in the North is of great importance to everyone on this 
side of the House, as it is to members opposite on the other side 
of the House. 
 
With respect to child and family services up in the North, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to report that we have been able to fill a 
number of the positions that were formally vacant. Like many 
employers . . . And we also have a number of interviews 
scheduled in the coming weeks, additional staffing actions we 
are also working on which I’ll talk about shortly. 
 
Like many employers, the Ministry of Social Services has faced 
many challenges with recruiting qualified people for positions 
in the northern communities, including Prince Albert. We need 
qualified applicants to apply on those positions, and so I’ve 
directed the ministry . . . We’re reaching out to post-secondary 
institutions for both a Bachelor of Social Work and Bachelor of 
Indigenous Social Work programs to try to fill those needs. 
 
In the meantime, of priority to us is that we are deploying staff 
from other areas to make sure that vulnerable children and 
youth are served in the interim, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 
Nutana. 

 
Global Transportation Hub and Details of Land 

Transactions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it’s an honour to rise here in the Assembly to raise the 
issues of concern in the Assembly. I have to say the issue I’m 
speaking about today is probably one of the most frustrating 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

issues that we’ve had to deal with since I came to this Assembly 
in 2011, for sure. And the frustrations are deep; they’re 
concerning. And I think we see an attitude here from this 
government that really speaks volumes to the future of our 
province and the way they’re treating not only providing us 
with the information we need to properly do our work, but also 
just how finances are being handled in this province in general. 
 
Now the motion I’m going to introduce is going to talk about, 
or that I’m . . . yes, that I’m going to move, is talking about the 
way this government has blocked a number of key witnesses 
who know much about what happened with the GTH, and 
particularly the purchase of the east parcels. 
 
We’ve seen a government that has stopped these people from 
testifying at the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. There 
are a number of concerns about that. We also see them shutting 
down discussion on the topic as a committee and, unfortunately, 
that will result in avoiding scrutiny of the spending of 
government, which is obviously the role of the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
As a result, once again we see a government that refuses to be 
open and transparent about the situation of the GTH, and I think 
we’re seeing that on a number of levels here, Mr. Speaker — on 
the budget, on the state of the finances. We know that the 
Minister of Finance has information available to him to tell us 
what the actual deficit is right now, but he refuses to do so, and 
he’s going to hide that behind the presentation of the budget for 
next year. So those are very concerning issues, Mr. Speaker. 
And these are things, I think, that are important to have this 
debate today to discuss how this is happening in the House at 
this time. 
 
One of the things I want to talk about today is a review maybe 
for backbenchers who aren’t really familiar with this is, what is 
the mandate of the Public Accounts Committee? And it’s found 
in the manual for the Public Accounts Committee; it’s available 
online. But just to take a little review on that, the Public 
Accounts Committee is supposed to “Review and report on 
observations, opinions and recommendations on the Reports of 
the Provincial Auditor . . .” They also “Review, amend . . . and 
approve the estimates of the Office of the Provincial Auditor.” 
And there are a number of other responsibilities that they have. 
So I think the first one that we’re talking about is obviously to 
review and report on the recommendations, observations, and 
opinions. So it’s not just the recommendations, Mr. Speaker, 
but it is the observations and opinions of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I’ve looked at other places. The UK [United Kingdom] 
parliament has a description of . . . They call it the committee’s 
remit, which I think is the mandate of the committee. Anyways 
in the UK, “This Committee scrutinises the value for money — 
the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness — of public 
spending . . .” 
 
And when we look at what has happened with the purchase of 
the east parcels at the GTH, Mr. Speaker, that is obviously a 
waste of at least $11 million of public dollars. And they can 
dismiss it, and, you know, scoff at any concerns about that 
because they’re now selling land at the GTH. Obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s apples and oranges because we know that that 
land has now been improved and is definitely worth more 

money, as any improved land in any industrial park would be. I 
mean, that’s common sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to suggest that because they’re able to sell it means that it 
was okay, that it was okay, Mr. Speaker, to waste callously $11 
million on a whim without any sort of explanation, with lots of 
cabinet ministers and former cabinet ministers who are in the 
Assembly today who know exactly what happened, and not 
provide an explanation to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that is definitely reproachful. And I think this needs to 
be continued first and foremost in this Assembly until this 
government starts sharing information and becomes much more 
open and transparent about its activities in relation to that 
purchase. And I mean, we’re not even touching the other issues 
in terms of the east portion of the bypass, the west portion of 
the bypass south. I mean this is . . . the volume of these 
transactions is beyond belief. 
 
And I think, you know, for the committee, or for the Assembly 
to be aware, for example, the extent of the spending that we’re 
looking at, on 23rd of February 2017 we see a special warrant 
coming out of cabinet for an additional $70 million for the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure. This is above and 
beyond the money that was asked for at budget time last year, 
Mr. Speaker. So you have to ask yourself, what is going on with 
that bypass? And I mean, that ties into the whole discussion on 
the GTH as well. 
 
But we know that 50 per cent of that spending extra money is 
on the bypass. We have a government who’s committed to a P3 
[public-private partnership] arrangement with a foreign 
company where we don’t know what the contingencies are. We 
don’t know what the timelines are. We don’t know what 
off-ramps this government has even negotiated on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan to put a slowdown on that until we 
have the actual money in hand to be able to help pay for it. 
 
Instead we see special warrant after special warrant asking for 
an additional $70 million — $70 million, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan to deal with that 
very, very expensive . . . and the overruns in a P3 that we can’t 
even get accountability for it because we can’t even see the 
contract. This is alarming, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan should be alarmed. Those backbenchers should 
be alarmed, and they should be raising concerns. Even former 
ministers who are now backbenchers should be saying to their 
cabinet, hey guys, you better whoa. You better slow down and 
better take a look at some of this stuff. 
 
I just want to share with the committee, this is from an article 
from publications that you find in the Government of Canada. 
It’s a research study for the Commission of Inquiry into the 
Sponsorship Program and related activities, 2005. You’ll recall, 
Mr. Speaker, that was well known as the Gomery Commission. 
And this article talks a little bit about what is a public accounts 
committee supposed to do. Because we hear this Premier say, 
we heard him say it today: the auditor did a report. Everybody 
move on. Nothing to see here. Just move on. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that is not a good representation of what the role of the Public 
Accounts Committee is. And it’s concerning to hear the leader 
of this province of Saskatchewan misleading the people of 
Saskatchewan as to the proper role of the Public Accounts 
Committee. 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

I want to quote from page 67 of the article. The author is 
Jonathan Malloy. And he says . . . And this is a quote from the 
standing order of the House of Commons, which is the basic 
mandate of the federal public accounts committee. He says: 
 

The Committee then selects the portions of the report [the 
auditor’s report] it wants to scrutinize and calls public 
servants from audited organizations to appear before it to 
explain the Auditor General’s findings. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have tried time and time again. There are 
members of the Public Accounts Committee here today, and we 
have tried time and time again to call members from the public 
service, from the audited organizations to appear before the 
committee to explain the auditor general’s findings. This is 
common. This is usual. This is normal. And yet we have a 
committee that refuses to allow those people to come before the 
committee. This is alarming. This is concerning. This is 
blocking democracy, Mr. Speaker. It will leave a black mark on 
the history of this government and this expression of democracy 
here in Saskatchewan. And the people of Saskatchewan are 
concerned, and they are watching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Another quote I’d like to share from this article describes a little 
bit more about how this procedure should work, despite the 
efforts of this committee and this Premier and this government 
to shut down hearings from those people. And I’ll quote, and 
maybe the Premier will find this interesting. Here’s the quote: 
 

While the Auditor provides the Committee with fodder for 
discussion, the Committee provides a public forum for the 
further examination of government activities. 
 
The PAC provides several distinct strengths to the Auditor 
General’s inquiries. First, it can draw further attention and 
notice to issues raised by the Auditor General. While AG 
reports usually receive good or exceptional media 
coverage, this coverage may focus on minor sensational 
items, rather than more substantive and complex issues. 
Even when coverage is more thoughtful, journalists rarely 
have the time and space to dig deeply and sustain their 
inquiries. The PAC is able to revisit reports, often after the 
initial wave of attention, and attract further sustained 
attention to issues and problems. 
 
Second, committees offer a venue for the Auditor General 
and public servants alike both to present fairly their 
perspectives and to hear the other side in a public forum. 
Auditors are given further opportunity to . . . [express] 
their concerns, while public servants have an opportunity 
to answer and explain. 

 
I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, just so that we all understand 
the role of public servants in the PAC [Public Accounts 
Committee]. It says, “. . . public servants have an opportunity to 
answer and explain.” Based on what the auditor said, public 
servants are then given the opportunity to answer and explain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time and time again, we have seen this 
committee, under direction of who knows who, to come 
forward and block the people that are able to answer and 

explain all of the important questions that arise out of the 
auditor’s report. I think the Premier’s characterization of this is 
shameful. I think that the current minister’s characterization of 
the auditor’s report is also shameful. It’s disingenuous, and it 
really needs to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, because the people of 
Saskatchewan see right through this blocking of testimony. 
 
The third thing I’ll just share quickly with this article, it says: 
 

. . . the Committee provides additional public and visible 
pressure on governments to change or account for their 
actions. While its reports and recommendations may not 
have immediate influence, they remain important and 
easily accessible aspects of the public record. 

 
I think the final thing I’ll share from this article, and I know 
time goes quickly in these debates, is this notion from the 
author. He says: 
 

Key, however, is the PAC’s ability to question publicly 
witnesses, unlike either the Auditor General or Question 
Period. In this way, the Committee does indeed hold 
government to account, publicly, for its actions. Whether 
the media pays much attention is perhaps not important; 
what is important is the public record and the potential for 
further attention. A PAC appearance is not taken lightly by 
public servants [when they’re allowed to appear], and this 
provides powerful and transparent follow-up of the Auditor 
General’s investigations. 

 
So again, Mr. Speaker, we hear that the role of PAC is to do a 
transparent and powerful follow-up to the auditor’s 
recommendations. So for the Premier to suggest that we 
shouldn’t be concerned with it, we should just move on, and 
that the auditors say her work is final is, as I say, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s misleading. And I think, you know, it raises more questions. 
Why are they blocking these people? Why won’t they put 
forward . . .  
 
The one individual, to me, who knows exactly what happened 
at the point of sale is the current deputy minister of the Ministry 
of Economy, Mr. Laurie Pushor. If he cannot come before the 
committee . . . He’s in the building when the committee is 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. And it seems to me that it’s incumbent 
upon him or his current boss, or perhaps his former boss who 
directed him, the member from Kindersley who directed him to 
make a deal that was against all common sense . . . It was 
against all known management of real estate deals to make that 
deal, and not be able to be accountable to the public through the 
Public Accounts Committee is more than . . . I don’t know. It’s 
outrageous, Mr. Speaker, and it’s frustrating to see this 
government block this individual. If he can’t do his job, why is 
he in the job, Mr. Speaker? And I think that it’s very important 
for the public to understand that individual has either refused or 
been denied an appearance before the Public Accounts 
Committee to answer for his actions. 
 
I worry about what the Premier said about the role of Public 
Accounts Committee. We have him in the House on November 
29th saying . . . Mr. Speaker, there was a question about why he 
wouldn’t allow Laurie Pushor to come to the committee. He 
says: 
 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, the same key witnesses that the Provincial 
Auditor interviewed through the course of her work? You 
mean those witnesses, Mr. Speaker? Yes, that’s what he 
means. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House think the 
Provincial Auditor and her professional staff, those are the 
right people to ask those questions, to interview those 
witnesses . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he couldn’t be more wrong. He knows that 
that’s not correct, and why he’s saying those things in the 
House really sort of, I think, obfuscates what is really going on 
here. And we see this obfuscation over and over again. We saw 
it today here in question period, Mr. Speaker. So there’s so 
many concerns, I think, in terms of what the government is 
doing here on so many levels that it’s alarming. 
 
We see committee members being directed by the House 
Leader, Mr. Speaker. We all know what the role of a House 
Leader is in politics, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not to be neutral, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s an advocacy role on the part of the House 
Leader that I think . . . I really question when we have a House 
Leader showing up at a Public Accounts Committee and 
controlling the conversation, and leading . . . despite the fact we 
have a Deputy Chair who is responsible for doing that. So at 
this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m running out of time. I’m going to 
introduce the motion, and the motion is this: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for blocking 
key witnesses who know important details about the 
Global Transportation Hub (GTH) land deal from 
testifying at the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 
for shutting down discussion on the topics, for avoiding 
scrutiny of government spending, and for failing to be open 
and transparent with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I take the motion from Saskatoon Centre as 
read. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
stand in my place and join this debate today. It will come as no 
surprise that I will not be supporting the motion. Since last May 
in this place we have gathered around and gone over and over 
this topic. There was nothing to talk about then, and there’s 
even less to talk about now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is now a very important part of our 
economy, providing hundreds of jobs as well as over 1,800 
construction jobs as it was being built. Every week, over 4,800 
truck movements are completed in and out of the GTH. It is 
truly a hub, and a very important piece that allowed us to export 
over $26 billion worth of goods to the world in 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we debated this subject last fall and many of the 
points made by the members from Moosomin and 
Martensville-Warman are still relevant today. So if some of it 
sounds familiar, it is. 
 
On February 9th, 2016 an order in council was signed that 
requested the Provincial Auditor to perform a special audit to 
examine whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan 

followed appropriate procedures and received appropriate value 
with respect to the land acquisition at the Global Transportation 
Hub. Mr. Speaker, this included the examination of any 
transaction leading up to the said acquisition. 
 
Section 25 of The Provincial Auditor Act states: 
 

The provincial auditor may examine any person on any 
matter relating to any account that is subject to an 
examination or audit by him . . . 

 
Under that authority, the Provincial Auditor released her report 
on June 30th of 2016. The auditor did find a number of 
instances where the proper processes were not followed. She 
identified those instances and made recommendations on how 
to address them — two recommendations specifically for the 
GTH, and eight recommendations for the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read those recommendations and I’ll let 
you know how we’re making out with each of them. For the 
GTH, Mr. Speaker, the No. 1 recommendation was: 
 

We recommend that the Global Transportation Hub 
Authority require, for its Board’s review and approval, the 
preparation of business cases for major land acquisitions or 
significant new initiatives. 

 
The Global Transportation Hub Authority is making progress 
towards complying with the recommendation. No. 2, Mr. 
Speaker, was: 
 

We recommend that the Global Transportation Hub 
Authority require and keep documentation of review of 
land appraisal reports it uses when making offers to 
purchase land. 

 
The Global Transportation Hub Authority is making progress 
towards complying with that recommendation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For Highways and Infrastructure, there was eight 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to say that the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure has complied with all 
of them, and here they are: 
 

1. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure explore alternate approaches to optimize 
the timing of land acquisitions for major public 
improvement projects. 

 
2. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure require staff responsible for acquiring land 
for public improvement projects to periodically 
document conflict of interest. 

 
3. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure require staff to clearly document the 
results of review of appraisal reports used to acquire land 
for public improvement projects. 

 
4. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure clarify its policy for paying permanent 
damages for partial takings of agricultural land to 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

landowners for public improvement projects. 
 
5. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure follow written approved policies in effect 
related to determining compensation associated with 
land acquisitions for public improvement projects and 
keep related supporting documents. 

 
6. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure provide for an internal review of 
compensation performed by a second person other than 
the preparer associated with land acquisitions for public 
improvement projects prior to making offers to 
landowners. 

 
7. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure follow its delegated signing authority 
when acquiring land for public improvement projects. 
[And] 

 
8. We recommend that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure publish information to help landowners 
understand their property rights and how it determines 
due compensation for land for public improvement 
projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure has 
complied with all eight of those recommendations. 
 
Now I’d like to move on to a few of the GTH highlights, Mr. 
Speaker. Public sector investment in the GTH has topped $485 
million. Employment during construction, as I said before, 
created 1,804 jobs. 
 
The GTH serves as an instrument of trade by providing a 
world-class infrastructure to allow efficient and effective 
movement of goods by rail and truck and assist Saskatchewan 
producers in accessing supply chains for their products. 
 
The GTH is in its sixth year of operation. It’s admired by its 
industry peers who understand that the logistics hubs take 20 to 
25 years to reach full maturation. The GTH offers greenfield 
build opportunities. It’s centrally located between Canada’s 
largest sea ports. GTH also offers integrated rail, intermodal, 
and highway infrastructure. It’s a logistically superior design 
for maximum efficiency of truck movement. 
 
It’s a foreign trade zone, Mr. Speaker, which provides 
single-window access to Canada’s duty and tax relief 
programming. The GTH received its foreign trade zone 
designation from the Government of Canada in August 2015. 
With only a small selection of Canadian communities having 
this status, being able to offer clients eligibility for programs 
like duty deferrals is a significant competitive advantage for the 
GTH. 
 
And while we’re talking about that, Mr. Speaker, some export 
facts from Saskatchewan, and these are pretty good. 
 
Saskatchewan provides 65 per cent of the world’s lentils, 55 per 
cent of the world’s peas, 39 per cent of the world’s durum 
wheat, 30 per cent of the total worldwide production of potash, 
and 15 per cent of the world’s uranium. Saskatchewan is the 

second-largest exporter of oil in Canada. It exports goods to 
over 150 countries. Saskatchewan’s exports per capita is 
$22,844. It’s number one among Canadian provinces. And 1 in 
5 jobs in Saskatchewan depends on exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan exports to South Korea were nearly 
300 million in 2011. About that same time, our competitors in 
that market signed free trade agreements with South Korea and 
quickly became the suppliers of choice. Our exports sunk to 
85.5 million by 2014. 
 
Canada’s free trade agreement with South Korea was finally 
implemented in 2015 and exports that year rose to $104 million. 
In 2016, in year-to-date statistics, it rose over 72 per cent from 
the low point to over $147 million. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The GTH is also making inroads into China. The GTH was 
invited to sign a co-operation agreement with one of China’s 
largest economic development groups, the China Overseas 
Development Association, or CODA. During a signing 
ceremony on September 24, 2016 in Beijing, CODA’s 
Secretary-General Zhenwei said that the GTH is an ideal 
platform for Chinese businesses to enter the North American 
marketplace. This strategic location, high efficiency facilities 
and services, and supporting government policies make the 
GTH an attraction for Chinese government organizations and 
enterprises. 
 
In a room filled with 400 attendees, Mr. Zhenwei noted that the 
GTH aligns with China’s national initiative of going global, 
where major industries are seeking expanded business 
opportunities in foreign countries. “We are encouraged [he said] 
as Saskatchewan is eager to strengthen its economic and 
cultural relationship with China, its enterprises, and its people.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think in closing I’d like to say a few things. 
The Premier asked the Provincial Auditor to do a complete 
review of this matter, which she did. During her work, the 
Provincial Auditor interviewed everyone she felt was necessary. 
She mentioned that any members and officials she spoke with 
were forthcoming with all of their information. We are 
confident in the work that the Provincial Auditor has done and 
we trust that she’s done a thorough job. 
 
The auditor found a number of instances where proper 
processes were not followed. She identified those instances and 
made recommendations of how to address them. We are 
following those recommendations. 
 
Now the members opposite made a number of irresponsible and 
false allegations before, during, and after the last election 
campaign about conflict of interest and breach of trust. Here’s 
what the Provincial Auditor said about that: “The audit did not 
find evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t be supporting the motion. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today and join in on this very important debate. It’s also an 
honour for me to be the opposition representative on the Public 
Accounts Committee along with my colleague, who is the 
Chair. It’s a really important role. 
 
The committee has a very important function in government, 
and I’ve learned that through mentorship both from my 
colleague the Chair as well as the former representative on 
PAC, the Leader of the Opposition. Through that I’ve learned 
the importance of the scrutiny role that PAC has and the 
importance that it has as a committee that’s somewhat different 
from the other committees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that it does 
not analyze or present policy decisions, but it’s actually 
supposed to be, in a non-partisan way, looking at government 
functions to ensure that taxpayer dollars are being spent as 
wisely as possible. 
 
So that’s what’s the alarming thing, the most alarming thing 
about the way that the GTH and the auditor’s report has been 
moving through PAC and the way that members opposite have 
been essentially shutting down debate — not only shutting 
down debate on PAC with respect to this report but also 
limiting and blocking important individuals from testifying at 
committee meetings, which is completely different from 
experiences that are supposed to happen at PAC, experiences 
that I’ve had on PAC thus far, and experiences that colleagues 
who came before me have had on PAC. It runs completely 
counter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the purpose and the role of 
Public Accounts. 
 
Now as the opposition representative on PAC, I’ve been the one 
frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who’s been tabling motions to 
request that these important individuals come before PAC and 
testify. It’s been standard practice that the individuals who are 
relevant to the issues that we’re discussing are there and are 
available. Never in any other auditor report meeting that we’ve 
had on PAC has there been an instance where we weren’t able 
to get the relevant people to come forward and to help us 
answer our questions, which is our job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
members of the committee, is to actually ask questions. And in 
no sense has it ever been seen as a discount on the hard work of 
the auditor. It’s, frankly, simply our role, as it should be — both 
as MLAs and as members of the PAC committee — to make 
sure that we are effectively using taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And it’s been six times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where I have 
asked for the relevant officials to come forward and to be 
allowed to testify, and six times the members opposite have 
voted down the motion that I have made. And each time I 
present this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remind the 
committee members of the importance of their role and the 
importance of our role collectively on PAC as a scrutiny 
committee, the importance of the ability for us to ask questions 
of all relevant officials. 
 
The only officials that we’ve been allowed to talk . . . to ask 
questions of at PAC so far have been two officials: one 
gentleman from GTH who was not around during the . . . when 
the crux of the decisions around this GTH land scandal 
occurred, and we’ve most recently learned actually wasn’t 
around as he was on holidays during when the real crux of the 
decision was made. And the other gentleman that we’ve been 

allowed to ask questions of is a gentleman from the Ministry of 
Highways, similarly wasn’t around when the majority of the 
decisions around this land purchase was done and similarly was 
on holidays during a large portion of when the actual decision 
was made to . . . when the actual land purchase occurred, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, who has done a 
very fantastic job in terms of unearthing and probing through 
the documents that we were able to receive, as well as the 
auditor’s report, and ask questions, often we get a response 
back that the officials that are present don’t know the answers 
to. And they tell us that they don’t know, and yet these are the 
only officials that we’ve been given an opportunity to question. 
 
Not only that, but we’ve also tabled motions asking for further 
time, which have been voted down by the members opposite. 
We’ve also most recently, as of this week, tabled a motion . . . 
Because at last committee meeting we were given a lot, several, 
at least several dozen undertakings from the officials who were 
there, again because they didn’t know the answers to the 
questions that we had. They made undertakings to present, to 
provide the committee with further documentation. When I 
tabled a motion this week asking for an opportunity for us to 
have a meeting to, once that documentation is tabled, for us to 
be able to ask our relevant questions to those officials about that 
documentation, yet again members opposite voted down that 
motion. 
 
It’s very frustrating. It’s very frustrating when our important 
role as a scrutiny committee is being thwarted for partisan 
reasons. It’s very frustrating when we’re not able to do our job. 
It’s very frustrating when we’re not able to get the answers that 
we need to for the taxpayers. It’s the whole purpose of our job 
on Public Accounts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite should know darn well what our role 
is on Public Accounts and the value of it. And I think . . . I 
know because we all had an orientation session after the 2016 
election and we were all provided with the Public Accounts 
procedures manual, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this should be 
coming as no surprise to the members opposite when the 
procedures manual lays out exactly what our mandate is. And 
our mandate has always been to question findings of the auditor 
in terms of uncovering further information ensuring that 
taxpayers’ dollars are being using effectively and efficiently. 
 
I want to read into the record the mandate of the committee 
because it seems like the members opposite have forgotten what 
it is. 
 

The mandate of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts consists of the following: 
 
1. Review and report on the observations, opinions and 

recommendations on the Reports of the Provincial 
Auditor (as designated for referral to the committee by 
The Provincial Auditor Act) and the Public Accounts of 
the Province of Saskatchewan. These documents are 
permanently referred to the committee as they become 
available. 

 
2. Review, amend (as considered appropriate), and approve 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

the estimates of the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

3. Consider and report any bills related to the Provincial 
Auditor that may be referred to the committee. 

 
4. Conduct a competition for the position of the Provincial 

Auditor of Saskatchewan and unanimously recommend 
to the Legislative Assembly an individual for 
appointment. 

 
5. Recommend, after consultation with the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies, the names 
of individuals for appointment to the Audit Committee 
of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
6. Undertake any other activities as directed by the 

Assembly or [presented] . . . by statute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all received, during our orientation, copies of 
CCAF and the CCPAC [Canadian Council of Public Accounts 
Committees] guides to parliamentary oversight committees and 
relationships, and the importance of PAC and the role and 
function of PAC in a commonwealth democracy like ours, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I want to read some of this into the record 
because I’m not sure if members opposite forgot to read this 
material when they went to their orientation. You know, that’s 
the glass-half-full optimist view — maybe they just forgot and 
maybe they’re just waiting for us to remind them what it is. 
 
This is a quote from the Parliamentary Oversight-Committees 
and Relationships. And being cognizant of the time, I have a lot 
of . . . There’s a lot of information in all of the documentation 
that we received during our orientation. I encourage members 
opposite to read all of it. But what I read into the record is just 
but the tip of the iceberg in terms of what we should be doing. 
So: 
 

In theory, PACs, which are legislative oversight 
committees, should be the cornerstone of financial 
accountability and governance in the public sector. The 
PAC is supposed to work in tandem with the legislative 
auditor, known as the Auditor General or Provincial 
Auditor in Canada, depending on the jurisdiction, to hold 
the government to account for its use of public funds and 
resources.  

 
It’s not an indication that we don’t agree with the auditor’s 
report or findings. It’s not an indication that we are questioning 
her work. It’s very simply our role and duty as committee 
members to do it. And I don’t understand why the members 
opposite have suddenly forgotten that this is the importance of 
their role, and this is what their role should be. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s also interesting that, so far in the 
debate from members opposite, we have members who are so 
afraid to talk about this matter that all we’ve gotten are quotes 
from the Provincial Auditor’s findings and the 
recommendations as provided by the ministries. 
 
I know we’ll have a few more people join the debate. I’m 
hoping for a little bit more dialogue of relevance. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s a privilege and an honour to be able to speak to this 
preposterous motion, Mr. Speaker. When I sit there and I look 
at the motion, the way it goes through and it says, you know, 
“. . . shutting down discussion on topics . . . [and] avoiding 
scrutiny of government spending . . .” etc., etc., Mr. Speaker, 
this motion just doesn’t pass the smell test. 
 
I think part of the problem is, I think part of the problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the NDP is actually jealous, because they never 
wanted to see this province move forward. You know, they 
looked, they actually looked at the Global Transportation Hub 
back when they were on this side of the House. But the old 
story, you know, they never got around to it. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s jealousy that’s actually driving this witch hunt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the questions have been answered by the 
auditor; every single thing. And they keep on going back to 
Public Accounts, and they keep on coming back with the same 
questions. They keep on getting the same answers which is 
answered fully. It’s been answered in this House. It’s been 
answered in Public Accounts. But yet the NDP still, for some 
reason, have got to sit there with their witch hunt and keep on 
looking and trying to find something, anything. They just can’t 
come up with anything new. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the things that have happened in this province 
since this government came into power in 2007 . . . We wanted 
to see this province going forward and the Global 
Transportation Hub is one of these fine models that is moving 
this province forward. 
 
What they wanted for answers out of the Global Transportation 
Hub, like I said, the auditor went through. She even had . . . she 
even went so far as getting all the cabinet documents. 
Everything was there. It was laid out. She never had a problem 
interviewing any of the witnesses. All of the witnesses were 
very forthcoming. Everything has gone through. 
 
And I guess it’s been read before and it’s been read many times, 
but I’m going to throw those quotes back in there again as to 
what the auditor said, and I’m going to quote, “The audit did 
not find [any] evidence of conflicts of interest or indications, [or 
indicators] of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or 
Board of Directors.” And that includes the former minister. 
 
[11:30] 
 
She also said on July 4 on the John Gormley show: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red 
flags. And because this is a land transaction, we did look 
for conflicts of interest. [And] we didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing 
in the course of our work so there . . . [was] no red flags 
there. 

 
That’s the Provincial Auditor. Now for some reason the NDP 
thinks that they want to take on the job of the Provincial 
Auditor which . . . The Provincial Auditor is an independent 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

person within this legislature but the NDP, they think that they 
should take on that job of the auditor. They want to call 
everybody. 
 
And I have to give credit where credit is due. I have to give a 
lot of credit to our member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, the 
Deputy Chair for keeping everything on track. I told him I’d 
give him a compliment today, Mr. Speaker, so . . . But anyway, 
he has done a great job and so has the whole team on PAC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing there, and yet the NDP continue, 
continue to slander the good members, the honourable members 
of this House on this side. I don’t know what their thoughts are, 
but like I was saying before, I think I’ve come to the conclusion 
that the only thing they’re coming up with is they’re jealous 
because they couldn’t figure out a way to move this forward. 
They couldn’t figure out a way to have the GTH. 
 
The fact is, I’m just going to step back for a second and take a 
look at the former Premier Calvert who wouldn’t go on the 
trade missions which the GTH is all about. It’s helping move 
our product forward, and Mr. Calvert wouldn’t even go on 
those trade missions. This government has worked hard at 
moving, moving the province forward and bringing things that 
the NDP couldn’t even dream about. Of course, they couldn’t 
even think about raising the population of this province either, 
so that’s a completely different story. 

 
But when you look, the GTH is . . . when you put it into this 
province, it’s almost like a seaport in the middle of the prairies. 
This is a place that there are very few of them out there where 
people can ship stuff through. It’s an excellent trucking port. 
It’s been approved for the export market, for the customs 
market. This is something that is absolutely fantastic for our 
province. 
 
But the NDP, the NDP is jealous, so they go on their witch hunt 
and try and bring up something, something, anything that is 
wrong with it. Even though they’ve been given all the answers, 
every day they bring it up in question period. They bring it up 
to the media. But what is happening is truly they’re losing 
credibility on this. But they don’t seem to understand that, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are losing credibility for bringing something 
forward that the auditor has already gone through and checked 
into thoroughly, thoroughly and found out that there was 
absolutely no conflict of interest within there and no red flags, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
She did have some recommendations. I think there was 10 
recommendations of which eight have already been approved 
by the Department of Highways. And there are still some GTH 
recommendations that they’re working on so that they can 
comply with. So, Mr. Speaker, yes there were a couple of 
mistakes made, but these that the Provincial Auditor has 
flagged are being worked on and improved as we speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the hundreds of jobs, the 
thousands of jobs that are coming to this province because of 
the GTH, this makes a big difference to the province of 
Saskatchewan as we are an export-driven province and 
everybody knows that. And, Mr. Speaker, the thing is, is 
without the government on this side of the House looking to 
move this province forward, these things would not have been 

happening. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I say the NDP . . . It’s 
a witch hunt. They’re jealous because they couldn’t get it done, 
and they’re mad that we are. And they’re just trying to slander 
everybody for that simple reason and that reason alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at even the truck movements out of 
there, there’s 4,800 truck movements per day, and this is just 
the beginning of it, Mr. Speaker. When you take a look at how 
this is going to move on and continue to be a grandstanding 
example of what Saskatchewan is, of what Saskatchewan has 
become, we’re going to be that top province in all of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the foresight of the people on this side 
of the House to move this province forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we export as much as what we do, when 
we’re based on agriculture especially in this province and our 
trade going across to the rest of the world, we desperately need 
something such as the GTH to help us do that. And I know this 
has been read in there before, but you know, we export goods to 
over 150 countries. We’re an export province. This is where we 
get our money from. Unfortunately some of the revenues have 
kind of dropped off on a few of the things here as of late, but 
we all know that that’s going to come back. 
 
Now when you take a look at . . . We export 60 . . . I’m going to 
run out of time. Mr. Speaker. I will not support the motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to rise in my place today and to support my colleagues, 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana, the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, who are very accomplished legal professionals 
that have made the decision to enter the political life to do 
exactly what we’ve spoken about, is to bring credibility and 
thoroughness, and to certainly examine the role of government 
and how they’re spending our hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was with great amusement that I listened 
to the member from Saskatoon University and the member from 
Carrot River. And the challenge I have to them today, that in 
the event, in the event in a short order, that obviously the 
Premier alluded to a police investigation. That if it is found that 
there has been some very poor dealings that the government 
undertook, and there has been some serious allegations that 
have been made, and now the police are investigating this issue. 
 
And if there is guilt found, I would assume that since they’re 
willing to stand up today to defend against this motion, that at 
that time they’d stand up and they would resign their seat for 
the simple fact that they stood up to defend something that I 
don’t think they know the full breadth of the problem when it 
comes to the GTH land scandal. And when they get up and try 
and defend it by trying to distract people’s attention, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that there should be repercussions for that. 
 
And I would hope that I would see both the Carrot River MLA 
and the Saskatoon University MLA stand up and say, we were 
wrong and we therefore resign. When that day comes, Mr. 
Speaker, I think they’ll find that we’re going to be asking them. 
They should be compelled to do that. They should be compelled 
to do that. 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

Why, Mr. Speaker? Because this whole thing stinks, that’s why, 
Mr. Speaker. The government continues to deny the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers the right to answer questions, us to 
answer questions on behalf of the taxpayers of how their money 
was wasted on this scandal. 
 
Now people across the way can say, oh it’s all the NDP’s fault. 
And the member from Carrot River, the member from Carrot 
River said, well we’re losing credibility on this. Absolutely you 
are, sir. You’re losing a lot of credibility as this thing does 
indeed stink. This thing stinks, and there’s more information 
coming our way each and every single day on this deal. And 
you should not defend a deal that stinks . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the member to make his 
comments through the Chair. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if this deal stinks, those 
that wish to stand up to defend it should be held to account. 
Now what happens . . . I’m not going to belabour what the 
auditor said because the auditor is tired of the Saskatchewan 
Party using her as a shield against accountability. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, what’s really important, what’s really important is the 
auditor’s simply . . . There’s two things I want to say about the 
Provincial Auditor. Her report was scathing and it exonerated 
no one, Mr. Speaker. And we have more details on that coming 
forward. If you want to go there, we’re willing to go there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is this debate all about? What is the 
75-minute debate all about? We want answers on the GTH deal 
that those folks . . . [inaudible] . . . across the way, and they 
have steadfastly blocked that effort. They have blocked that 
effort, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Now we set aside the auditor’s role. Now let’s go to the media. 
The media have been asking for this, Mr. Speaker. The media 
have asked all kinds of questions, and every time they go 
through the freedom of information Act, they got three-quarters 
of every page blacked out. They use the word “redacted” but 
really it’s blacked out. So how do you pay for information from 
the government when 90 per cent of it’s blacked out, Mr. 
Speaker? Even the media can’t get information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important things that I think 
that we ought to share here is the fact that in general, being the 
former Highways minister, Mr. Speaker, we had great trust and 
confidence in our officials. Now the officials are non-political. 
They are non-political, Mr. Speaker. So I want to quote from 
one of the officials within Highways. Because what happens is 
when Highways purchases land, it goes through the officials, 
and the officials decide a wide variety of matters — whether the 
land is going to be forcibly taken away, the price of the land, 
whether the land is needed — all these really important issues 
that the Sask Party didn’t seem to follow at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. And generally they bring forward a recommendation 
to the minister and then the minister decides a course of action. 
 
But that was not the case with the GTH land deal, Mr. Speaker, 
because . . . And I quote from a document, a report, Mr. 
Speaker, and this goes CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] News. It was posted just a month ago, Mr. 
Speaker, February 8th to be exact. And I quote: 

The man who was in charge of making sure 
Saskatchewan’s Ministry of Highways followed its own 
land buying rules says it failed miserably three years ago, 
[to buy land] when it purchased property from the Global 
Transportation Hub. 

 
And again, Mr. Speaker, another quote is: 
 

In early 2014, Jeff Grigg, then-director of property 
standards with the ministry, was alarmed that Highways 
was “under significant political pressure” to buy land from 
the GTH at a vastly inflated price. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it goes on, and this is one of the comments 
of one of the officials, who said, “Ridiculous. How did it ever 
get there? There’s no appraisal that gives that number. There’s 
no indicator not even in the ballpark of that number.” And that 
was Jeff Grigg, former director of property standards for the 
Ministry of Highways. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have Highways officials that are willing 
to stand up and speak out against this deal. We have the media 
who have been steadfastly denied access to information. We 
have the auditor’s report that was scathing and exonerated no 
one. And, Mr. Speaker, finally we have nuns, people that have 
dedicated their lives to the service of their fellow man, and they 
came forward and they explained to the people of Saskatchewan 
how they were ripped off on this deal. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is not the NDP that went and told the nuns 
to say that. It was not the NDP that went and told the media to 
investigate this. It was not the NDP that told the auditor’s report 
to try and exonerate anyone. And it certainly wasn’t the NDP 
that forced Highways officials to come forward. These are all 
independent people that came forward and offered their opinion 
and advice on this deal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from our vantage point, this deal stinks, Mr. 
Speaker. It went from a $400 million cost to well over, or close 
to $2 billion. And, Mr. Speaker, it is the largest infrastructure in 
the history of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, on one page, on 
one component of this deal, there’s an odour, and we’re going 
to find out why. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, in particular the Saskatchewan Party 
government, fasten your seatbelt folks because this ain’t going 
away for the next three or four years. There’s more and more 
and more information that is coming forward because $2 billion 
is a lot of money. Two billion dollars is money that the people 
cannot afford in Saskatchewan to have wasted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we all believe in investment, Mr. Speaker, and 
infrastructure. We believe that we have to have smart growth, 
smart growth to ensure Saskatchewan’s future is building an 
economy that creates jobs and opportunity for our people, for 
people that have to pay their mortgage. And the list goes on as 
to the many people that need work. 
 
But what people can’t stand, Mr. Speaker, what people can’t 
stand is when the government stops any effort of accountability. 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

They put a wall in front of us. And when you talk about 
accountability . . . And all these ladies wanted, the ladies that 
represent the NDP on Public Accounts, all they wanted, Mr. 
Speaker, was to ask a few witnesses to come forward, Mr. 
Speaker. They asked a couple of witnesses to come forward that 
still work for government to give us information that they 
would have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the entire Sask Party caucus across the way 
come along and they blocked that effort. They blocked that 
effort on a $2 billion deal. And then when I hear the Minister of 
the Economy start whining about us not going to a Board of 
Internal Economy meeting, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to 
him, perhaps you should open the public accounts to witnesses 
on a $2 billion deal, Mr. Speaker, on a $2 billion deal. And then 
we’ll begin to open the meetings on a, discussion on a 3.5 per 
cent decrease of which the NDP are supportive of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the audacity, that’s the audacity that we’ve been seeing 
from the Saskatchewan Party. So, Mr. Speaker, fasten your 
belts — fasten your belts, Sask Party — a $2 billion 
boondoggle. We have tons of questions and we’re getting tons 
of information. And this issue ain’t going away, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why I support the motion that calls for greater 
accountability because the people of Saskatchewan have the 
right to know how their taxpayers’ dollars were wasted by that 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to stand in my seat today to debate the opposition 
motion which, I want to state immediately for the record, I do 
not agree with. 
 
Now with respect to the motion, our government has directed 
the provincial auditors to do a full review to ensure full 
disclosure and then to go on to the conclusion of the review, to 
move on to the work of the people that we were elected for — 
the people of Saskatchewan. And they should know that this 
government has had the first ever AAA credit rating and the 
fourth lowest unemployment rate in Canada, despite the low 
resource prices. 
 
And I’d like to thank the member from Saskatoon Nutana for 
putting this motion forward. I’d like to thank her so we can 
publicly stand and defend our government for all the wonderful 
work, for all the wonderful things that we have accomplished in 
less than a decade. And I would like to share some of them with 
you today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our government has learned some very valuable lessons from 
this experience. We accepted the auditor’s findings and 
recommendations, and we are taking corrective action. We are 
moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our record, as compared 
to the NDP record, is thus: from 2008 to 2015, with our 
government, Saskatchewan has had the best economic growth 
rate in Canada, averaging 2.5 per cent per year, well above the 
national average of 1.6 per cent. 
 
Since 2007 to 2016, Saskatchewan has had the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada. We’ve been a have province 

every year since 2007, and we continually grow in population: 
in nine years, over 150,000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, across the world people choose words. 
The Oxford English Dictionary has declared “post-truth” the 
Word of the Year for 2016. Post-truth is defined as “relating to 
or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less 
influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion 
and personal belief.” 
 
It’s official, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Truth is dead and facts are 
now passé, considered so-last-year’s sentiment. In a wide world 
of social media and general information, to research and 
challenge the sources is not as important as tidbits, tweets 
casually flung your way and quickly retweeted without valid 
evidence. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, post-truth refers to a profoundly 
dangerous trend that affects all of us, elected officials and 
citizens of Saskatchewan. With the speed of social media, we 
all have to be more cautious when the truth is no longer 
respected, and we have to rigorously fight back with established 
publications and quality peer reviews and research. Global 
Transportation Hub employment during construction has 
created 1,804 jobs. Global Transportation Hub is a very 
valuable tool for our province and across the nation.  
 
A growing distrust of factors offered up by qualified 
establishments has been finding a footing for some time. 
Post-truth, the final Word of the Year 2016 is meant to be one 
that captures “. . . the ethos, mood, or preoccupation of that 
particular year and to have lasting potential as a word of 
cultural significance.” Our recent federal election and the 
election to the country south of us, America, USA [United 
States of America], has created some of this drama, the public 
finding politicians far more entertaining than they should, our 
good work and legislation forgotten to those online with social 
media technology. 
 
Viewpoints in an ideological, growing group rejecting 
mainstream ideas is becoming increasing prevalent. Post-truth 
describes basic human behaviour swayed by emotions and 
personal beliefs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reality of today and how we deal with 
debates and arguments is our new reality. Our government has 
real facts and a good set of teeth to take a bite out of the heavy 
burden we are currently involved with in this great province due 
to global resource prices. This government deals with the issues 
we are facing with in our nation today. We are not immune to 
those in need and the suffering. This government continues to 
address the challenges the vulnerable and sick face daily. 
 
Saying all that, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts regarding the 
Global Transportation Hub. The Premier asked the Provincial 
Auditor to do a complete review of this matter, which she did. 
The auditor found a number of instances where proper 
processes were not followed. She identified these instances and 
made recommendations of how to address them. 
 
Yes, it’s true a prolonged downturn in global commodity prices 
has resulted in a significant shortfall in government revenues. 
We are in a manageable situation, however, when compared to 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

neighbouring provinces. Here in Saskatchewan, our government 
has worked since forming government to build a strong 
financial footing and the trust of the people. Our government 
will continue to work through our challenges and come out 
stronger than ever with the people’s co-operation and resilient 
strength they have shown since their ancestors have settled this 
country. 
 
Our government is known . . . and will continue to help our 
communities and neighbours by interacting and engaging with 
people and navigating government agencies for their access to a 
better quality in both rural and urban areas. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is my home, my Saskatchewan, and I and my 
government will continue to strive for excellence and quality of 
life we all want for our families and communities. Policy and 
government programs are a necessity to governments, and we 
will continue dialogue with the people of Saskatchewan to 
continue to honour our commitment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan provides so much for the 
rest of the world, and with the Global Transportation Hub, we 
can even do better. At the moment Saskatchewan provides 65 
per cent of the world’s lentils, 55 per cent of the world’s peas. 
Saskatchewan is the second largest exporter of oil in Canada, 
and we export goods to over 150 countries. One in five jobs in 
Saskatchewan depends on exports.  
 
During her work, the Provincial Auditor interviewed everyone 
that she felt was necessary, and she had access to any cabinet 
document that she felt was needed. The auditor mentioned on 
numerous occasions that any members and officials she spoke 
with were all forthcoming with all of their information. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, engaging with the 
people of Saskatchewan is a vitally important aspect of our 
government’s process for public feedback and the role it has to 
play in formulating policy. Public empowerment and 
engagement advances our province, our province’s quality of 
life. So I do not support the motion, but I do support our 
government’s decisions. I support the auditor. I support our 
exports, and I support our international trade. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government takes 
the auditor and her findings very seriously. That is why our 
government has fully accepted all the recommendations that the 
auditor has made, and we thank her office for their hard work. 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. We agree with the auditor and her 
recommendations. Why don’t you respect and trust the 
Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very clear that we 
respect the work of the auditor, as we always do as members 
. . . [inaudible] . . . of this House. I’ll tell you what we won’t do. 
We won’t hide like members opposite. We won’t block like the 
members opposite. We will let the Public Accounts Committee 

do its job. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, on November 28, 2016, in PAC 
committee, the Provincial Auditor stated that regarding the 
audit into the GTH it “. . . did not conclusively state that there 
was no conflict of interest, fraud, or wrongdoing with respect to 
these land transaction related to GTH.” And she had to stand up 
and say that after the minister from Meadow Lake stood up 150 
times and hid behind that report. 
 
So in light of these facts, this truth, to the member from Carrot 
River: will you stop pointing fingers at the NDP and demand 
that your government start taking accountability and start 
answering questions? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you for that question. And I have to 
kind of wonder how she put that because here I’m going to read 
again the quote. On July the 4th the Provincial Auditor said, and 
I quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find [any] evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work, so there are no red flags there. 

 
I think that’s fairly self explanatory. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on July 4th, 2016 the Provincial Auditor said, and I 
quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find [any] evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work, so there were no red flags there. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. The Provincial Auditor has said that there are no red 
flags and no conflicts of interest. Why doesn’t your party have 
confidence that the auditor and her team have done a thorough 
job? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
wish the member would continue the story appropriately 
because she’s only telling half of the story here, Mr. Speaker. 
What I wanted to tell you is that this what the auditor had to say 
about what she just read into the record and she said this on the 
record. That was a press release by the way. This is on the 
record in Hansard. Here’s what she said on November 28th. 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

She said: 
 

Thank you very much, Madam Chair . . . Thank you for the 
opportunity just to, I just wanted to reinforce a couple of 
points that we raised at the last meeting. And the reason 
that I do that, that I wanted to do is that our office is a bit 
concerned that our finding — which is the audit did not 
find evidence of conflict of interest, indication of fraud . . . 
is not well understood and . . . [I really think I] 
overshadowed . . . 
 

I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I think the members should listen to 
this: 
 

. . . is not well understood and has . . . overshadowed our 
audit conclusion. 
 
. . . our office did not do a forensic audit or audit the 
activities of private sector individuals or corporations. 

 
[12:00] 
 
So that member needs to understand and read ahead a little bit 
to recognize that what the auditor said in July was only part . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The next question. I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the member from Saskatoon University. Are you 
aware of any members being interviewed by the RCMP in 
relation to the GTH land investigation? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
answer to that question is no. And I just want to reiterate, in the 
auditor’s report to the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 
Speaker, she made the recommendations to the GTH and to 
Highways and Infrastructure. Both ministries have accepted 
those recommendations and have either implemented them or 
are in the process of doing so. We believe that the Provincial 
Auditor and her team have done a thorough job and are pleased 
to see that all recommendations have been accepted. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — In her work, the Provincial Auditor interviewed 
everyone that she felt was necessary for her report. She 
mentioned on numerous occasions that any members and 
officials she spoke with were very forthcoming with 
information. On this side of the House we are confident in the 
work that the Provincial Auditor has done, and we trust that she 
has done a thorough job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why do 
the members on your side of the House think they can do a 
better job than the auditor has done? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sadly, we have 
another backbencher who hasn’t done his homework, Mr. 
Speaker. On November 28, this is what the auditor said. She 
said, our office did not . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well just 
listen to this: “. . . our office did not do a forensic audit or audit 
the activities of private sector individuals or corporations.” We 
know that that one private sector individual was the one who 
was friends with the former minister, who was minister at the 
time when he made $6 million. 
 
That was not within the purview of the audit. And why don’t 
you want to know the answers to that? Why aren’t you guys 
curious about what exactly happened between the minister 
responsible and his landlord who made $6 million and the 
auditor could not look into that? She was not allowed to from 
the scope of her investigation. And that Premier and that 
minister now currently responsible are not bringing those 
individuals forward to tell us what really happened. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members on this side 
of the House have been all across the province hearing from 
constituents, our constituents and their constituents, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, asking questions about this land scandal. 
 
So to the member from Carrot River: have your constituents not 
asked you about this scandal? What do you tell them about it 
when they ask you? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well, I’d like to thank the member for the 
question. And really the people from Carrot River Valley don’t 
think this is a scandal at all because they believe in what the 
auditor is saying, contrary to what, contrary to what the 
opposition is saying. 
 
You know, during her work the Provincial Auditor interviewed 
everyone that she felt was necessary. And they had access to 
any cabinet document that she felt was needed. She mentioned 
on numerous occasions that any members and officials she 
spoke with were forthcoming with all their information. Our 
government and the members of the Public Accounts 
Committee are confident that the Provincial Auditor and her 
team have done a thorough job. That’s the answer, and that’s 
what I tell my constituents, and they certainly believe me ahead 
of believing anything that the NDP is going to be saying. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m not sure if 
the members opposite are aware, but the GTH received its 
foreign trade zone designation from the federal government in 
2015. An FTZ [foreign trade zone] provides tremendous 
opportunities for Saskatchewan exports and imports that 
ultimately allow us to get our goods to market. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to the member from Regina Douglas Park: does she 
recognize that having a GTH FTZ gives Saskatchewan a 
competitive advantage in accessing international markets, or are 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

they still ideologically opposed to free trade? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s such a ridiculous 
question, and it has nothing to do with the fact that this 
government wasted millions of dollars on this ridiculous 
scandal. Our job on Public Accounts Committee is to scrutinize 
the work of government to ensure that we’re using taxpayer 
dollars effectively and efficiently. It has nothing to do with the 
process of the GTH. It has everything to do with the use of 
taxpayer dollars. And it’s ridiculous that this government keeps 
hiding from what is the truth, and what is the truth about the 
scandal that’s happening here today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
from Carrot River Valley: did he know the former GTH 
minister’s landlord, Mr. Tappauf, was never listed on the title, 
even though he made $6 million on the transaction? Does that 
sound right to him, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, there they go coming out with 
their slanderous comments again, when the auditor went 
through and came up with the decision there wasn’t any conflict 
of interest. Why can’t they, the NDP, believe that? 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mining represents an 
important element of our province’s economic framework. And 
it is a privilege to be able to stand and talk about that today. At 
the end of my speech, I would like to bring forward the motion 
as follows: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very attractive mining policies 
which has led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investments in the world. 

 
This is very good news for the province of Saskatchewan and 
this government. This shows that we as a province have been 
doing the right thing to ensure Saskatchewan is a great place to 
live, work, and invest. It truly shows that we are open for 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week the Fraser Institute released its 
annual report on the most attractive mining jurisdictions in the 
world. And as I stated already, this is very good news for 
Saskatchewan. Out of 104 jurisdictions surveyed, Saskatchewan 
was named the number one jurisdiction in the world for mining 
companies to invest. Needless to say, this most certainly caught 

my attention. And if it has not caught the attention of everyone 
else, it certainly should. 
 
When looking into details of the report, we see that our 
province moved up from second place last year to first place 
this year, and it also ranks well in every other category. Mr. 
Speaker, the report I am speaking of is the results of the 2016 
annual survey of mining and exploration companies. The survey 
is an attempt to assess how mineral endowments and public 
policy factors such as taxation and regulatory uncertainty affect 
exploration investment. The survey results were tallied. The 
provinces, states, and countries, according to a number of 
factors, included the extent that public policy factors encourage 
or discourage mining investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have committed to making Saskatchewan a 
great place to live, work, and invest. And our number one 
ranking is proof that we have kept that promise. We will 
continue to reject those who would impose ideology over 
practical solutions of our economy, whether that is the federal 
carbon tax or the NDP Leap Manifesto. 
 
Mining contributes to the economic growth worldwide, and 
Canadian mining companies operate in jurisdictions around the 
world. While mineral potential is obviously a very important 
consideration in encouraging or dissuading mining investment, 
the impact of government policies can also be significant in 
encouraging or discouraging investment in this important area 
of economic activity. 
 
When I was reading through the news articles on this topic, the 
Minister for Energy and Resources said: 
 

Saskatchewan enjoys an excellent reputation in the mining 
sector. We are gifted with a variety of resources, and as a 
government we are doing our share to encourage the 
industry and to make sure that we are competitive and 
friendly to investment. We have maintained a stable 
royalty structure over the last number of years, supported 
by clear government policies that have helped 
Saskatchewan remain a destination of choice for investors 
and business. 

 
He also stated: 
 

Aside from having high-quality geoscience information, 
we place high priority on collaboration with our 
stakeholders in the industry to help [ensure we] reduce red 
tape wherever possible. 

 
The words of that Minister for Energy and Resources used 
could not be truer. When I look into the details of the report put 
out by the Fraser Institute, I clearly see, under the investment 
attractiveness index, that over the past four years Saskatchewan 
has gone from sixth place to first, proving that we continue to 
make Saskatchewan more attractive for investment. And we 
will continue to strive to keep Saskatchewan an attractive place 
to invest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we compare our results with the neighbouring 
province of Alberta, you will note that four years ago they were 
listed at 14th on the attractiveness index. But if we look at the 
chart, we can see now that they sit in 47th on attractiveness 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

index. Mr. Speaker, the reality is, policy matters. 
 
As part of the consideration that went into the survey, it was 
designed to capture the opinions of managers and executives 
about the level of investment barriers in jurisdictions in which 
their companies were familiar. And once again, I will state that 
it would appear as though we are doing a great job because we 
were number one. 
 
Now I would be remiss if during my talk about success with 
mining in Saskatchewan if I did not take the time to talk about 
mining in my constituency, something I’m very proud of. 
Westmoreland Coal Company is Saskatchewan’s sole coal 
producer. They have operations in both Estevan and Poplar 
River mines. These coal mines in Saskatchewan show that our 
province is a great place to invest. I also need to add that our 
government’s innovation in carbon capture and storage is 
keeping our coal industry vibrant. That’s why IBEW, the 
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, a union, came 
out publicly in support of Boundary dam 3. 
 
In 2014, the American-based Westmoreland acquired shared 
international coal mines in Saskatchewan, which once again 
proves that Saskatchewan is a good place to invest. 
 
Coal production in Saskatchewan over the past few years has 
been as follows: in 2013, there were 8.9 million tonnes; in 
2014, we had 6.4 million tonnes; and in 2015, we had 9.3 
million tonnes. And I might note that since the Saskatchewan 
operations, Westmoreland has signed a new long-term 
agreement with SaskPower. 
 
The economic spin-offs of an operation like Westmoreland 
being in my constituency do not go unnoticed. This company 
employs hundreds of people directly as well as hiring countless 
numbers of contractors to help ensure that their operations run 
smoothly. And not only do they create employment for the 
people of Estevan and the surrounding area, they do a great job 
at being corporate citizens as well. 
 
[12:15] 
 
They’re active members of the community and are continually 
donating to several different deserving organizations within the 
constituency. An example of this is Estevan’s annual United 
Way telethon. In 2016, a total of $398,000 was raised. This 
could not have been achieved without great corporate 
sponsorship like Westmoreland Coal. Every year the people 
who are employed at that mine have money come directly off 
their payroll deductions to contribute towards United Way, and 
then the company matches those donations. 
 
In 2016, the employees and management of Westmoreland 
donated a total of $74,000 to our United Way campaign. The 
money that is donated there goes to over 40 deserving member 
agencies in and around the Estevan area. So as you can see from 
my example above, the mining industry in my constituency 
brings very positive direct and indirect outcomes. 
 
And coal mining is not the only mining that takes place in 
Saskatchewan. I’m going to state some facts about mining in 
Saskatchewan that I find quite interesting, and I hope you will 
also, Mr. Speaker. 

A preliminary estimate by Natural Resources Canada indicated 
that Saskatchewan accounted for about 17.5 per cent of 
Canadian exploration expenditures in 2016. That was up from 
13.9 per cent in 2015 and is ranked second nationally, only 
behind Ontario. Since 2005, the potash industry committed over 
$20 billion for expansions to current operations and the 
development of new mines in Saskatchewan. The expansions, 
which are near complete, are expected to nearly double 
Saskatchewan’s potash production capacity. 
 
In addition, several companies are considering constructing new 
potash mines, including global mining giant, BHP Billiton 
limited. As well K+S Potash Canada is in the final stages of 
commissioning Saskatchewan’s newest potash solution mine at 
the Legacy site adjacent to Belle Plaine. The $4.1 billion mine 
will be capable of producing 2 million tonnes of potassium 
chloride annually and is expected to generate its first production 
in the summer of 2017. 
 
A total of 10.11 million hectares of Crown land were disposed 
of for minerals, potash, and coal as of December 31st, 2016. 
Over the past few years, uranium discoveries in the Patterson 
Lake South areas north of La Loche and diamond-bearing 
kimberlite discoveries north of Deschambault Lake have 
resulted in industry acquiring significant land positions in those 
two areas. 
 
The increased staking activity has been facilitated by the 
mineral administration registry of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan’s new online mineral disposition acquiring 
system. In 2015, Saskatchewan produced 11.1 million tonnes of 
potassium oxide. Uranium production for 2015 was 34.6 
million pounds. This number is due largely to ramping up of 
production at Cigar Lake mine. As well, Silver Standard 
Resources Inc. reported that production at the Seabee operation, 
Saskatchewan’s only active gold mine, achieved 77,660 ounces 
of gold in 2016. In total, the Seabee mining operation has 
produced over 1.2 million ounces of gold since commencing the 
mining in 1991. 
 
A survey conducted by the Ministry of Economy estimated that 
226 million would be spent on mineral exploration in 
Saskatchewan in 2016. This is an increase from the year before 
and shows strength in mineral exploration. Past exploration for 
the last few years have added hundreds of millions to our 
provincial economy. For example, in 2015 it was 211 million; 
2014, 216 million; 2013, 236 million; and in 2012, $323 million 
were added to our provincial economy. 
 
This is more good news for Saskatchewan because as long as 
industry is prepared to spend money in the province of 
Saskatchewan on mineral exploration, that will mean ongoing 
business is happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
All of the mining I speak about above is done by a multitude of 
great companies across the province of Saskatchewan and the 
economic benefits that have come to the province of 
Saskatchewan have been phenomenal. These companies 
demonstrate that Saskatchewan is a better place to live, work, 
and invest. These companies bring corporate tax dollars to the 
province of Saskatchewan. These companies bring good paying 
jobs to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



March 9, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

As I noted above, these companies are great corporate citizens 
and contribute not only to the communities they live in, but also 
to the province of Saskatchewan as a whole by generous 
donations they make to non-profit organizations that are giving 
back to the people of Saskatchewan who may be less fortunate 
and need a helping hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are talking a lot about the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan of late. So it is interesting to note 
that mineral sales over the past four years have been as follows: 
in 2013, 7.1 billion; 2014, 7.3 billion; 2015, 8.2 billion; and in 
2016 we are projecting 6.5 billion. The decline is primarily 
attributed to lower realized prices for potash and uranium, 
which in turn means less revenue for the province of 
Saskatchewan. The fact remains though that our province is still 
seeing tremendous investment in mining and our resource 
sector. 
 
Now this does not happen overnight, nor does it happen by 
accident. This has taken hard work and dedication on behalf of 
both the Government of Saskatchewan and our mining industry 
to make this work — true collaboration to do what is right to 
ensure that Saskatchewan is a place where these companies 
want to do business; from a government standpoint, ensuring 
that we are competitive and friendly to investment, ensuring we 
have a stable royalty structure, ensuring the policies that are in 
place are clear to help encourage investors to do business in our 
province, as well as trying to reduce red tape wherever possible. 
I have great faith in the future of our province and that our 
government will continue to help Saskatchewan be a great place 
to invest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also proud to stand here today to share that 
on Friday, February 17th of this year, Mosaic K3 mine near 
Esterhazy reached potash at an astounding depth of 3,350 feet. 
Development started in 2009, and after many cycles of drilling, 
blasting, mucking, and years of hard work, they struck potash. 
This is the third production shaft now in operation at the Mosaic 
Esterhazy site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the hard work and 
dedication of the skilled workers of Mosaic potash. These 
people, along with the policies and the record of our 
government, has made Saskatchewan the number one 
jurisdiction in the world for investment. Mr. Speaker, Mosaic’s 
K3 mine is another example of how Saskatchewan, even in the 
midst of lower global commodity prices, has seen continued 
strength in the mining sector. 
 
I gave you some facts about coal in my constituency, and I’m 
going to give you a few facts about potash now. Potash 
production in Saskatchewan has been continuous since 1962 
when Mosaic completed its K1 mine in Esterhazy. The potash 
reserves in Saskatchewan are massive. By conservative 
estimates, Saskatchewan could supply world demand at current 
levels for several hundred years. 
 
The Saskatchewan potash industry typically accounts for 
approximately 30 per cent of the world’s production, directly 
employs approximately 5,000 people, and contributes to the 
livelihood of thousands more. The long-term prospects are 
excellent for Saskatchewan potash industry. Higher population 
growth, combined with growing world income levels and 

increased biofuel consumption, will ensure that the global 
demand for potash will increase over the long term. 
 
And a couple interesting facts about uranium. Saskatchewan 
accounted for 22 per cent of the world’s primary uranium 
production in 2015 and was the second largest producer behind 
Kazakhstan. Saskatchewan has been producing uranium 
continuously since 1953 and is recognized as a long-term and 
stable source of uranium. 
 
In 2015 total employment by uranium industry, including 
contractors, was approximately 3,900 people. Saskatchewan’s 
northern residents account for roughly half of those employed, 
which approximately 50 per cent of those are of Aboriginal 
ancestry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while our government has made Saskatchewan a 
great place to live, work, and invest, the record of the NDP is 
very different. It seems like the NDP do whatever they can to 
make investment less attractive. Now the members opposite 
seem to have forgotten about their past, while unfortunately 
their present isn’t any better. 
 
When our government announced that we would stand up to the 
imposed federal carbon tax, the Premier asked the interim 
Leader of the Opposition to join him in condemning it. He 
refused. He refused to stand up for Saskatchewan, not to 
mention that the most recent addition to caucus has come out 
publicly and endorsed the carbon tax. 
 
The member from Saskatchewan Nutana made her beliefs clear 
when at the federal party’s convention in Edmonton. That 
member voted in favour of the principles in the Leap Manifesto. 
The document says, and I quote, “There is no longer an excuse 
for building new infrastructure projects that lock us into 
increased extraction decades into the future.” And then it went 
on to say, “. . . Canadian-owned mining projects the world 
over.”  
 
With that extreme ideology thinking, I shudder to think of what 
the state of the province would be in if the members opposite 
were in power. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the members 
opposite have not learned from their past. While they are caught 
up in ideology, our government will continue to make 
Saskatchewan a world-class place to invest. I could go on, but I 
think I’ve made my point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s continue to have great policies that will bring 
investment and industry to the province of Saskatchewan. We 
should be proud of our ranking as number one jurisdiction in 
the world for mining investment. And with that, I would like to 
move the following motion. The motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very attractive mining policies 
which has led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most 
attractive jurisdiction for mining investment in the world. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move that for the record. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Estevan has 
moved: 
 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2017 

That the Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having very attractive mining policies, 
which led Saskatchewan to be ranked the most attractive 
jurisdiction for mining investment in the world. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am looking forward to 
participating in the private member’s motion that’s currently on 
the floor right now, but at this time I would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melville-Saltcoats 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1613 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1613 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1614 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1614 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1614 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1614 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1615 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1615 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Master Corporal Alfred Barr 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1615 
 Coldest Night of the Year Walk in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1615 
 World Wheelchair Curling Championship 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1616 
 Heritage Language Day 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1616 
 Wilke, Saskatchewan in Hockeyville Top 10 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1616 
 Emergency Crews’ Response During Blizzard 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1616 
 Saskatchewan Women’s Basketball Teams Vie for Canada West Championship 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 
 Changes to Members’ Compensation 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 
 State of Provincial Finances 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1619 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1619 
 Intent of Bill No. 40 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 
 Usage of the Weyburn Court House 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 
 Youth Suicides in the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1621 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1621 
 Support for Vulnerable Children and Youth in the North 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1621 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1621 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Global Transportation Hub and Details of Land Transactions 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1621, 1631 
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1624, 1632 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1626, 1631 
  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1627, 1631 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1628, 1632 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1630 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1631 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1631 



 

  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1631 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1632 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1632 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1633 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1633 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1636 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


