






















































Hansard: March 27, 2017


FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan
____________

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 

____________

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 64A  MONDAY, MARCH 27, 2017, 13:30 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1877 
 March 27, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the House, seated in the west 
gallery is my youngest son. Last but not least most definitely, 
Ryan — and he’ll bug me quite a bit about this — he’s the only 
one of my three boys that don’t carry anything other than my 
last name. But he has both his grandfathers’ names, so it’s 
actually Ryan Peter Robert Lawrence, where everybody else 
has a chunk of my name in there. So to you and to all members, 
I’d like everyone to welcome Ryan to his House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce some guests in your gallery. We have some 
members here from the company Johnson Controls. We have 
Vince Russell, Randy Taylor, Chris Oyka, and Hassaan Khan. 
Vince, Chris, and Randy all reside in Saskatchewan and they 
have a combined 70 years of work experience in our province. 
A little known fact about Johnson Controls, their first project 
was actually in this very building in 1912 where they worked on 
the systems in this building. It’s a little chilly in here, so they 
may have to come back pretty soon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say that Johnson Controls has 
grown. They employ over 160 employees across the province 
and have six offices, and I’d like to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming these individuals 
from Johnson Controls to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly 
it’s a company with a good name, Mr. Speaker, for good work. 
And I can only think, you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad that 
they weren’t doing the smart meter program; perhaps that 
would have gone better. But you know, the mind races, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’d certainly like to join with the member opposite 
in welcoming these individuals to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. To you and through you and all 
members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a constituent 
seated in the west gallery, George Haas. And George, I believe, 
is well known to many members here, as George has held 
numerous positions on the provincial Sask Party executive, 
including president. 

George and his wife, Esther, have also played a very important 
role in the Melville-Saltcoats constituency association, and 
George has played a big role also in the Hudson Bay Route 
Association. And I’ve known George for a number of years, all 
the time during my farming, as he ran a custom spray business 
and custom combining business.  
 
I consider George and Esther to be good friends, so I would like 
all members to welcome George to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a constituent 
of mine from Kamsack, and he grew up in Canora, Dereck 
Wolkowski. He’s a businessman in Canora and Kamsack. And 
I’d like to say I hope I don’t have to support his business for a 
while, as he owns a funeral home in Canora, in Canora and 
Kamsack. So he’s been a great businessman and supporter for 
our area, and I’d like all members to welcome him to his 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
welcome two of our friends from down Highway No. 1 to the 
west of us, from Moose Jaw, two active community members 
from Moose Jaw. We have with us today Corey Atkinson and 
Mandy Canning, both people who are well involved in their 
community and advocates within the health care system. Corey 
was the candidate for us, of course, in the last provincial 
election, in Moose Jaw North. And they’re here today to watch 
the goings-on in this Assembly. And I would invite all members 
to join with me to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
stand in my place today to present a petition to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with the threat to our 
economy and the unaffordable increases to the cost of living 
which will result from the federal government’s decision to 
impose a carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

To cause the government to take the necessary steps and 
actions to stop the federal government from imposing a 
carbon tax on the province. 

 
This is signed by the good citizens of Denholm, Saskatchewan. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who signed this petition are opposed to the 
Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear message, a clear signal, about how 
little they care about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and 
that SaskTel helps drive the economy with its parcel service 
that serves farms and other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I will read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition opposed to Bill 40, and a potential 49 per cent Crown 
corporation sell-off. The people who have signed this petition 
want to bring to our attention the following: that the Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 
per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for 
schools, roads, and hospitals. Those dividends should go to the 
people of Saskatchewan, not private investors. And we know, 
Mr. Speaker, they provided over $3 billion worth of dividends 
in the last 10 years. Our Crown corporations employ thousands 
of Saskatchewan people across the province. 
 
Under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations are exempt from corporate income tax, provided 
not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a government 
or province. The Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 
per cent of a Crown to be sold without being considered 
privatized. This short-sighted legislation risks sending millions 
of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request the Government of 
Saskatchewan to immediately stop the passage of Bill 40, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act and start protecting jobs 
and our Crown corporations instead of selling them off to 
pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 

in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
That the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives found that in 
Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 cents for 
every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women earned on 
average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. According to 
the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender wage gap for 
full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has 
had to close its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss 
of resources to people in distress. And, Mr. Speaker, with the 
recent cuts to community-based organizations such as the 
parent mentoring program and many more, we know that 
there’s going to be a lot more crisis intervention that’s going to 
be needed and this service is going to be very valuable. And we 
also know that the severe cuts to municipalities, they’re going 
to have limited resources to be able to help with the funding for 
mobile crisis. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile crisis has put 
stress on Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and 
other agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to 
provide counselling and intervention services to clients. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s people across the province that are concerned 
about this and they are actively signing petitions here. So I’m 
going to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals signing this particular petition come 
from the communities of Canora, Regina, and Saskatoon. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in the province. Those who have 
signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
to the fact that across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child 
care centres are taxed inconsistently; and to the fact that many 
of our licensed non-profit child care centres pay commercial 
property tax, and this is not something that is done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], and New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. Child care 
centres are institutions of early learning and childhood 
development, and it is appropriate that they have the same tax 
treatment as schools. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres from property tax 
through changes to the appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by people all 
over this province. The one I submit today has signatures from 
Craven, Zehner, and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having 
the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners 
amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence follows them to work. 
Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba 
has already enacted such legislation and Ontario is on its way to 
enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims of 
domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve tabled a private member’s bill on our side 
that calls for the enactment of this provision along with two 
other important provisions to protect victims of domestic 
violence. We’re hopeful that the government will take that on. 
 

The individuals signing this petition come from Kamsack, 
Stockholm, and Langenburg. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Saskatchewan Epilepsy Program Holds Purple Day 
Fundraiser 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday, 
March 26th, marked Purple Day. Founded in 2008 by then 
nine-year-old Cassidy Megan of Nova Scotia, Purple Day is an 
international grassroots effort dedicated to increasing awareness 
about epilepsy worldwide. On this date annually, people in 
countries around the globe are invited to wear purple and host 
events in support of epilepsy awareness. 
 
In 2012 the Government of Canada declared Purple Day in 
official recognition of epilepsy. Cassidy travels across Canada 
and around the world raising awareness of epilepsy. Mr. 
Speaker, this past Saturday, Cassidy was the guest of honour at 
the Western Development Museum when the Saskatchewan 
epilepsy program held a fundraiser in conjunction with Purple 
Day to increase epilepsy awareness, to raise money for new 
equipment to treat patient epilepsy seizures, and to celebrate the 
10-year program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 50 million people have epilepsy worldwide. There 
are more than 300,000 Canadians living with epilepsy, and it is 
estimated that 1 in 100 people have epilepsy, and in 50 per cent 
of cases the cause is unknown. 
 
And so I ask all members to join me in recognizing Purple Day 
and in commending the Saskatchewan epilepsy program for the 
work they do to ensure people with epilepsy here have access to 
the best available treatment; to educate and support people with 
epilepsy, their families, the public, schools, employers, and 
other health professionals; and to ensure people with epilepsy in 
Saskatchewan have access to epilepsy surgery and other 
available therapies. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Melfort Archers’ Success at National Tournament 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m happy to 
recognize the 75 archers from the Melfort archery program who 
competed in the National Archery in the Schools tournament in 
Edmonton. The team claimed two golds and a fifth-place finish 
at the tournament, and many athletes from the team finished 
with personal bests on the weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize our gold medal winners: 
Kristina Therres, who was the top elementary female archer, 
and Sacha Libke, who was the top of the middle years team. 
They both were awarded with the prestigious one-of-a-kind 
gold Mathews Genesis bow for their outstanding performances. 
Mr. Speaker, both athletes are very grateful for their coaches’ 
guidance and their hometown crowd, which was made up by 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

200 people from Melfort and surrounding areas who travelled to 
Edmonton to cheer on the athletes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the athletes from the Melfort archery club in a successful 
national tournament and all the best in their future events. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
recognize Gender Diversity Awareness Week. This week, 
observed throughout our province, is an opportunity to inspire, 
inform, and educate society about the challenges faced by 
members of the sex- and gender-diverse community and to 
celebrate the diversity of gender with all people here in 
Saskatchewan. Although the steps forward we have seen in the 
past few years are significant, there is still much to do. Health 
and mental health services are especially critical for our 
gender-diverse community and cannot be neglected. 
 
One area New Democrats are currently championing is to 
ensure supports for those fleeing domestic violence, including 
addressing housing and workplace supports. This threat affects 
us all, but perhaps even more it affects those who are gender 
diverse and face discrimination that forces them to suffer alone 
in silence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we watch with great concerns over the steps 
backward that are taking place in the United States of America 
today, whether it’s the Miami nightclub tragedy or the federal 
rulings on washrooms, and we do not want to see the same 
happen here in Saskatchewan. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all members to join me in celebrating Gender Awareness Week 
and in thanking groups like TransSask Services, the Trans 
Umbrella Foundation, Moose Jaw Pride, and many other 
organizations across Saskatchewan for making Gender 
Awareness Week so successful. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Saulteaux First Nation Opens Youth Recreational and 
Cultural Centre 

 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saulteaux First 
Nation has opened the doors to its brand new state-of-the-art 
youth centre. The grand opening brought the entire community 
down to experience and take part in many of the activities and 
services this centre will provide. 
 
The youth recreational centre has a fitness area, ping pong 
tables, computer lounge, and even a popcorn machine that will 
provide snacks for all the movies that will be watched with the 
brand new projector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this centre is for the entire community. Many 
elders have been spending time with the younger generations, 
giving them the opportunity to listen and learn about their 
community and culture. This investment is priceless, providing 

joy and happiness to all generations and a positive and healthy 
space for all. 
 
Construction began last October by local builders who were 
ecstatic about the dream of a centre being turned into a reality. 
The equipment installed into this centre will benefit the youth 
for their entire lives, with programs to help see them seek new 
opportunities as well as create and distribute job resumés. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Saulteaux community on a much needed grand opening of their 
youth recreation centre. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland. 
 

Successful Men’s Hockey Season for the University of 
Saskatchewan Huskies 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to stand before you today to congratulate the 
University of Saskatchewan Huskies men’s ice hockey team for 
reaching the U Cup [University Cup] finals. Although they 
came up short against the University of New Brunswick in their 
final, their efforts made us very proud. 
 
The trip to the finals was no small task. The team boasted a 
21-5-2 record in the Canada West conference, under the 
leadership of Coach Dave Adolph. In his 24th season, Coach 
Adolph guided the team to the first place regular season finish, 
and was named the 2016-17 Canada West and U Sports Coach 
of the Year during the weekend ceremonies. 
 
The awards did not stop there. U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] goalie Jordan Cooke was named Canada West 
and the university sport top goalie for the second consecutive 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is much more to this team’s season than just 
wins and losses. Every member of the team has worked hard to 
achieve a common goal. The life skills of planning, preparation, 
practice, hard work, sacrifice, and discipline are inherent in 
one’s involvement in sports, particularly at this level. Clearly 
this group of young men are well on their way to being positive 
role models and strong members of our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskies on their success this 
season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Completion of Two New Schools in Regina 
 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to stand today to highlight our government’s commitment to our 
education system, with the completion of two new schools in 
my constituency of Regina Rochdale. 
 
Regina Public’s Plainsview and Regina Catholic St. Nicholas 
are the two new schools in Rosewood Park. They are both 
wonderful state-of-the-art facilities and will be home to over 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

800 students and 90 child care centre spaces when they open 
this September. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northwest Regina is growing. It’s full of young 
families and young children who will benefit from the addition 
of these two new schools and additional child care spaces. This 
new joint-use school will benefit the community as a whole 
with increased access to fitness facilities and a community 
resource centre. These facilities will be available to the public 
after regular school hours, and they will be the pillar in our 
community. 
 
I am proud of our government’s record when it comes to 
education. Even in these tough economic times, our record is 
one of opening 40 new schools, including 21 this year, along 
with 25 major renovations. Mr. Speaker, this contrasts with the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] record. When in tough times, 
what did they do? They closed schools at an unprecedented rate 
of 176 schools. 
 
Our government is meeting the challenge and will continue to 
make sure that Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and 
raise a family. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Investment and Innovation in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, we often talk about 
how Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and invest. 
However, these are not just words. It is the reality, and last 
week we saw another example of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday the Brandt group announced that they 
were acquiring the Mitsubishi-Hitachi plant in Saskatoon’s 
north end. This plant was winding down operations but was 
seen as a tremendous facility that would allow Brandt to grow 
as a company. Further, Mr. Speaker, Brandt plans to use this 
new facility to produce equipment needed for green energy like 
wind power turbines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this announcement, along with other news like the 
Grain Millers’ investment of $100 million in Yorkton and the 
presidential approval of the Keystone XL pipeline, is good 
news for Saskatchewan. Entrepreneurs are creating jobs and 
opportunity in the province, and this government will support 
them in creating the conditions for them to succeed. We are 
excited to see investment and innovation that will keep 
Saskatchewan as one of the most competitive places in this 
world to invest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in thanking Brandt 
for their continued investment in our province. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s budget 
breaks promise after promise after promise. It picks the pockets 

of people, hurts small businesses, hurts families, and it attacks 
the most vulnerable, all while handing out giveaways to 
corporations, the wealthy, and well connected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, stepping on those in need while helping out their 
well-heeled friends is nothing new for the Sask Party. 
Remember, they orchestrated a scandal that saw nuns and 
taxpayers get ripped off while two Sask Party supporters made 
$11 million. 
 
Since the Premier has so far refused to answer the serious 
questions on this floor of the Assembly, will he today at least 
tell us why he thinks that $11 million is better being spent 
handed over to Sask Party supporters instead of supporting 
Saskatchewan people by keeping his word and keeping STC 
open and serving Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that the auditor looked into the matter being referenced by the 
member opposite. We know the auditor had full authority to 
look into all elements of the transaction referenced. We know 
the auditor went through literally thousands of documents and 
talked to all of those to whom she wished to talk to during this 
process. She made 10 recommendations, Mr. Speaker. We 
accept those recommendations. We’re implementing or have 
implemented those recommendations. 
 
And I would just quote the auditor, as she said on a provincial 
open-line show: 
 

. . . in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red 
flags, and because this is a land transaction, we did look 
for conflicts of interest. And we didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of the work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Services Provided by Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know it’s, in case the Premier’s 
wondering, it’s answers like that that have left Saskatchewan 
people wondering and realizing that the Sask Party have 
forgotten who they’re working for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, upon release of the budget, 224 STC workers found 
out that their jobs were cut, and people across the province had 
to scramble to arrange transportation, including for medical 
appointments and business needs, because the bus service they 
depend on had been callously cut. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
massive broken promise. It was a surprise to everyone, 
including the very proud workers at STC. 
 
You know, the Sask Party keeps saying that they’re not 
privatizing it. They say that this isn’t a sell-off. So then what 
are their plans with all STC’s assets, their buses, their 
equipment? What are their plans with the $27 million bus depot 
here in Regina? Why won’t the Premier come clean on his 
costly scheme? 
 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the budget contained a number of very difficult 
decisions, difficult measures that we’ve undertaken, Mr. 
Speaker, to get this province back to a balanced budget within 
three years. As far as I can tell, in terms of provinces that are 
facing deficits, we’re the only one to lay out a very specific and 
short-term plan to get to balance, Mr. Speaker. That requires 
some difficult decisions, and one of them is looking at the core 
services of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the context of costs we have to ask ourselves, is it the 
appropriate thing for us to invest between 80 to $100 million 
over the next five years to subsidize the money-losing bus 
company? Is it appropriate for us to see the per-passenger 
subsidy go from about $30 to over $90 per-passenger subsidy 
from the taxpayers for that service, Mr. Speaker? And so, 
notwithstanding the fact that those people that have worked at 
STC over the years have done an excellent job, have been good 
public servants, and notwithstanding the fact that this was a 
difficult decision, we have made this choice, Mr. Speaker. We 
think it’s more important to take that 80 to $100 million and 
focus on core activities of government in health care, education, 
social services, and infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And by supposition, sticking $11 
million of taxpayers’ money in the hands of two Sask Party 
supporters is core business of government? Hey, come on, Mr. 
Speaker. And there is no answer to the question. Either they’re 
selling the assets, which would make it a sell-off, or they’re just 
letting everything rot, Mr. Speaker. They’re either breaking the 
Crown protection Act or they’re throwing money away. Either 
way, that Premier’s not keeping his word. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Finance minister admitted last week that they really hadn’t 
thought this through. Well no kidding, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
he was up on Friday last week scrambling and saying that he 
was going to make up some new plan maybe for issues specific 
to Prince Albert. Why not think about those things before 
scrapping STC? And, Mr. Speaker, very importantly, 1,200 
people last year bought passes to use the STC to access medical 
services. That ridership is up, those accessing medical services. 
What’s the Premier’s answer to them? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, farmers and small businesses all across 
Saskatchewan use STC every day, their parcel service, Mr. 
Speaker. With all the ways that the Sask Party is hurting small 
businesses with their budget, are they going to have some sort 
of special plan as well for businesses and farms across 
Saskatchewan? To the Premier: why not just keep his word and 
keep STC open, serving Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would point out to the members opposite and 
members on this side of the House that there are programs 
within government from the Ministry of Health, and I think the 

Ministry of Social Services as well, that support those who need 
to have transportation support for different sorts of 
appointments they have, especially in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear the question from the member about freight. 
I can share with members of the House that when governments 
in the past or our government have discontinued lines, Mr. 
Speaker, that often there have been alternatives that have 
stepped forward to provide freight service in rural 
Saskatchewan. I think there’s an expectation that should happen 
again. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting because I’m hearing 
what the member says. The member’s saying, at any cost, you 
should continue to operate this service. 
 
I think that’s . . . Well if that’s not the case then, if that’s not the 
case . . . The Leader of the Opposition just shook his head and 
said, no that’s not the case. If that’s not the case, at what level 
of subsidy do you make that decision? Because it’s gone from 
$30 a passenger to $90 a passenger. And so, regardless of how 
much that subsidy increases — and we know it’ll increase by 
$100 million over five years if we don’t do something — at 
what point does he think you discontinue the service? Because, 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well now he’s just 
talking from his seat about the government’s management. 
 
When they were in office, they shut down lines. They shut 
down STC lines. Why did they do that? They must have looked 
at those lines and said, at this cost it’s just not economic; it just 
doesn’t represent the priorities of our NDP government. Mr. 
Speaker, granted this goes much further, but the same logic’s at 
play. And so I would ask him to take to his feet again and 
explain how it’s okay for the NDP to discontinue lines, 
obviously driven by cost, and it’s not okay for any other 
government to consider similar measures. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier claims that he wants 
to stimulate the economy and create jobs, but this budget is 
nothing short of an attack on job creators. The vast majority of 
new jobs are created by small businesses, but all of the 
hard-working entrepreneurs in our province got in this budget 
were tax hikes to themselves and to their customers. 
 
The increase in expansion to PST [provincial sales tax] picks 
winners and losers in the economy. Restaurants Canada says 
that this budget will cost their industry $140 million in lost 
sales. $140 million out of small and medium-sized businesses is 
not growth, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s budget won’t 
stimulate the economy; it’ll shutter business doors and throw 
Saskatchewan people out of work. How can the Premier justify 
providing a massive tax break to corporations, the wealthy and 
the well connected, and penalize the hard-working job creators 
of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So now we’re 
seeing the lines of attack, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this 
budget. First of all they don’t like the spending reductions. 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

They don’t like government reducing any spending across any 
aspect of government, whether it’s in our core services or areas 
deemed not to be our core services. 
 
Now they stand up and they don’t like any of the tax changes 
here, Mr. Speaker. I would remind the hon. member that those 
restaurants are going to benefit from a corporate tax reduction, 
Mr. Speaker, as of July 1st of this year and July 1st in 2019, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this, well anything over $500,000 is . . . See this is the 
difficulty, Mr. Speaker. Anything up to $500,000 in taxable 
income is a small business at that rate, anything over and above 
that . . . All they seem to think about are massive, large 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. A business in this province who 
makes $600,000 is a corporation that pays corporate income 
tax, Mr. Speaker. Those restaurants the hon. member is talking 
about is going to benefit from that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a good debate about this 
because the fact of the matter remains. We’ve got a $1.2 billion 
hole in our budget from resource revenues being down. We 
have broadened the tax base, moved it from tax on productivity 
and income to tax on consumption. Mr. Mintz, a well-known 
economist in Canada, Mr. Speaker, seems to think we’re on the 
right track. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, maybe if they knew anything 
about creating jobs over there, they wouldn’t have already 
doubled the number of Saskatchewan people looking for work 
— 40,000 people, Mr. Speaker. The fact is this budget is 
hurting job creators and Saskatchewan families. 
 
Families are already paying $120 more just to keep the lights 
on. Now in this budget it ensures that the average family will 
pay an extra $400 in taxes each year. This budget says that it 
“. . . eliminates a number of PST exemptions that no longer 
serve their purpose and are not fair to all taxpayers.” Mr. 
Speaker, those exemptions helped families and these new taxes 
disproportionately hurt low-income households and families 
with kids. It has gotten 6 per cent more expensive to put clothes 
on your kids, and they’re even taxing diapers. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget stinks. How can the minister justify pushing the burden 
of this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste onto 
the backs of families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The audacity of the members opposite 
to talk about job creation. They had the worst record in Canada 
on job creation, Mr. Speaker. Last, 10 out of 10 — that’s their 
record over there, Mr. Speaker. What’s our record on this side 
of the House? Sixty thousand jobs created over the course of the 
last nine years, Mr. Speaker, the second-best job creation record 
in the entire country. 
 
Just last month, Mr. Speaker, we saw the job numbers: 8,600 
jobs created month over month, the fourth-best month in 
history, Mr. Speaker, for this province. We’ve seen our 
population at an all-time high. Just last Friday, two separate 

announcements, Mr. Speaker, major investments being made 
into this province by miller grain and by Brandt, creating 
hundreds of more jobs here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Their record, last in Canada; our record, the best in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Operation of Wascana Centre Authority 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, they can keep congratulating 
themselves all they like, but the 40,000 people that are looking 
for work right now aren’t going to take any comfort from the 
brag party that the minister’s throwing for himself there right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last spring at this time we were out on the election 
trail, and of course you’ll remember where we saw the Sask 
Party talk about what a great idea it’d be to raise the PST on 
restaurant meals, you know. Actually no, that didn’t happen on 
the campaign trail, Mr. Speaker. You’ll remember when they 
talked about completely neutering school boards, Mr. Speaker. 
Well no, they didn’t talk about that on the campaign trail. And 
you’ll also remember, Mr. Speaker, when they talked about 
raising municipal taxes, Mr. Speaker. No, they didn’t talk about 
that on the trail. 
 
And something else they didn’t talk about on the trail, Mr. 
Speaker, is Wascana Centre. Now as with other organizations, 
Mr. Speaker, when they don’t like what’s happening in that 
organization, they have a move to try and take it over. And we 
see that in this budget, Mr. Speaker, where the Sask Party wants 
to take a 55-year-old partnership that has worked for the jewel 
in the crown of the Queen City and take it over, Mr. Speaker. 
Can the minister for the Provincial Capital Commission point 
out to me where they get the mandate from in their campaign 
platform? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A comprehensive 
review was undertaken by Wascana Centre Authority, involving 
well over 3,000 respondents to determine the overall vision for 
Wascana Centre. The review recommended a new governance 
model for the WCA [Wascana Centre Authority] which 
involves the Government of Saskatchewan assuming 
responsibility for Wascana Centre. This will help provide stable 
funding, a consistent approach to infrastructure investments, 
and a comprehensive plan to maintain the centre, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, Wascana Centre is not the only 
treasured green space facing the Finance minister’s axe. Later 
today the Parks minister will stand to introduce cuts . . . 
introduce a bill to cut the statutory funding to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. He’ll be standing to introduce cuts, but he 
won’t be standing for the good of Saskatoon — nearly half a 
million dollars cut, those costs downloaded to the city of 
Saskatoon, to the University of Saskatchewan, who have 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

already been hit pretty hard by this budget. 
 
The Meewasin Valley is central to our city, central to the life of 
our city, to our economy, to preserving our natural 
environment. And we just had a by-election in Saskatoon 
Meewasin. I listened on hundreds of doorsteps. I met with the 
Sask Party candidate who promised to fight to preserve funding 
for the MVA [Meewasin Valley Authority]. I never once heard 
anyone say, hey let’s cut that thing. I certainly never heard the 
Sask Party say they were planning to cut it. That was a month 
ago. They knew this was happening. How do you justify this 
cut, and why did you keep it secret from the people of 
Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, to the member for the question. Certainly very pleased 
to talk about the Meewasin Valley Authority on the floor of this 
legislature. Since 2008 that organization has received about 
$8.2 million from this government. As members opposite know, 
or should know, many difficult decisions had to be made. 
Negotiations had to take place, and we had to make some 
difficult decisions. Yes, we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had an opportunity to meet with Mayor Clark, to meet with the 
president of the university, to also have discussions with CEO 
[chief executive officer] Lloyd Isaak. At the end of the day, 
Meewasin’s funding was cut by 28 per cent. But more 
importantly, we agreed to work together to look towards the 
future and to be creative in the way that we use taxpayers’ 
money, Mr. Speaker.  
 
What we indicated as a government was that everything was on 
the table. We challenged groups to work with us. The groups 
that I fore-mentioned have taken on that challenge. I look 
forward to working with them as we move forward for the 
betterment of the people of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Financial Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t sound like the 
minister is getting the message: stop cutting Meewasin Valley 
Authority and keep your hands off of Wascana Park. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they should also keep their hands off slapping our 
municipalities in other ways too. 
 
They’re downloading $36 million onto municipalities by cutting 
grants in lieu of taxes at SaskPower and SaskEnergy. And 
because municipalities can’t run deficits, the Sask Party is 
forcing even more tax hikes with their budget. 
 
Why is the minister forcing municipalities to pick up the tab for 
the last decade of Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, just to be clear, we’re 
not taxing the municipalities. We don’t have that authority. But 
however, there were very, very difficult decisions that had to be 
made in this budget. And we were very clear with all our third 
party partners in every sector that we were going to all work 
together and share in the pain of bringing our budget to balance, 
and bring it to balance we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been no sector that has received more support from 
this government than our municipal partners. Municipal 
revenue sharing has more than doubled from this government, 
and for the cities of Regina and Saskatoon it has been two and a 
half times as much as it used to be under the previous 
administration which, if the members opposite forget, the 
previous administration were NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since we formed government, almost $2 billion has flowed 
through that program to our municipal partners. Mr. Speaker, 
when we spoke with SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], the Premier was very 
clear time and time again. Everything was on the table 
including grants in lieu. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, they’re the ones that got us in 
this financial mess. They are responsible. If the minister won’t 
take my word for it, maybe she’ll listen to Saskatchewan’s 
mayors. Regina Mayor Michael Fougere said, “That is 
significant downloading to our city.” The Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association said, “Our members are outraged, 
and so are we.” Saskatoon city councillor and former 
Conservative candidate, Randy Donauer, said, “This is a 
transfer of a tax burden from one level of government to 
another because they can.” 
 
These municipal leaders are rightly and understandably 
outraged over the government’s short-sighted and irresponsible 
decision to cut a vital source of funding for urban communities. 
Will the minister do the right thing and stop these cuts, or will 
she keep plowing ahead with her plan for fewer services and 
higher taxes? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the cities that the 
member opposite was just talking about, quite frankly, have 
pretty significant reserves. And, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t call 
transferring almost $2 billion to our municipal partners 
downloading. I’d actually call it uploading, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t think they want to go back to the revenue-sharing formula 
that was under the NDP. Oh, but there was no formula. They 
had to guess from year to year what else the NDP would cut 
when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On top of the record municipal revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has made record infrastructure investments in 
our major communities around this province. Mr. Speaker, the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

revenue sharing to Saskatoon and Regina alone have each 
increased by over two and a half times, Mr. Speaker. But we 
know this is a challenging budget, Mr. Speaker. We know we 
all have responsibility to help us bring the government back to 
balance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries and Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More shirking of 
responsibility and more downloading of cost. Now we know 
that the Sask Party don’t find libraries all that important. The 
minister has made that very clear. But if after years of zero per 
cent funding increases and struggling to maintain basic services, 
and despite the number of library users increasing every year, 
our libraries only expected enough funding from this 
government to be able to just get by. But this budget made 
devastating cuts to libraries, eliminating more than 50 per cent 
of their funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this decision has put many of our libraries into 
crisis mode. They were given no warning about these massive 
cuts. Cuts to services are inevitable, and some libraries may 
even be forced to close their doors. Mr. Speaker, our libraries 
are a hub for community programming, and they encourage and 
instill the love of literacy in our children all across the province. 
My question is this: how can the minister justify this terrible 
cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in our province we have one library for every 4,000 citizens. 
We have small towns that have a municipal library in a 
municipal building. A few blocks away, we have a school 
library. We need to look at what kind of efficiencies, what kind 
of co-location can exist. We want to work with our libraries to 
adjust how they can deliver services within the available 
funding levels. Our focus is on supporting things like electronic 
resources, interlibrary loans, CommunityNet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work with our libraries. We 
believe in literacy. We believe in education. We want to support 
our students. We want to support the citizens of our province. 
But, Mr. Speaker, sometimes we have to recognize that the 
needs have changed. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to continue to 
work with them to make sure that we’re able to continue the 
best possible service we can in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, believing in them and supporting 
them are two very different things. And I would suggest that it 
is well past time that that minister, and perhaps some of his 
colleagues, step foot into a library and maybe into a classroom 
while they’re at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just libraries that are facing funding cuts 
from that minister. Millions, millions were cut from education, 
and all school divisions all across this province are being forced 

to make deep cuts. 
 
The cuts to schools in Swift Current alone total nearly $6 
million, with the school division saying that, quote, everything 
is on the table, when it comes to the cuts that they are going to 
have to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education property taxes are going up and funding 
to education is going down. Why is the education tax money 
not going to school divisions and directly to our kids’ 
classrooms? And how can this minister justify using the money 
meant for our kids’ classrooms to pay off the debt created by 
this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
talked about libraries. And I want to just mention a few things 
about libraries. Since 2007, the items checked out of our 
libraries in our province has dropped by 1.6 million items. The 
number of library cards has dropped by 175,000. Over 90 
Saskatchewan rural communities with a library also have a 
library in their school. 
 
We believe that there’s opportunities to combine resources in 
those communities. For example, if you drive between 
Martensville and Langham, a distance of 35 kilometres, you 
will pass five libraries, all within 15 minutes of Saskatoon. If 
you drive from Indian Head to Regina, you’ll pass four 
libraries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the percentage of provincial funding that went to 
Regina’s library was 2.75, 3 per cent in Saskatoon. We’ll work 
with the municipalities. We believe in the citizens. We don’t 
believe in what the members opposite are trying to do. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, 
The Education Property Tax Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe I heard the minister introduce Bill 
No. 48. It has been moved that Bill 48 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, 
The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 49 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, The 
Provincial Capital Commission Act be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Central 
Services that Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital Commission 
Act be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, The 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 51, The 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — The bill will be read at the next sitting of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment 

Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 52, The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport that Bill 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

answers to questions 280 to 283. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 280 to 283. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to be 
able to stand in my place and respond to the budget that was 
released last week. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s something that I 
want to do first. 
 
Those of us who have served in government, regardless of 
which side of the House we currently sit on, Mr. Speaker, 
understand the dedication and expertise that our amazing public 
service brings to their jobs, and it allows us to do our jobs. 
 
I had the honour of working with Nithi Govindasamy, who is 
the deputy minister of Highways. He was formerly an associate 
deputy minister of Agriculture. But, Mr. Speaker, he has 40 
years of public service under his belt and will be retiring next 
week. 
 
And I wanted to take this opportunity quite publicly to thank 
Nithi for his many, many years of dedication, Mr. Speaker, not 
just to our province but to Alberta as well, and to thank his wife 
for her patience and letting Nithi do what he does. He works so 
very hard, probably harder than most of us would like him to, 
and I know that he’s looking forward to having some downtime. 
 
He’s worn many hats while working in different governments, 
Mr. Speaker, but I know his favourite one is being a grandpa. 
And I’m so looking forward to Nithi having an opportunity to 
spend more time with his grandson. 
 
So I would ask all of my colleagues, quite honestly, to thank 
Nithi if you see him in the halls — he’s only got a few days left 
— but to thank him for his service as well, Mr. Speaker. He 
deserves our gratitude and thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some of the highlights of the 
budget, specifically how they pertain to my constituency. I got 
to the office this morning and got a text from my constituency 
assistant, Whitney, to let me know that there is being dirt 
moved at the Warman interchange site on Highway 11, and I’m 
pretty excited about that. 
 
And there’s just over $26 million in this budget to go towards 
the construction of overpasses at both Warman and 

Martensville. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, those two 
communities are about the fastest growing in the entire country, 
and the traffic on Highway 11 and Highway 12 is growing 
every day. So those interchanges are very important and there’s 
money in this budget for that. 
 
I did a statement last week, Mr. Speaker, about schools that are 
going to be opening both in Warman and Martensville. Over the 
course of the last few years . . . And I realize the boundaries 
have changed a little bit but there was some major 
improvements in other communities. But, Mr. Speaker, there 
was a middle years school in Warman in 2009, major 
renovations to the Martensville High School in 2010, and these 
four new schools that are going to be opening this fall. Every 
time I’m back in the riding, I drive past them just to check on 
progress. I am looking forward to the ribbon cuttings this fall. 
Our schools are very crowded as these communities are 
growing and I’m pleased that these schools are going to be 
opening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did highlight some of the work that’s being done 
on the interchanges, but, Mr. Speaker, I have to say the 
difference between now and when I was first elected on the 
roads in my constituency . . . It was actually just about three 
weeks ago was my 10-year anniversary of being sworn in as an 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in the months leading up to that event, I drove all over 
the constituency during the nomination process to talk to folks 
and then obviously during the by-election. And at the time I had 
a little Neon — you can judge me for that car choice if you 
want — but I had a little Neon, which probably makes the 
situation feel even worse. But I remember driving out to 
communities like Hepburn and Dalmeny, and you’re driving 
from side to side just to avoid all the potholes. The roads were 
atrocious. They were falling apart. 
 
I remember shortly after arriving in this Chamber in opposition, 
the member for Athabasca was the Highways minister at the 
time and I wrote him a letter and I invited him to come out to 
my riding and drive these roads because I thought it was 
important for him to understand what my communities were 
facing. Those communities were growing very quickly at that 
time as well. Well he denied my request; he didn’t come out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say that in the years since the 
NDP started sitting over there and we were sitting over here, 
that there’s been major, major projects, Mr. Speaker. You have 
to go drive around the riding now and it’s like night and day. 
It’s hard to believe it’s even the same place. Major renovations 
— the relocation of 305 between Warman and Martensville, the 
upgrading and resurfacing of 305 between Martensville and 
Dalmeny, a complete reconstruction of the Dalmeny access 
road, 684, which was treacherous before, Mr. Speaker; and then 
of course the interchanges. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So I’m very proud of the work that our government has been 
doing in my community, and I know that it came up again today 
about revenue sharing. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I know 
the minister responsible highlighted some of the increases to 
other communities, but in Martensville between 2007 and this 
year’s budget, Martensville’s revenue sharing increased by 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

259 per cent. And in Warman, Mr. Speaker, their increase in 
revenue sharing since 2007 when the NDP were in government 
is 327 per cent, Mr. Speaker. These are astronomical increases 
for these communities, and I think our dedication to these 
communities is well known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that during the budget there was a 
number of different tax changes that were implemented, and I 
know I was back home in my riding this last weekend and 
people tend to have heard only one side of the story. So they 
understand the PST has increased to realize some additional 
revenues for us. But what they didn’t understand, Mr. Speaker, 
is that for the lowest income earners that the low-income tax 
credit has also been increased. They didn’t know that their 
income taxes were being reduced, so I quite enjoyed having 
conversations with folks at home to explain to them the entire 
story, because that isn’t always what is relayed. I know people 
talk amongst themselves and sometimes the bad-news part of a 
budget is what people talk about, not necessarily the good-news 
stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there is good news in this, because even with these tax 
changes there is still considerably less tax being paid by 
Saskatchewan families now than in 2007. That’s taking into 
account the PST increase, Mr. Speaker. And the one thing that 
we won’t find in here on the tax side is a carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. I think we’ve been very clear that that is not 
something that we are going to be entertaining and, you know, 
all the advice from the NDP in Alberta aside, I think we’ll 
continue to make our own decisions and not go down the path 
that they are going down, Mr. Speaker, which is massive 
deficits and having a carbon tax imposed on their jurisdiction. 
 
This is truly a made-in-Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Speaker, and it 
is a plan. It is a plan to get back to balance within three years, 
and within that mandate, while there are some tax increases, we 
are also lowering taxes as I said, with reductions to personal 
income tax and to corporate tax. 
 
And I found it interesting during question period when we were 
talking about . . . There was a question about restaurants and 
that they would be paying less corporate tax. The Finance critic 
and the Leader of the Opposition, they seem to think just 
because it’s called a corporation that it’s some big, huge 
multinational. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was just talking to my 
seatmate. Just about every farmer that he knows in this province 
is incorporated, which means they pay corporate tax. 
Restaurants for the most part I would imagine would be 
incorporated, which means they make corporate income tax 
payments, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know. Maybe the member 
from Athabasca, who likes to tell us what to do, can help out his 
seatmate and explain to them what an incorporated business is 
and who pays corporate tax in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Because he seems to be wholly unaware of the implications of 
that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Probably. I’m sure there’s 
probably some incorporated businesses over there. Considering 
they have contracts with government, I would imagine they 
might be incorporated as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a very interesting article that was out the 
day after our budget, written by Jack Mintz who’s the 
President’s Fellow at the University of Calgary school of public 
policy. And I started highlighting it, and I almost need to read 

the whole thing because I ended up highlighting almost all of it. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will read just a portion of it. Considering 
that the federal budget and our budget came down in the same 
day, he did a comparison between the two, and I will quote part 
of this article. It begins, and I quote: 
 

Two very different budgets on the same day. There has 
been lots of talk about the federal one. Saskatchewan’s 
budget was much less noticed. The Saskatchewan one 
deserves more credit. 
 
The federal budget has no plan to balance the books in the 
foreseeable future. The Saskatchewan budget will balance 
the books within three years, even though it has faced 
plummeting resource prices since 2014. 
 
The federal budget focuses on growth through a plethora of 
government spending programs. The Saskatchewan budget 
uses tax reform and spending restraint to improve 
competitiveness. 
 
The federal approach is based on a philosophy that 
government should direct the private sector. Saskatchewan 
looks [at ways] to reduce barriers to growth by getting the 
government out of the way. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

The feds could learn something from Saskatchewan. 
 
There, the big theme is shifting taxes from income to 
consumption — and improving competitiveness. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

Overall, these changes go in the right direction to improve 
competitiveness . . .  
 
To balance the books in three years, Saskatchewan keeps 
the lid on spending, including public sector compensation. 
Infrastructure spending will sharply rise as well as 
increased support for low-income households as an offset 
to the sales tax increases. 

 
And it ends, Mr. Speaker, by saying this: 
 

Saskatchewan’s budget is a dream for fiscally prudent 
voters: it keeps spending down, starts balancing the books, 
and shifts taxation to less distortionary revenue sources. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, if my colleagues, and even the members 
opposite, if they haven’t read this article, Mr. Speaker, I would 
suggest to them that they do. It’s very well written. And I have 
to say I agree with a lot of what’s in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand, and we heard that again through 
question period today, that there’s difficult choices to be made 
in this budget year. I was on treasury board for seven years. 
There’s difficult decisions made every year, but this year was 
quite a bit different. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a quote into the record. 
It says, and I quote: 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately as a result of this need to 
reduce expenditures, we also had to reduce staff and . . . 
[that is] not an easy decision to make . . . But in order to 
govern effectively, we had to have responsible finances 
and not to back down from these difficult choices. 

 
Guess who said that, Mr. Speaker? The NDP member for 
Saskatoon Centre, when he was a minister in the NDP 
government after bringing down a difficult budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they know in their hearts that there was difficult 
decisions to be made, but in true fashion for the NDP, they sit 
there and oppose without offering up any single alternative. 
They like to tell us what we shouldn’t be doing, but they don’t 
say what they would do instead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t want any of the tax changes to occur. They want to 
put back all of the spending that was reduced out of this budget. 
They stand up and still refer to things that happened in the last 
budget, want that money put back as well, Mr. Speaker. Well 
there’s a $1.2 billion revenue hole in our budget, and how 
would they propose to fill it? All I’ve heard so far, Mr. Speaker, 
from their Finance critic . . . And you would think being a 
Finance critic she’d be better at math than this, but apparently 
she’s not. Her only solution that I’ve heard so far is to get rid of 
a few MLAs and then cut back on some cabinet pay. Well last 
time I checked, that doesn’t add up to $1.2 billion. 
 
So what would they do? They want to be a 
government-in-waiting, which means they have to look to the 
future and explain to the people of this province what their plan 
is. Their only plan, Mr. Speaker, is to take some mythical time 
machine back to 2007 and tell people what they wouldn’t have 
done. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those things are done, and I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, to the benefit of the people of this province, whether 
it’s Boundary dam, keeps the coal industry alive and well in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, something that apparently the members 
opposite would like to shut down and put those people out of 
work. So it keeps people employed. 
 
The bypass, for whatever reason they’re against that, even 
though the Leader of the Opposition stood in this House every 
day for years presenting petitions about getting truck traffic off 
of Dewdney Avenue. Mr. Speaker, this bypass actually does 
that. I haven’t heard him on his feet in a very long time about 
this. 
 
And I’m going to go back to my opening comments about staff 
in the ministry. I was able to go to Nithi’s retirement function 
on Thursday, and obviously, as I had been the minister before, 
I’ve got relationships with the folks that work there. And I 
talked to quite a few of the men and women who are working 
on the bypass, Mr. Speaker, because obviously there are folks in 
the ministry still involved in this. 
 
And the one thing I heard over and over and over again is how 
incredibly discouraged they are by the comments from 
primarily the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, because 
not only do they know that he sat in on a technical briefing that 
we offered through Highways; they were the ones in that 
technical briefing giving the Leader of the Opposition 

information. So when he comes into this House and says this 
project ballooned from $400 million to 1.2, he knows that to be 
not correct. He has been told that over and over again, and not 
by politicians. He’s been told that by the fine men and women 
in our public service, and apparently chooses not to believe 
them. And that is disgraceful and shameful to those people who 
work every day for our province. He is well aware, Mr. 
Speaker, that that $400 million project was tiny in comparison 
to the project that is in place now. 
 
While they’re beaking from their chairs, maybe we could offer 
them another technical briefing on this, and maybe this time 
they’ll pay attention instead of having prewritten a press release 
before the meeting even took place because they didn’t want to 
listen to the answers. They didn’t want the facts. They didn’t 
want the truth because they had their own little story to tell, Mr. 
Speaker, a story that is not correct, and they know that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they can’t go back and say that these things 
will be undone. You can’t undo these things. So as a 
government in waiting, today, 2017, March, what would they 
do? How would they fill a $1.2 billion hole? They deserve to 
tell all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll be going back to an election in a few years and they 
would probably have a plan there. Because, Mr. Speaker, in the 
absence of a plan today, the only information that we have on 
hand is their election platform from 2016, just conveniently off 
their website, I believe. I happen to have a copy. So that’s the 
only plan that we have. 
 
Well even in that plan, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t even get it 
right when they tried to do it right because I have a list of 18 
promises during the election campaign that were never funded 
in this document, a billion-dollar hole in their own election 
platform. I don’t think we want any . . . Nobody in this province 
wants the NDP in charge of math or finances or budgeting 
because they can’t get it right during the campaign, let alone 
real-life budgeting when you’re actually making decisions for 
the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll go through some of these promises that they made but 
didn’t fund them, Mr. Speaker, including the P.A. [Prince 
Albert] bridge. And they said that they were going to fund it 
through the urban highway connector program, which is about 
$4 million a year, and still somehow get a $150 million project 
built in four years with a $4 million-a-year budget. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, NDP math. Nobody wants them on this side of the 
House making those kinds of decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They, in the midst of a campaign, promised an all-weather road 
to Wollaston, Mr. Speaker, not funded in their budget. A whole 
long list of them, 17. I can table it if they forgot what they did 
in the last campaign. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know, and I think the people of this 
province know that you need to have a plan. People expect a 
government to tell the people of this province what we’re going 
to be doing going forward. That’s what we did in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, a three-year plan to get us back to balance. And 
I’m pretty . . . Mr. Speaker, so far the only thing that we’ve 
heard from them is more. As I said at the beginning of my 
remarks, they want all the tax changes to be undone. They want 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

all the spending to go back in place, Mr. Speaker. Just simply 
saying more is not a plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our record is pretty solid on funding to 
important things in this province. When it comes to building 
schools, they say they need more schools built. Well how many 
and where? Our record is clear; it’s over 40 schools that we’ve 
built across this province in the last nine years including five in 
my own constituency. On education, they say they need more 
funding. Fair enough. Happy to have the conversation, but how 
much more? They won’t say. They won’t put a dollar figure to 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They say we need to spend more on seniors. We’ve increased 
funding for front-line nurses across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We increased the senior income plan, something that the NDP 
didn’t do over the course of 16 years. So they say, more. Again 
more is not a plan. How much more do they want to spend? 
You know, put a number down so we can have a conversation. 
 
More in health care. Well the member from Nutana, their 
Finance critic who we’ve already I think established isn’t very 
good at math, said 6 per cent each and every year. Well does 
that still stand or do they want more on top of that? We don’t 
know, Mr. Speaker, because they won’t say. 
 
I have to say that last week the member for Athabasca — and 
I’m quoting this, Mr. Speaker — during a question in question 
period said, and I quote, “I made that last part up . . .” That was 
on March 22nd. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that was one of 
the most honest comments that I’ve heard in all of my years in 
politics, particularly in this building having to deal with the 
NDP. So I applaud him for that. Sadly it was ridiculous and 
honest all at the same time. I’m not sure. He’s been here long 
enough. I don’t know why he’d say that out loud, but at least we 
know what’s in his heart, Mr. Speaker, and that’s encouraging. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do find it interesting. I want to point out when 
we talk about them not having a plan, not a whole lot of ideas 
going forward, the one proposal that they have brought forward 
is to ban corporate and union donations. I thought that was 
interesting, which means that we’d all be funded by just 
individual donations. So I had some time this weekend, and I’m 
a bit of a geek and a past researcher, so I went back through 
every NDP candidate’s election return, every single one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All of them? 
 
Ms. Heppner: — All of them. And so if we’re supposed to be 
funded purely on individual donations, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for P.A. Northcote, individual donations during the 
campaign, zero. The member for Athabasca, individual 
donations during the campaign, zero, but had 11 cents from 
corporations. So I don’t quite know how that works out. Maybe 
that’s all they think of him. There’s a whole series of them, Mr. 
Speaker, where they have zero individual donations. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I’m kind of almost rethinking my position on this because I 
don’t know how they’d run a campaign. Oh, the member for 
Regina Rosemont, the interim leader of the NDP, 1 per cent of 
total donations came from people, Mr. Speaker, individual 

donations. And there’s a whole series where they got 15, 11 
cents for corporations. I don’t . . . Again I don’t know how that 
works. 
 
And the member for Saskatoon Centre, I applaud him. He did 
much better than most of his colleagues, 5 per cent in individual 
donations. But 15 per cent of that 5 per cent came from himself, 
so he still has some work to do on that front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said when I stood up today that it was an honour 
to stand up and speak to our budget. And coming from the 
perspective of my constituency, I am very pleased. My 
communities, their resource, or their revenue sharing is 
something that they’ve never seen before. I applaud the 
government for keeping that in place, for the infrastructure 
investment into my communities in the constituency of 
Martensville-Warman is unprecedented. I don’t know that the 
folks there have ever seen infrastructure dollars go into that 
riding like they have in the last nine years, Mr. Speaker. And so 
I thank my government for their understanding that these 
growing communities need that infrastructure investment, 
whether it’s schools or highways, the things that were important 
to the folks that I talk to when I go home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, we’re sitting here for a few more weeks and 
then we’ll have a summer break. We’ll have some time on our 
hands. And I would just encourage the NDP . . . I know the 
former member for Regina Lakeview took off with his giant 
Suburban so they’re going to have to find another place to have 
their caucus meeting. But maybe they can get together and 
actually formulate a plan, Mr. Speaker. Instead of looking 
backwards, look forwards, Mr. Speaker, and present something 
to the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t know. Maybe the people 
of Saskatchewan will like it, but they don’t have the chance to 
make that decision, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve seen nothing 
from the members opposite. 
 
I will not be supporting the amendment put forward by the 
member from Nutana. I will be supporting my government and 
this budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured 
today to stand and reply to the budget speech and support the 
budget speech. But before I get started on that, I’m going to 
take a few minutes to thank the folks at home that allow me to 
be here. 
 
First and foremost, of course, is my wonderful spouse, 
Marjorie, who happens to be working today, running the store 
that she runs in Moose Jaw. And I don’t if she’ll have time 
because the store, its productivity in the last couple of months 
has gone through the roof. And she was saying with the 
increases in tobacco tax that it’ll probably get busy because she 
helps people stop smoking. So that was good for her store. And 
without her support, I wouldn’t be able to do this job. And I’m 
sure that’s with most of us, with all of us with a spouse or a 
significant other at home. We wouldn’t be able to do this job to 
the extent that we can without the support of our spouses at 
home. So I just want to give her my heartfelt thanks and her 
thanks for supporting. She gives me enough support at home 
that if I go to an event and my wife doesn’t come with me, 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

Marjorie isn’t with me, people don’t say, Greg, how are you 
doing? They say, Greg, where’s Marj? So that is how important 
she is to me back home. She’s my right hand and she’s there, so 
I just need to thank her for all that support. 
 
I also want to thank my CA [constituency assistant] back in 
Moose Jaw. I’ve got Trina Nicolson working in the office back 
there. And as all of us have constituency assistants back in our 
ridings and in our offices, the work that they do and the work 
that she does is exemplary. She helps me look good back at 
home. She gets the answers for the folks . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, and that’s definitely not easy, helping me 
look good back home. She gets me the answers I need, and we 
follow up with the majority of our constituents when I get 
home. Thursday and Friday I make a point of returning those 
calls to constituents, even on those constituents that we don’t 
always have good news for. They’re always surprised when I 
give them a call, and it’s not necessarily good news. We still 
work for them and try and do the best work that government 
can do for them. 
 
I also want to reach out to my mom and dad. They are 
unwavering supporters of the Sask Party. They’ve been there 
from the word go. My dad still occasionally shakes his head and 
goes, I’m not sure how you got there, but you’re doing a great 
job. And all of us with our parents back home, I know they are 
fully supportive of us on both sides of the House. Even if they 
don’t have the same view as us, their parents support them as 
well. So a huge thanks to Mom and Dad, Bob and Rose. Mom’s 
retired finally, and Dad isn’t retired yet, but they tell me they’re 
going to take a holiday again this year, so that’s good. They get 
some time off. 
 
And then there’s my boys. I’ve got my three boys, all three of 
them still in the province, all three of them working in the 
province. I introduced Ryan earlier today. He works for a 
company out in Moose Jaw called Provincial Airways. Not only 
is he a pilot, he’s a AME, aircraft maintenance engineer. So not 
only can he fly the plane; if something breaks he gets to fix the 
plane he’s flying. Hopefully not in that order, but he gets to do 
that as well. 
 
And I’ve got two boys working here in Regina. I’ve got Dylan 
and Geoffrey here in Regina working. Dylan works for a 
company called Duke Sewer. They take care of apartments and 
homes across town doing the cleanout. Geoff is working on a 
loading dock doing shipping and stuff like that, so it’s good for 
him. And he’s got a fight coming up in Edmonton in about a 
week and a half. So he’s going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Organized? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, an organized fight. He does MMA 
[mixed martial arts]. So he does the MMA and into the 
Brazilian jiu-jitsu. So he’s got a fight coming up. So the best of 
luck for that next weekend in Edmonton. 
 
And then there’s my grandkids. I’ve got three wonderful 
grandkids. I’ve got Jordison who is the oldest. He’s about three 
and a half now and he is just a going concern, talks a lot. And 
he isn’t to the questioning stage yet, but if he’s going to be like 
his dad he’s going to ask why, why? Why did you this? Why is 
the sky blue? 

And then we’ve got Jaxton, his little brother, his younger 
brother, who is doing his best to try and keep up with a brother 
that’s a year older or just under a year older. And Jaxton is right 
there, right alongside him trying to keep up, and you can see 
that sibling rivalry that my boys have is alive and well in them. 
 
And then there’s my wonderful granddaughter. So my wife 
finally got another female in the family that, you know, she can 
help spread her love over because she raised boys. And just 
about all of our foster kids except for one were boys, so she 
hasn’t had that daughter to help raise. So with my 
granddaughter there . . . But she does have a wonderful 
daughter-in-law. 
 
So it’s great that I have my family. They’re all working here in 
the province. In spite of tough times, they work here in our 
province and they didn’t have to leave. 
 
And this is where I want to go a little bit with my budget 
speech. So we’ll get to that because when I graduated from high 
school, I didn’t have a lot of my friends stick around. They left 
the province, and they left the province in droves. And when we 
point this out to the opposition, they’re like, oh, we were just 
ready to turn a corner. If we just had that one more year, just 
one more year, one more year, it would have been a different 
story. But let’s take a look at that first. 
 
So forward, right now, the population grew by over 130,000 
since 2006. Saskatchewan is now the second-fastest-growing 
province in Canada. And what was the comparison for when the 
members opposite were in? Population dropped by 22,000 
people from 1996 to 2006. So that’s saying we lost Estevan and 
Weyburn — out of province, gone. But we grew by 130,000 
people. So that’s either 10 Estevans, 10 Weyburns, and a Moose 
Jaw thrown in. So that’s what we’ve grown in the last 10 years. 
 
Job creation, it was mentioned during QP [question period] 
today. What was the NDP record in Canada? From 2000 to 
2007 they had the worst, the worst job creation record in 
Canada, and it was just half the national rate of job growth. 
What is ours? Now yes, we say there’s more work to be done. 
Ours is the second-best job creation record in Canada: from 
2000 to 2016, nearly doubled the national rate of job growth. So 
is there more work to be done? You betcha there is. We need to 
be number one, and we’ll keep working with the people of 
Saskatchewan to get us there. 
 
And we had some great announcements. Saskatoon has a new 
manufacturing facility coming in with Brandt, and then we have 
more farm stuff coming in. You know we take a look at Moose 
Jaw, my home city. They started . . . if there wasn’t potential for 
growth do you think Moose Jaw would have really created a 
brand new industrial park? No. If there was no potential for 
growth, they wouldn’t have done that. So even my home city, 
Moose Jaw, is now taking a look at bringing industry to Moose 
Jaw. Instead of, you know, planning for the last person leaving 
shutting off the lights, they’re preparing for growth right there 
in our home city. 
 
Taxes. Now I’ve have had lots of conversations over the last 
week, half a week, on taxes, and some very, very interesting 
discussions on that, we’ll say. Saskatchewan still has the lowest 
PST of any province with PST. And what was it under the 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

NDP? Well, geez, they raised taxes 21 times in 16 years, 
including raising the PST four times and the gas tax twice. So 
there is definitely a difference in comparison. And how does 
that affect families because, you know, my kids are still here, 
and young families here in the province . . . So right now we’ll 
take a look at my oldest boy, a single person with under 
$40,000 income, will still pay $749 less than in 2007 under the 
previous government. So dollar for dollar, that’s a 20 per cent 
reduction, and that’s with the PST increase. That’s with the PST 
increase. 
 
A family of four — so there we have Dylan — a family of four 
. . . No. No, see he makes a little more money than that. But a 
family of four with a 50,000 income will still pay $2,366 less 
than in 2007 — a 77 per cent reduction, 77 per cent reduction. 
Now if you talk to those folks on the other side, they only talk 
about giving the wealthiest and the top 1 per cent and our 
corporations a tax break. Well a family of four making $50,000 
a year isn’t what we’re talking about. They have a 77 per cent 
reduction. That’s huge.  
 
Now a family of four with 75,000 income will pay $1,876 less 
than in 2007 — a 31 per cent reduction. And a family of four 
with a $100,000 income will pay $1,951 less than in 2007 — a 
20 per cent reduction.  
 
So when you take a look at what we’ve done compared to what 
the opposition did when they were in power, it’s a huge 
difference, you know. I don’t know about most folks, but if you 
talk to my kids, would almost $2,000 in their pocket at the end 
of the year make a huge difference in their monthly budget? 
Yes, huge. Huge. 
 
And back to more. So the NDP claim to fame is health care. 
That’s what they run on. So what was their record from 2001 to 
2006? Saskatchewan lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors from 2001 
to 2006. Lost. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Well it probably had something to do with 
the amount of hospitals they closed, but we’ll talk about that 
too. They also had the longest surgical wait times in Canada. 
Now if you close 52 hospitals, which is what they did, you’re 
going to have to lay off nurses and fire doctors. And you know, 
that’s what they did: 450 and 173.  
 
[15:00] 
 
So take a look at ours: 750 more doctors and over 3,000 more 
nurses of all kinds. We’ve pointed this out over and over and 
over again. They always say, it’s not enough. So what’s 
enough? What’s the plan? Where do you draw the line? How 
many more do we hire? You know, we have among the shortest 
surgical wait times in Canada. And we’ve doubled investments 
in hospital projects, including the children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon, the brand new hospital in Moose Jaw, and the one in 
North Battleford.  
 
And let’s talk about the hospital in Moose Jaw. So you know, 
nobody thinks Moose Jaw is rural Saskatchewan, unless you 
live in Regina, and then it’s rural Saskatchewan. But our 
government, because it’s not just centred in Regina or 

Saskatoon, thought we’re building a brand new hospital. What 
would a new hospital need? An MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging]. Moose Jaw got the first MRI outside of Regina or 
Saskatoon in our brand new hospital.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Hear, hear. Thank you. Yes. That was 
astounding that, you know, that actually an MRI will work 
outside the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. If you take a look at 
the way that the NDP thought about it, anything outside of 
Regina and Saskatoon really didn’t count, including closing the 
Plains Hospital which was built for rural Saskatchewan, for 
those rural Saskatchewan people: easy access, easy to get out, 
to get there from anywhere in Saskatchewan right off Ring 
Road. What did they do? They closed it. Shut her down. Okay.  
 
Seniors. So what have we done for the seniors? We’ve opened 
15 new long-term care facilities for seniors. What did they do? 
They closed 1,200 beds, 1,200 beds. So they talked about wait 
lists, moving people out of the cities. What would have those 
1,200 beds done? You know, maybe they would have alleviated 
some of the stress that’s on the system right now.  
 
What did they do for the seniors’ income plan, the seniors’ 
income plan benefit? Those that cared so much for those that 
need the most help? For 16 years, 16 years, what was their 
increase? Zero. Absolutely nothing. Zero. Nothing. What did 
we do? Well we tripled it. The seniors’ income benefit plan 
tripled from $90 a month to $270 a month. Those are to help 
our most vulnerable seniors. And you know, you talk to them, 
they’re very thankful for it.  
 
And you know, when you point that out that this is what we’re 
doing, this is what we’ve done compared to what the NDP did 
when they were in government, some people have a very short 
memory. Other people have very long memories. So you know, 
you just . . . We have to take the time to compare what we’re 
doing now compared to what it was like languishing under the 
NDP. 
 
So all my kids are graduated school. They all graduated school 
in the province, and luckily they didn’t have a school closure. 
However not so many kids in Moose Jaw were that lucky. A 
couple of the schools that the NDP did close were in our fine 
city of Moose Jaw. They closed over 176, or they closed 176 
schools. So that’s a school a month; a school a month they 
closed. They thought it was a good idea. That’s their idea of 
keeping classroom sizes smaller, is close the schools and tell 
their parents to go get a job in Alberta or Manitoba or wherever 
it was. So they closed the school. From 2000 to 2007 . . . So if 
you’re closing schools, what do you think that does to our 
teachers’ numbers? Well it dropped by over 400. You know, 
they underfunded K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education, 
leading to significant education property taxes and tax revolts, 
huge tax revolts. 
 
There were RMs [rural municipalities] across the province that 
just, you know . . . And I have a friend that moved to Alberta to 
go to university, and last summer, last summer, amazingly, they 
had combines rolling down the streets of Edmonton going to the 
legislature. And people in Edmonton were dumbfounded, and 
they said, how is this happening? And they said, well we have 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

an NDP government; get used to it. Right? Because that’s what 
they did. That’s what happened here. You know, I remember 
protests that were here that, you know, lots of farmers showed 
up at. 
 
So, oh back to schools. I got sidetracked there. So what have we 
done? We built 40 brand new or replacement schools and 25 
major school renovations. So because of that, what do we have? 
We have 754 more teachers, 754, and 164 more student support 
teachers. We’ve increased K to 12 funding by 32 per cent since 
2007, compared to an enrolment growth of 10 per cent. So yes, 
our schools have grown. Yes, we say that. So they’ve grown by 
10 per cent, but we’ve increased funding by triple that — 32 per 
cent. 
 
Post-secondary, we’ve increased operating and capital funding 
for post-secondary institutions by 40 per cent over 10 years. 
What happened under the NDP? Well, they increased funding 
for post-secondary institutions by just 20 per cent over 16 years, 
just over 1 per cent per year. 
 
Child care spaces. Okay, this was great — this was part of the 
file I worked on when I was Legislative Secretary for Social 
Services — 6,500 new child care spaces in 10 years. That’s 650 
new spaces per year. Now what did the NDP do? Oh, 2,856 new 
child care spaces in 16 years. Fewer than 180 per year? Really, 
650 compared to 180? That seems significant. That’s more than 
triple, if I can remember my math. Yes, that’s better than triple. 
 
Municipalities, over doubled revenue-sharing funding to 
municipalities, from 127 million in 2007 to 258 million in 
’17-18. What did the NDP do? They cut nearly 500 million out 
of the municipal revenue sharing — 500 million during their 
time in office. Wow, that’s significant. 
 
So as we continue going . . . Our budget is called Meeting the 
Challenge, and you know, we do have a challenge. Everybody 
on this side realizes we have a challenge. Since 2014-15 
resource revenue sharing has declined by over $1.3 billion, so 
that means tax revenue is down by hundreds of millions due to 
the resource sector slowdown. 
 
I still have family back at home in Estevan that work in the oil 
field, and you know, they’ve adjusted. My cousin who runs a 
trucking company had to adjust his rates from what he was 
getting paid . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you’re the only 
one left over there so . . . He was getting paid at this level and 
had to cut it significantly, I think he said, something like a third, 
to get his revenue . . . to keep working. And he was able to keep 
the majority of his employees working, but because they had to 
cut their prices by a third, well his employees took the hit. 
 
And I remember back in the late ’80s, early ’90s when I was in 
the oil field, and the oil hit the tank and . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I should go back? Well you know, I enjoyed 
the oil field but I’m getting a little long in the tooth and I didn’t 
enjoy working out in the cold like those hardworking oil field 
workers do. And you know, we intend no disrespect to those oil 
workers out there. We will fully support fighting that carbon tax 
that the federal government wants to bring in, and we will fight 
the Leap Manifesto that some of your members openly support. 
And then you want to throw our oil field workers under the bus, 
like under the bus on supporting the Leap Manifesto. You want 

no more, no more oil pipelines. None. And you want to go 
down there so . . . 
 
You know, there’s a reason that my colleague from Estevan 
won with an overwhelming majority in that town, because they 
know what the NDP has done to the oil industry in the past. Just 
take a look to the west and see what’s going on there. 
 
So being I’m nearing the end of my time, because we want . . . I 
want to keep going because there is so much when you compare 
what the opposition did when they were in government 
compared to what we did. You know, yes, there was an 
infrastructure deficit. You talk about, where’s the money gone? 
Well 40 new schools. New hospitals. New highways across the 
province. 
 
You want to take a look . . . like you bring up the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] in here every day, and you take a look at 
the scope of that project, what it was before with a couple of 
overpasses and now, you know, the safety and the concerns of 
the safety for those people on the east side of town. You know, 
you guys . . . The cost overruns that you guys talk about that 
aren’t real. That is two different projects you’re talking about. 
Two different projects. So you talk to the people on the east 
side of Regina and see if they think any one of those overpasses 
should be cut out, any one of them. What’s the price of a life? 
You guys sit there and giggle about it but, you know, those 
people fought long and hard to get those overpasses over there. 
 
So I want . . . You know, this was a tough budget. It was. And 
we’ve said that. We had the minister out in Moose Jaw this 
morning, and a tough budget, so not . . . There are positive 
budget reactions out there. I want to quote the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers. What did they say? “Budget supports 
agriculture.” Of course it supports agriculture. Christa Dao from 
Global News on Twitter, and I quote: “Re: #skpoli education, 
school boards will not be amalgamated. #saskSSBA Shawn 
Davidson said glad provinces listened to school and teachers.” 
Okay, SARM: “SARM applauds provincial government 
commitment to revenue sharing.” Another one: “Thank you 
Minister [Reiter, Jim Reiter] . . . for including SK boys in 
#HPV vax program . . . This will prevent cancer & save lives.” 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, there is positive reaction out there. It 
is not doom and gloom. That’s the difference between the NDP 
and us. We have a plan. And this is the first time that, you 
know, we as a government have sat down and we have not a 
one-year budget but a three-year budget. And we have a plan to 
get out of deficit. Not like some of the provinces across the 
country or even the federal government where they’ve decided 
to take and punt that football down the line and not bring it 
back. 
 
You cannot, you cannot build this province and not spend 
money. It’s easy to build a rainy day fund like they did when 
they don’t invest in infrastructure. You know, when their 
highways . . . Their idea of fixing the highways was, go fix it 
yourself. You know, working at two different Crowns under 
these people, I know what they put into the infrastructure in our 
Crown corporations, and it was sad. 
 
Yes, it’s going to take a long time to bring it back and if we . . . 
We have some aggressive targets. We’re looking at 50 per cent 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

renewables for our SaskPower and this is going to take 
infrastructure dollars. They forget that we need infrastructure 
dollars. We actually have to spend money to put the 
infrastructure in place to help the province grow. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I will not be supporting the 
member’s opposite motion and I will be supporting the budget. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is a pleasure to stop for a few minutes and take a few minutes 
to recognize the budget that was presented last Wednesday. I 
want to commend the Minister of Finance for bringing in the 
budget and also for coming out to Moose Jaw this morning and 
presenting it to a group of business leaders and citizens in 
Moose Jaw and explaining some of the issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a challenging budget. We all recognize that. 
We knew this was coming and this is why we did what we did 
over the past year with the transformational change, saying 
everything is on the table. I think the citizens of Saskatchewan 
understood that. 
 
And this is where we’re moving forward, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
easy, but we have a plan to control and reduce government 
spending. We’re modernizing and expanding the tax system, 
ensuring the economy remains strong, investing in priority 
areas, and returning to . . . a plan to return to budget in three 
years. 
 
[15:15] 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, even with the expansion of the PST 
this year, every Saskatchewan taxpayer at every level of income 
is still paying far less tax than in 2007 under the NDP. That’s 
important to remember. Since the privilege of forming 
government in 2007, this province has grown in almost every 
sector and grown substantially. 
 
When we look at the sector of agriculture, Saskatchewan has 
almost half of the arable land in Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen 
crops, the yields improve and the varieties improve in pulse 
crops, and we see the opportunity for processing, and we notice 
that in Moose Jaw in the new industrial park for agricultural 
processing business which is advancing along. The Agrocorp 
head office is going to be moved from Vancouver to Moose 
Jaw. It’s part of the Saskatchewan initiative, part of the 
Saskatchewan advantage of looking at head offices to move into 
a province that is aggressive and looking forward to building. 
 
When we look at forestry, the sector of forestry, two-thirds of 
our province is covered with forestry. We have good 
opportunities in that industry. When we look at mining and 
resources with the coal, the oil, the gas, uranium, potash, and 
the new K+S mine that’s coming on stream probably this year, 
and BPH mine as well. So Saskatchewan’s expanding in that 
sector. 
 
We all know the advantage and the expansion of tourism that 
keeps our province moving forward, the upgrades and the 

expansion in all of our provincial parks. Mr. Speaker, all of this, 
it is a great province. We’ve known for years it’s a great 
province. 
 
But with all its greatness and with this growth, we need to have 
responsibility, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s how I would describe 
this budget: a responsible reaction to the people of the province 
for growth and fiscal challenges that now exist with this. You 
know, over the past 10 years we’ve seen tremendous growth. 
Our population is now 1,158,000-plus. Currently we have the 
third lowest unemployment rate. For many years we had the 
lowest unemployment rate, but we’re still underneath the 
national average on unemployment. 
 
Manufacturing. The manufacturing centre of excellence is being 
set up in Saskatoon because our manufacturing’s an important 
sector in this province. We realize that and we’ve seen some 
growth. 
 
Retail sales are up. The average weekly salaries in the province 
are the highest in the nation. So you can see Saskatchewan is 
strong. The economy is strong, and in spite of the challenges, 
the fiscal challenge before us. That is why this document, the 
2017-2018 budget, is so vitally important and is a responsible 
reaction to the growth and the fiscal challenges that we are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan Party government came to 
power and inherited a billion-dollar infrastructure deficit. It was 
a declining province. People were moving out of Saskatchewan, 
with the worst job creation record in Canada. We saw 176 
schools close, and that was mentioned earlier, 176. That’s one a 
month in their 16-year duration. Fifty-four hospitals were 
closed with doctors and nurses fired. All this, Mr. Speaker, is 
important to remember. 
 
But to go back to the NDP record, Saskatchewan was a 
have-not province with the worst job creation record in Canada. 
People were leaving the province, and the NDP government of 
the day was closing schools, closing hospitals, and raising 
taxes. That’s right, raising taxes. Twenty times over 16 years 
when they were in government, taxes were raised. 
 
And if that wasn’t bad enough, Mr. Speaker, they made bad, 
bad investment. They have a bad investment record. Millions of 
dollars of bad investments like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company], the fiasco over the potato 
industry. And not only in this province but Navigata, a BC, a 
BC phone company, and Austar, Australian communication 
company; Coachman Insurance, an Ontario company, if you 
please; tappedinto.com, a Nashville dot-com company; NST 
Chicago, a Midwestern US [United States] fibre optics 
company. These are all investments they made not in 
Saskatchewan but around the world that they lost money on, 
millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP record. That’s a record that we 
have to keep reminding the people of Saskatchewan, because 
we never want to go back there. The NDP’s strategy for the 
province was decline, with people moving out of the province, 
businesses struggling and closing, and despair. As far as 
agriculture was concerned, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had all but 
forgotten agriculture. In fact in Moose Jaw the Saskatchewan 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

Party . . . [inaudible] . . . opened an expanded agricultural office 
while the NDP didn’t even have a sign on the building when 
they were in power. 
 
Well after the privilege of forming government in 2007, we 
started the humongous task of overcoming an infrastructure 
deficit, building roads and highways, fixing schools, 
constructing schools, and correcting long-overdue seniors 
support. The member from Wakamow mentioned the seniors’ 
income plan. It wasn’t increased in 16 years of NDP 
government; 16 years and not a dime went into the seniors . . . 
to increasing the seniors’ pension plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, our 
government has tripled the seniors’ income plan in our past 10 
years of office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government started 
building hospitals and building and repairing schools, building 
care homes and child care spaces, and we paid down debt. We 
lowered taxes, started attracting investment, creating 
employment opportunities, and growing our population, 
establishing a strong economy. It is a strong economy that 
grows the province, Mr. Speaker, led by reasonable government 
for the people of the province. 
 
Over the past 10 years Saskatchewan has vastly improved in 
almost every sector. However, no one could have predicted the 
turnaround in resource revenue, no one. Not even the best 
forecasters in the world could have predicted that the price of 
oil would have gone from over $100 a barrel to somewhere 
around the $30-a-barrel cost. 
 
Our province relies on resource revenue to assist in the growth, 
provide for government programs. The drop in resource revenue 
led to the deficit that we ended up this year with. And, Mr. 
Speaker, of course this is a challenge. It presents a challenge. 
And it wasn’t the spending on the new schools or the hospitals 
or infrastructure. Those are sound investments right across the 
province, but it was a revenue challenge with a deep decline in 
resource revenue, a loss of income that no one could have 
planned for. Mr. Speaker, I compare it very much to a hail 
storm in agricultural, something totally out of the control of the 
producer and totally eliminates their year’s income. 
 
I remember growing up on a farm near Lipton, Saskatchewan. 
My dad had returned from the services in the World War II and 
began farming. It was a struggle, and after voting four years to 
support our country, he and mom started a farm. During those 
early years, mom and dad, William and Irene Michelson, 
worked hard to build a home on a farm from an abandoned log 
structure. They worked hard to make a business with their 
mixed farm of cattle and grain. Dad had to clear some of the 
land with axes and horses, and mom always had a huge garden 
to supply the family with a year of vegetables and potatoes to 
feed their growing family in those early times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can recall one particular year, a day and, would 
hail hit the farm? The hail completely wiped out the crop that 
year. The storm smashed all the crops completely. And as a 
young kid, you look at your parents for some kind of support 
when you feel this fear coming on, and I remember turning and 
seeing my mother praying, with tears in her eyes, as the wind 
blew the tree leaves across the yard. You could hear the hail 
hitting the house and the upstairs windows breaking. Mr. 

Speaker, we lost the entire crop that year. You know, it’s a scar 
in my memory that I can still remember very vividly years later. 
 
Fortunately today in agriculture, there is crop insurance, but 
Dad had no crop insurance that year. It was early August, but in 
anticipation of a good crop, Dad had purchased a brand new 
New Holland baler and a side-delivery rake that hadn’t been 
delivered yet, equipment that he knew he needed but now, 
without a crop, could ill afford to buy. He talked about it years 
later, knowing that he could ill afford it, but realized in the long 
term needed to make these investments to maintain the strength 
of his farming operation and continue to grow his farm. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s much like the situation we’re finding 
ourselves in today, an income loss that no one could have 
predicted. Resource revenue from an industry that slowed right 
down, and much like that hailstorm, revenue that we relied 
upon to support and operate the family farm was eliminated. 
Mr. Speaker, that day our family income was reduced by a lot 
more than three and a half per cent. 
 
You know, I’ve talked to some businesspeople and some 
constituents in Moose Jaw over the weekend. Several of them 
are finding that there is a strain on the income, that their income 
is lower, and one constituent in particular was saying his 
income will be about 20 per cent loss because of the economic 
turndown over the past two years. Yet they realize that it’s not 
the fault of the government. They’ve had to change some of 
their lifestyle and caution their spending and address this to the 
new reality. 
 
As a responsible government, as a transparent government, we 
realize the task before us and accept the challenge. Through the 
budget process we have developed a plan to move forward, 
supporting the strong economy, providing the services that are 
expected from government like health care and education, 
social programs and infrastructure. This will be done by moving 
away from the dependence on resource revenue. It will be done 
to move toward a stable source, a consumption-tax-based 
system that continues with programs and support provided by 
government, ensuring that our economy stays strong. 
 
We know resource revenue is volatile. We realize that we need 
to get away from traditional revenue resources and diversify the 
tax base in order to provide the services that government is 
expected to provide. To do that, some hard choices are made. 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s leadership. That’s looking forward to 
move forward. This is a plan, moving forward with a strong 
economy, investing in priority areas, and planning to return to a 
balanced budget in three years. 
 
I commend many organizations that have taken steps to find 
efficiencies. There are several of them and one in particular I 
wanted to highlight because they had talked to me about some 
of the efficiencies they have found. Prairie South School 
Division is one of these organizations that made adjustments 
through innovation and leadership with programs, efficiencies 
and staff efficiencies, program efficiencies, infrastructure 
renewal, and they’re saving millions of dollars doing it. 
 
You know, our government has come a long way in 10 years 
with the wise use of resource revenue from all sources. The 
Saskatchewan Party government has built a strong economy 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

which in turn builds a strong province. The new hospital in 
Moose Jaw is a prime example, the new children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon and the provincial hospital replacement in North 
Battleford, 750 more doctors, and 3,000 more nurses. Mr. 
Speaker, there are 40 new schools, 18 care homes. And we’ve 
lowered property taxes and lowered income taxes while 
maintaining revenue sharing with municipalities, and now 
adding 889 child care spaces. We’ve done this, Mr. Speaker, 
with good investments, good planning, and established a AAA 
credit rating. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So even with the expansion of the PST this year, every 
Saskatchewan taxpayer at every level of income is still paying 
far less in taxes than in 2007 under the NDP. We’re meeting the 
challenge by controlling and reducing spending, by 
modernizing and expanding the tax base, ensuring the economy 
remains strong, investing in priority areas, and planning to 
return to a balanced budget in three years. 
 
Saskatchewan has faced an economic slowdown over the past 
two years. However, economic indicators show that 
Saskatchewan’s economy is poised to rebound. Just some of 
those indicators are: 1,900 jobs were added in the first two 
months of this year; international exports are up by 15.6 per 
cent in January; 11 per cent increase in manufacturing, 5.1 per 
cent in wholesale trade, and over 6 per cent increase in new car 
sales. Retail sales were up by 6.3 per cent in January. This is 
very positive, Mr. Speaker, and very encouraging. 
 
Yet we see the opposition members negatively chirping in the 
province about the status of our province: boondoggles, fiascos, 
scandals, job killing, waste. That’s all the kind of the language 
they use. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re not thinking positively. 
They’re not looking at the facts or listening to the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has done very well in the last 10 
years. Even their petitions are on spending, spending, spending, 
more money with no plan of where that money may come from. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy is strong. Growth 
is predicted at point eight per cent forecast for 2017. 
Unemployment rate is expected to remain about 6.2 per cent 
during 2017, with a plan to get back to a balanced budget in 
three years. 
 
We relied on revenue that isn’t there anymore, Mr. Speaker. 
And no one can blame us for taking the path that we took, but 
the path has changed and the revenue isn’t there anymore. But a 
new path will be created, a path that is diversified with less 
reliance on resource revenue. 
 
We understand change isn’t easy, but it is necessary. Yes, there 
are some difficulties in facing this deficit, but our plan we have, 
we can do it. We will control and reduce government spending. 
We are modernizing, expanding tax systems. We’re ensuring 
the economy remains strong, and we’re investing in priority 
areas. And yes, the plan to come back to a balanced budget in 
three years. 
 
You know, I respect the input from our constituents in Moose 
Jaw North and those from across the province. And I commend 
the Minister of Finance and his ministry for the hours and the 

days and the weeks spent in resourcing, studying, consulting, 
deliberating, developing, and presenting the 2017-18 budget 
that was received just last Wednesday. 
 
The budget helps address the fiscal challenge caused by the 
decline in resource revenue that made up 19 per cent of the 
provincial revenue and now only represents, comes up at 9 per 
cent. Yet we are meeting the challenge. This budget is meeting 
the challenge, Mr. Speaker. I reject the amendment made from 
the opposition, and I support the government budget in its 
entirety, as presented. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 
rise today in this House to speak about the budget. I first want 
to talk about my family. My family’s changed in the last six 
months. I’ve welcomed two new members of my family: now 
my 10-year-old niece — it’s her birthday today; happy birthday, 
Madison — and my soon to be nine-year-old nephew, whose 
birthday’s on Sunday. So planning their birthday parties has 
been a little bit different since my daughter is 23 years old, and 
definitely it’s a challenge. I think I was looking forward to 
grandchildren but definitely it’s been a welcome challenge. 
 
These kids have enriched my life quite immensely, Mr. 
Speaker. But also, I don’t know how people my age do it. I 
have friends that are just now having children, and I’ve had an 
adult daughter for quite a few years. And these kids are pretty 
independent, but still chasing them around is . . . I’m tired, Mr. 
Speaker. I am. Well yes, I’m tired. But definitely I think, you 
know, these kids, they’ve had a lot of challenges in their life. 
And definitely they don’t realize that they enrich my life, how 
much they enrich my life as well. So that as well, and then 
having to put some marriage plans on hold to accommodate the 
kids, which is fine. I’m sure Duron will wait. He has waited all 
these years; he’ll wait some more. It’s okay. 
 
And definitely my daughter . . . Talking about my daughter and 
she just recently came back from South Africa. She was out 
there for a while in Swaziland and in Mozambique. So she’s 
had some really good experiences and . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Next time. And next time apparently I’m 
invited so his family can present. So there’s something big 
coming with that, and I’m looking forward to that trip when it 
does happen. So again I’m going to say, I can’t wait to have 
grandchildren . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are we invited? 
 
Ms. Campeau: — If you want to take the trip. 
 
And also I want to mention my CA, Allison Wyant. She’s been 
my CA since last summer, and she’s done a good job in my 
office. And I also want to just mention my executive. I haven’t 
had a chance to really speak since the election last year, and I 
just want to talk about the hard work they did, and definitely the 
members of my team who ensured that I would be sitting here 
again and very happy to be back. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as always, I want to thank the treasury 
board members and all the time and energy that they put in to 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

develop the budget, as well as the Finance and the ministry 
officials, the long hours and the difficult decisions that they had 
to make in order to get this budget ready. I know all the months, 
the many months, and even pretty much almost a year, it takes 
to get the budget ready, so I just want to thank them. 
 
So I realize, and I’ll be the first to admit it, this is a very 
difficult budget. It’s a difficult pill to swallow. And I don’t 
know who said this, but I am known for always having quotes: 
sometimes you have to step up so you don’t fall back. And I 
believe that. I really believe that the officials really did their 
jobs in terms of having to make those difficult decisions, and 
stepping up and being the ones to have to deliver, you know, 
the difficult news. 
 
But I just want to talk about the resilience of Saskatchewan 
people. Just recently I’ve had a death in my family where my 
uncle passed last week. And he was the last surviving family 
member from my dad’s immediate family, and just how 
resilient that family was in terms of living in the bush and living 
on the trapline, pretty much living in a big, white tent in the 
summertime and living in a cabin in the bush, and how active 
he was. He was still looking after a trapline up until a few years 
ago which was pretty, quite large, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the resilience of Saskatchewan people, and then having to 
deal with this difficult budget and how we are approaching it in 
terms of having a plan and having a three-year plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it is difficult. 
 
And I have some articles here, one in particular from Macleans, 
March 24th, 2017. “Saskatchewan swallows the fiscal pill 
Alberta refuses: Through restraint and strategic tax hikes, 
Saskatchewan shows how to get off the royalty rollercoaster.” 
So I just want to quote a few things. So: 
 

On Wednesday, the government of Saskatchewan 
presented a budget offering what one might call a middle 
ground. That is, they will solve their budget problem with 
both revenue and spending measures (in fairness . . . 
 
Saskatchewan’s plan 
 
On the spending side, the government is lowering 
public-sector employee compensation by . . . [5.5] per cent, 
largely through the use of mandatory days off. 

 
And our office will have . . . My CA will have nine furloughed 
days this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I just want to talk about the economic efficiency that’s in 
this article, Mr. Speaker. So: 
 

Sometimes this is a feature (e.g., carbon taxes) but most 
other times it’s a bug. Taxes on income discourage 
employment and taxes on capital discourage investment. 
These effects can have large costs as recent research from 
economists Bev Dahlby and Ergete Ferede demonstrates. 

 
Sorry, I’m having trouble reading this because I don’t have my 
bifocals, Mr. Speaker. I could probably borrow yours. 
 

They find Saskatchewan’s PST costs its economy $1.41 for 

each $1 raised, and personal income taxes cost the 
provincial economy $2.38 — a substantially higher 
economic burden, for the same revenue raised by the 
government. 

 
Worse still, the researchers found corporate taxes in 
Saskatchewan are so distortionary that lowering the 
corporate income tax . . . may actually increase 
government revenue. That is, the corporate tax rate may be 
on the . . .  

 
Sorry, I’m not even going to try read the rest. I can’t see the 
words. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, some facts about taxes. After the 2017-18 
budget, Saskatchewan still has the lowest PST rate of any 
province with a provincial sales tax. A family of four in 
Saskatchewan pays no income tax on their first 50,495 of 
income, the highest tax-free threshold in Canada. And as a 
result of this budget, Saskatchewan individuals and families 
will pay among the lowest income taxes in Canada ranging 
from the lowest to the third lowest for most, depending on the 
level of income. Even with the PST increase, every 
Saskatchewan resident at every level of income will be paying 
significantly less in income tax and PST combined than they 
did in 2017 under the NDP. 
 
So I mentioned my daughter, and I know the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow mentioned his son. A single person with 
40,000 income will still pay 749 less than in 2007, a 20 per cent 
reduction. I’m not going to say . . . My daughter doesn’t make 
that much. She’s just starting out, but she’s still in a good place. 
 
A family of four with 50,000 income will still pay 2,366 less 
than in 2007, a 77 per cent reduction. And a family of four with 
75,000 income will still pay 1,886 less than in 2007, a 31 per 
cent reduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A family of four with 
100,000 income will still pay 1,951 less than in 2007, a 20 per 
cent reduction. 
 
[15:45] 
 
I have, and I’ve spoken about this before in the Assembly, my 
brothers are in, they work on pipelines, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
brother and his wife, they’re both pipeline insulators, as well as 
uncles who have worked in the pipeline industry for years, and 
other brothers who have worked in the oil and gas sector, a 
welder. So with the changes in the economy regarding oil prices 
and the slowdown of the oil industry, Mr. Speaker, I just 
wanted to say that even though a few of them have had to go 
way up north to find work, Mr. Speaker, they still live here in 
Saskatchewan. This is home. 
 
So when the tax changes announced in this budget are fully 
implemented, Saskatchewan will have the lowest corporate tax 
rate, the lowest taxes on manufacturing and processing, and 
nation-leading research and development incentives which is 
important because they’re affected by . . . You know, the oil 
and gas sector is affected by this, and giving our province a 
tremendous advantage in attracting new investment, jobs, and 
opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when this budget is fully implemented, Saskatchewan will 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

be the only province in Canada with no carbon tax of any kind. 
And my family in particular know the detriments of . . . the 
effects of the carbon tax and how it affects the oil and gas 
sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also you know, going back to family, it seems like people in 
my generation, they’re looking after aging parents and also 
while looking after children, and in my case also looking after 
extended family. So the nuclear family isn’t something that’s 
pretty common anymore, Mr. Speaker. Families look very 
different nowadays. And maybe in the past, you know, there 
was some responsibility of aging parents, as well as when you 
had family members that ended up with another family 
member, their children being raised by another family member, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Regardless of the situation, daycare becomes top of mind, not 
something that I haven’t thought about for a while, but there 
will be 15,200 child care spaces in September, which is a 62 per 
cent increase since 2007, Mr. Speaker. And it’s the top of mind 
of a lot of my friends who are just having babies and as well 
have toddlers and are now getting . . . Some of them are starting 
preschool, Mr. Speaker, so daycare is very important. 
 
So I just kind of wanted to go over a couple of things that are in 
the budget. So for Advanced Education . . . Mr. Speaker, before 
I was elected in 2011 I was a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 
student at the U of S. So any time any kind of Advanced 
Education issue comes up, I’m quite interested. 
 
So in this budget we continue: 
 

. . . to invest in post-secondary students while controlling 
costs to help meet the financial challenge facing the 
province. 

 
[Mr. Speaker] high school graduates from Saskatchewan 
will continue to receive $500 per year in direct tuition 
relief through the Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship. 
Post-secondary students will continue to get their tuition 
costs back after graduation through the Graduate Retention 
Program [Mr. Speaker], which provides up to $20,000 in 
income tax credits to graduates who live and work in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
In addition, targeted funding is being redirected from the 
University of Saskatchewan’s base operating budget to the 
College of Medicine. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we just had an announcement here a couple of 
weeks ago about the increase of indigenous students in our 
College of Medicine. 
 

The College of Medicine will receive a total of $69.0 
million to support accreditation and sustainability . . .  

 
Students will also benefit from over $46.0 million in key 
financial supports: $26.0 million for the Student Aid Fund 
to provide student grants and loans; $12.0 million for 
scholarships, including the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship; and $8.0 million for the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings [Mr. Speaker] . . .  

 

Over the past decade, the province has invested $8.3 
billion in post-secondary institutions and student supports. 
The budget continues to provide strong support for 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions, with $649 
million in operating and capital funding, which is 40 per 
cent more than in 2007-08 [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
I also want to talk about the Saskatchewan research and 
development tax credit. So it’s basically helping technology 
start-ups to small- and medium-sized enterprises as they work 
towards the commercialization of their research and 
development efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I did my M.B.A. [Master of Business 
Administration], I focused on biotechnology. So this will 
definitely help some of the people that I know in terms of going 
the route of commercialization for their research. Typically that 
can take up to maybe seven years, which is quite time intensive. 
But definitely this will help. 
 
So the: 
 

tax credit is being reformed to make it more responsive to 
the needs of province’s technology start-ups and SMEs.  

 
A new refundable to 10 per cent R&D tax credit is being 
introduced in respect of the first $1.0 million in annual 
qualifying expenditures incurred in Saskatchewan by an 
eligible small business. 
 
The existing 10 per cent non-refundable R&D tax credit 
remains in place, but to ensure the ongoing sustainability 
of the program, the total of refundable and non-refundable 
R&D tax credits that may be claimed by a corporation will 
be limited to $1.0 million per year. 

 
So I talked a little bit about the oil and gas industry already 
when I was talking about my family working in it, but also I 
just want to get on the record again what our government is 
doing. This budget, it’ll see a significant enhancement to the 
regulatory oversight of the oil and gas industry: 
 

The petroleum and natural gas division of the Ministry of 
Economy, which is the . . . regulator of oil and gas 
activities, will receive an additional $1.4 million and 13 
full-time equivalent positions in the 2017-18 budget [Mr. 
Deputy Speaker]. 

 
So the funding will be allocated to the following initiatives: 
$600,000 in start-up funding for multi-year pipeline regulation, 
and an enhancement program to strength Saskatchewan’s 
approach to pipeline regulation; 500,000 increase in core 
funding to increase the number of field inspectors in the 
ministry’s field offices in Estevan, Swift Current, Kindersley, 
and Lloydminster; and $250,000 in funding to expand the 
technical capacity of the ministry to support the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s climate change commitments related to the 
upstream oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just kind of want to kind of highlight what I’ve been doing in 
the last few months. Since September, I’ve been travelling quite 
a bit. I’ve been on the road quite a bit visiting schools, had 23 
meetings with education and visiting schools and 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

administrators, as well as board members, and having 
conversations.  
 
And I think my most favourite thing out of this, being an 
elected person, has been the consultation processes that I’ve 
been a part of since being elected in 2011, which has been quite 
a bit. I’ve put a lot of miles on my truck, and the vehicle before 
that, on travelling, and it’s definitely nice to get out and meet 
the people in the communities. I think my visit to the North was 
quite enjoyable as usual. I found a relative in Cumberland, 
which was interesting, Mr. Speaker. And so I kind of wrapped 
that up and then did some travelling with the Crown committee. 
And then now I’m here. So it would be nice this summer to get 
some time at home. 
 
But I wanted to tell a story about . . . Just wanted to make a 
comment about the bypass. I was raised in a residential school, 
and I went for eight years up by Lestock, the Muskowekwan 
Residential School, Mr. Speaker, which you’re quite familiar 
with. It’s not far from where you live. So you know, along with 
losing some . . . You know, I’m a passive Saulteaux speaker. 
I’m not fluent, but I’ve grown up around the language and as a 
result, I’ve kind of lost it. 
 
So one of the things that I lost was, I don’t know how to make 
really good bannock. So I go out to Saulteaux Junction on 
Pinkie Road to pick some up because they sell it. So when I go 
out there, I always see the bypass trucks, and they’re getting gas 
and they’re lined up. And I’ve asked the gas jockey, you know, 
is the bypass keeping you pretty busy? And he said, yes. So I 
think it’s important to remember the offshoots of the bypass 
contracts as well as how that affects other local vendors. And it 
doesn’t have to be the direct pipeline, Mr. Speaker. So even if 
it’s just them getting gas from Saulteaux Junction, I think it’s 
quite significant, and we need to remember that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I will not be supporting the amendment from the 
member of Saskatoon Nutana, and I will be supporting my 
government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll begin my 
comments with a quick thank you to my family, my wife 
Giselle, and my siblings who have been incredibly supportive 
over the last year. And we’ve gained some new political fans, I 
think. I believe they’re even watching this afternoon. 
 
I also want to thank my constituents, not only for allowing me 
to serve them in the House, but also for their feedback and 
ongoing comments that they make throughout the year and the 
reinforcement that they provide for our government, but also 
their positive thoughts, their positive encouragement, and their 
ideas on the kinds of things that we can and should be doing as 
a government. So I want to thank my constituents for their 
engagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will, at the conclusion of my comments, be 
supporting the motion by the Minister of Finance, seconded by 
the member for Moosomin, and rejecting the amendment put 
forward by the Finance critic, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Mr. Speaker, a mentor once provided me with the words of 
wisdom that I share with you today. He said, “Small minds 
discuss people. Average minds discuss things. And great minds 
discuss ideas.” Mr. Speaker, I’ve always considered that an 
aspirational statement. An idea is a concept developed by the 
mind, or is a conception of what is desirable and ought to be. 
Alternatively, it is defined as a formulated thought or opinion. 
 
Especially in this House, we should aspire to be of great mind. 
Our debates should be about ideas that respond to the needs and 
desires of our citizens in the present moment and, by definition, 
formulating a plan for those ideas that finds the appropriate 
balance between expectations and abilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it is far too easy to regress to 
hyperbole and spin. The subjective and objective expiration of 
ideals is far too often lost to the 30-second sound bite. Mr. 
Speaker, we live in a world where the depth of engagement in 
rational thought is predefined by the postulations of 
self-declared experts, better known as talking heads. The reality 
is that it takes time, substantiation of facts, and thoughtful 
process to debate effectively and, frankly, to be a good and 
learned citizen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are in a time of great change, and change is 
difficult. Habits, behaviours, entitlements, structural 
inefficiencies, and expectations become entrenched and 
comfortable. Months, years, and sometimes decades of 
structural patterns give us a sense that we are safe from the 
world around us because of that security blanket of conformity. 
Recognizing and facing change and responding to it will most 
certainly foster a sense of fear, a feeling of lack of control of 
one’s circumstances, and a period of adjustment. 
 
It is completely understandable to recognize and appreciate that 
it is our very nature to resist change. Mr. Speaker, a common 
misstated Chinese definition of “crisis” is the meeting of danger 
and opportunity. More accurately, the definition refers to 
reaching a critical point. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, arguably the Minister of Finance in this budget 
plan has laid out the case for a significant change in how 
services for the people of Saskatchewan must be reflective of 
modern realities, while appreciating that the volatility of 
non-renewable resource revenues could not continue to provide 
the stability necessary to meet these challenges. 
 
Lost in the minutiae of the budget — and this is a complex 
budget plan — is the fact that this is a broad and bold step to 
change how the people of Saskatchewan will pay for the 
services they expect from their government. We are fully aware 
that there will be individual circumstances that will be 
particularly challenged as they make the adjustments to the new 
realities outlined in the budget. We are particularly mindful of 
the contribution of those who will lose their jobs as a result of 
the structural reorganizations undertaken. As in all things, we 
also know that some will see these changes as opportunities and 
will rise to the challenge accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may, I feel the need to address some of the 
duplicity espoused in this House by opposition members and 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

outside this House by their surrogates. Mr. Speaker, the party 
opposite believes that money grows on trees. Day in and day 
out they come before us demanding more money for everything 
under the sun. At the same time they are opposed to debt, 
opposed to investment in capital structure, opposed to a tax 
plan, opposed to smaller government, opposed to investment in 
the provincial infrastructure designed to facilitate growth, 
opposed to open engagement with public sector unions, 
opposed to public-private partnerships, opposed to innovation 
rather than a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition in our form of government is 
responsible for challenging the policies of the government and 
producing different policies where appropriate. Unfortunately 
ours is bereft of creative thought. Mr. Speaker, to enable 
articulation of positions, I feel a need to explain some 
fundamental business facts that might help members opposite to 
better frame their positions so we can attain the aforementioned 
debate of ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the discussion about Crowns is both valid and 
egregious at the same time. On one hand, it is entirely valid to 
debate the role of Crown corporations in the delivery of 
services. On the other hand, it is egregious to cloud their ability 
to effectively deliver services in the long term with arbitrary 
limitations. 
 
However in order to have a meaningful debate, one must 
understand some pretty fundamental business principles. First, 
to succeed in business one must be fully responsive to one’s 
customers and, in fact, anticipating with some degree of 
accuracy the direction of consumers into the future. 
 
Second, there is no such thing as status quo in successful 
businesses. As we have seen, our Crowns, which are unique in 
Canada, must grow, expand where necessary, and retract where 
required to be responsive to changes in consumer demand and 
behaviour. 
 
Third, despite members’ opposite position that money grows on 
trees, there are really only three ways to grow a business: first, 
reinvest dividends, reinvest profits; second, shareholder 
injection of capital; or third, debt. Determining the optimal 
structure means identifying the right mixture of capital and debt 
that provides needed funds in the most cost-effective way. In 
other words, it is important to weigh the cost of capital versus 
the cost of debt. 
 
If we rely entirely on the reinvestment of profits, we cannot on 
occasion meet growth challenges. If we rely entirely on 
government as the sole shareholder, there will be a requirement 
to make choices. For example, do we deliver more health care, 
or do we invest in SaskPower? If we utilize only debt, we create 
a built-in, cost-benefit analysis requirement that might not 
recognize the public good. Debt carries with it a cost, and we 
must be ever mindful that while the cost of debt is low today, 
history tells us that it could change radically, and we must 
measure the use of debt accordingly. Finding that balance is 
always the task of good governance, and measuring debt to 
GDP [gross domestic product] is an effective tool in 
recognizing one element of the cost of growth. 
 
Let me outline an example in real terms. SaskTel is seen by 

some of the people of Saskatchewan as a staple, a utility in the 
traditional sense of the word. The reality is that SaskTel is a 
technology company and must compete in a dynamic, 
fast-paced, evolutionary industry. Imagine for a moment the 
change in the past 10 years in how we communicate, how we 
get information, how we watch sports or movies. Now imagine 
what changes might occur over the next 10 years. Should we 
not be investing prudently in rejuvenation of the infrastructure 
and software to support the change in technology? Might there 
be circumstances where a strategic partnership to grow and 
expand services might make sense? Should we prepare for the 
range of circumstances that might evolve for the benefit of its 
consumers? 
 
Let’s consider another example. Members opposite would argue 
vociferously for a transition to cleaner energy, and yet they rail 
daily against technology that is now being widely used around 
the world in various forms. We continue to make investments 
toward the technological solutions to global emission concerns, 
in part at a cost that may entail certain debt levels. Again they 
oppose these real solutions to real problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Regina bypass, the largest 
infrastructure project in Saskatchewan’s history, to compare the 
original scope and cost of the project from 2009 to today is 
quite simply ludicrous. The numerous studies, proposals, and 
evolution of the project are all fully available on the Internet. In 
fact if one looks closely, the earliest plans before the 
government were in the range of $120 million which only spoke 
to the Pinky Road portion. 
 
Again members opposite continue to impugn other members in 
this House and members of the public, never once with any 
sense of decency, respect, or defensibility. Mr. Speaker, I refer 
to my earlier remarks in that members opposite cannot begin to 
imagine that a private citizen might actually make a profit 
through risk and speculation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my banking days I witnessed first-hand the 
activities of land speculation. It is a high-risk, high-reward 
business, and those who participate fully understand that on any 
given transaction an error in acquisition or an error in timing 
can have devastating consequences, while at the same time 
taking the risks can have a huge upside. That is the business 
they are in, and they fully understand the risk-reward equation. 
 
Members opposite forever criticize the debt levels of our 
government. In fact it’s particularly interesting that the Finance 
critic opposite was talking about a sea of red ink at precisely the 
same time as CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
Edmonton was proclaiming Saskatchewan’s status as having the 
lowest debt-to-GDP in the country. 
 
Let me ask them the question: given the choices to face growth, 
given the choices to face innovation, would they rather the 
prudent use of debt, the prudent injection of shareholder 
capital? Or would they prefer less health care or education as 
we refuse the dividends from the Crowns so they can be 
reinvested over time to respond to the consumer’s needs, albeit 
much slower and much less competitive than current practice? 
 
I think we know the answer based on their philosophical 
history. Where we see opportunity, they see danger. Where we 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

see reward, they see risk. Where we see enthusiasm, they see 
doubt. Where we see engagement, they see surrender. Where 
we see winners, they see losers. Mr. Speaker, it must be truly 
depressing to forever walk around with a proverbial cloud over 
one’s head. Where the glass is seen as half full, to see it as half 
empty. Where there rises an entrepreneur, they only see danger.  
 
To understand our fundamental differences to our approach to 
the economy, the history of the money-grows-on-trees party 
opposite is best described in a couple of examples. First, the 
co-operative commonwealth principles of the pre-merger CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] party reads, and I 
quote: 
 

A community freed from the domination of irresponsible 
financial and economic power, in which all social means of 
production and distribution including land, are socially 
owned and controlled either by voluntarily organized 
groups of producers and consumers, or — in the case of the 
major public services and utilities and such productive and 
distributive enterprises as can be conducted most 
efficiently when owned in common — by public 
corporations responsible to the people’s elected 
representatives. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in the past, communities were built 7 or 8 miles 
apart because that was as far as you could reasonably ride a 
horse or take a wagon full of goods and return home the same 
day. Mr. Speaker, the aforementioned philosophy may well 
have been arguably appropriate at the time, but could you make 
that same argument today in this new, dynamic, global 
environment that we deal with? 
 
Mr. Speaker, even Tommy Douglas, nearing the end of his term 
in Saskatchewan, realized that the government of the day could 
not fully respond to the need to develop industry and sought 
private investment to participate in the mining economy in 
particular. Of course as history would tell us, the 
money-grows-on-trees party opposite couldn’t possibly allow 
anyone to be too successful, so Mr. Blakeney undertook a 
process to nationalize the very industries that were beginning to 
build Saskatchewan. Even today members opposite belong to a 
party whose constitution still uses the phrase, in section 1.3: 
 

The purpose of the Party shall be to promote through 
political action and other appropriate means the 
establishment of a co-operative commonwealth [I refer to 
my description earlier] in which the principle regulating 
production and exchange will be the supplying of human 
needs and not the making of profits. 

 
The profound lack of understanding that profit is what drives 
reinvestment, what contributes to personal gratification of the 
entrepreneurial spirit, what creates opportunity is truly 
troubling.  
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to address some specifics in the budget 
plan laid out by the Minister of Finance last week. Mr. Speaker, 
this budget plan is another step by our government in ensuring 
long-term, stable core services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
It is absolutely correct to infer that there will be some pain in 
the process. We fully appreciate that the broad application of 
revenue sources is a fundamental shift from overreliance on 

resource revenue. 
 
It’s also important to note that some of the characterization of 
new taxes are in fact removal of exemptions that have been in 
place for a number of years. Let us not forget that the tax 
system is a fluid mechanism to which adjustments are made to 
respond to the state of the economy on any given year. All 
governments, including those of the members opposite, have 
made the necessary adjustments to expand and contract certain 
elements of the tax base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no more resilient an entrepreneur than the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. Despite the vagaries of price, of 
weather, of markets, our Saskatchewan agriculture community 
will face the challenges head on and will succeed, as evidenced 
by their outstanding performance as an industry over the past 
few years. 
 
We appreciate and value the services of our public sector 
employees. Across the public sector, dedicated employees go to 
work every day and provide safe, reliable, and responsible 
services to our taxpayers. At the same time, when we go to the 
constituency doorsteps many of the folks we talk to will tell us 
about opportunities for improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our responsibility is to the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and our focus must be on the value 
and delivery of core services to the customers of government 
services. We can never be complacent about good value in 
service delivery. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Our neighbours to the west and in Ontario have chosen to 
increase public sector spending, and their cost of government is 
spiralling out of control. Their idea is bigger government 
intervention in the economy. 
 
We respect and encourage the active role of public sector 
participation in meeting the budget challenge. At the same time, 
we strongly encourage and support the financial health and 
growth of agriculture, small businesses, large businesses, and 
opportunities for innovation and job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must look to the future with new and 
innovative ideas and ideals. Mr. Speaker, not long ago a job 
was almost entirely a physical task. Today and into the future, 
the consequences of change will forever alter our reliance on 
traditional job descriptions and job grades and traditional 
hierarchies based on longevity. Mr. Speaker, today’s job market 
demands a fluid, highly motivated, eager-to-learn, and dynamic, 
enthusiastic employee able to make a contribution to a project 
or goal and then able to move on to the next opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we evolve to meet the challenges of the day, 
let’s make the bold move forward and redefine the public sector 
workplace together. Let’s find the next generation of public 
sector engagement. Let’s part ways with old definitions of jobs 
and move into a new reality of results-based task management, 
outcomes grounded in expectations, team structures that evolve 
for the challenges faced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary, our economic model for the province 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

is changing. So too are the expectations of taxpayers. Working 
together, we can keep Saskatchewan strong and meet the 
challenges facing us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, I 
would ask members of the Assembly to, if they are having 
conversations across the way, they may want to take it behind 
the bar. I think it’s incumbent upon members to at least show 
respect to the member that has the floor. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand and speak to this budget. But before I start that, I want 
to talk about the people that support me in my private life and in 
my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to start with my 
wife Linda. She’s supported my hopes and dreams for over 46 
years now, and I’d have to admit that that probably hasn’t 
always been easy. I want to recognize . . . But she’s always 
been there, and always supportive, and together we’ve been a 
great team. I want to talk about my . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should not have opened this can of worms. My 
children and grandchildren: Stephanie and her husband Gabe, 
and their children, Stewart and Jack, living in Ottawa now, very 
successful, but they’ve never forgotten where they come from. 
My daughter Alison and her daughter Liberty, also in Ottawa, 
very successful again. But you know, if circumstances would 
permit with their family lives and their spouse’s situations, and 
one thing and another, the thing they’d like to do most is come 
back here. My son Lee and his wife Jessica. Lee is the CEO of 
the family corporation, Stewart Ag. And their daughter Josie 
and their son Sam, who just had his first birthday on Friday. 
They live on the farm in a house that they built not far from our 
own, and it’s a constant joy having them there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all rely on the family. I think I’m blessed to 
have mine. And you know, I know how much we all rely on 
them. And you know, I can’t say enough about the support that 
they give me. Without them, I couldn’t have done this. I started 
doing this when I was still farming full-time, and that would not 
have been possible without family. And they’ve supported me 
all along the way. 
 
The constituents of Lumsden-Morse, Mr. Speaker, are among 
the most down-to-earth, hard-working, salt-of-the-earth people 
that you could ever find anywhere on this planet. I’m convinced 
of that. They don’t complain a lot. They don’t ask for much. 
They just expect us to be honest and forthright, and maybe a 
little right of centre would be good. They’re a great support 
group on their own, you know, in their own, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank them. They’ve supported me now through five elections 
with ever-increasing margins of victory. And I consider it a 
great honour, not only to come to work in this place, Mr. 
Speaker, but to represent them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has not been an easy budget. And my hat’s off 
to the Minister of Finance and treasury board and cabinet and 
caucus and Finance officials and everyone who had, you know, 
had a hand in this. And it’s been our most difficult budget to 
date as a government. And you know, I recognize, and we all I 
think recognize here, that some very difficult decisions had to 
be made. 

And you know, the opposition likes to make the point that 
we’ve squandered the wealth of the province and our spending 
is out of control, and then in the next breath they say that we 
should have spent more on everything. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what happened, as everybody in this 
province knows, that’s actually paying attention and is 
reasonable and sensible about it, is that three years running 
we’ve had a 1 billion to 1.2 billion shortfall in revenues from 
resources. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to budget around 
that. 
 
I mean we could be criticized for the bypass around Regina, all 
the schools we’ve built — I don’t know how many we’ve built, 
but a lot — the hospitals, the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, 
the psychiatric facility in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. We 
could be criticized for the thousands of kilometres of highways 
that we’ve built and rebuilt. We could be criticized for many 
more teachers than were working in this province when the 
NDP were in power. We could be criticized for spending money 
on 700 more doctors. We could be criticized for spending 
money on 2,000 more nurses. 
 
We could be criticized for anything in this place, Mr. Speaker. 
But the real people out in Lumsden-Morse and other great 
constituencies like it — if there are any more near like 
Lumsden-Morse, which I doubt — they understand. They 
understand what this is all about. And they understand that 
those members opposite can’t blow hot and cold. Either we 
squandered the wealth of the province and overspent, or else we 
haven’t spent enough. Which is it? What would they, I wonder, 
Mr. Speaker, have us not done? I think they’d be hard pressed 
to come up with that answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk specifically about the agriculture 
budget. It’s a budget that, like the budget of every other 
ministry, was subject to having every line item put on the table 
and examined very closely. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, 
and on behalf of the entire government, that I think we’ve come 
to a good balance. 
 
Our agriculture budget continues to support a strong agriculture 
industry in this province. We continue to fully fund programs 
like crop insurance, with the highest coverage in history in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker; AgriStability; AgriInvest; wildlife 
compensation program; livestock price insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
These programs are all fully funded. Ag research is as much a 
priority as it ever has been, Mr. Speaker, with the same funding 
as in the previous budget, Mr. Speaker, at $26.8 million. And 
we still continue to provide programming for water 
infrastructure, value-added agribusinesses, and environmental 
practices on farms. 
 
Our funding for industry organizations and events stays the 
same at $4.2 million, Mr. Speaker. And that funding supports 
organizations like 4-H, like Ag in the Classroom, like Canadian 
Western Agribition, like CropSphere, like the Canadian Centre 
for Health and Safety in Agriculture, the Prairie Diagnostic 
Services, to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It wasn’t easy. Every industry, every sector of the population 
was asked to give a little in this budget because it hasn’t been 
easy. And there was no other way that we could get to a balance 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

in three years if we didn’t make some changes. I mean it’s the 
definition of insanity to continue to do what you’ve been doing 
and expect different results. And nobody on this side of the 
House thought that we could do that. And so there have been 
some changes. There have been some things that haven’t been 
easy. The fuel tax, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a reduction to the 
rebate, the rebate on the farm fuel. The rebate has been 
eliminated on gasoline, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been reduced by 
20 per cent on diesel. 
 
The PST has been added to insurance premiums, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no denying that that’s a big bill for many producers. It 
is, and it’s something they take seriously. It’s something we all, 
on this side of this great Assembly, all take seriously. And you 
know, as big a cost as that can be, we’ve heard, you know, 
we’ve heard some questions about it, but our producers are 
pretty stoic in recognizing, number one, the problem; and 
number two, that they have to be part of the solution. Now 
nobody likes it. Nobody wants to pay. Who in this room, wants 
to pay more taxes, Mr. Speaker? Nobody. Nobody anywhere 
does. But they’re more accepting than one would expect. And 
you know, that goes to the nature of our farmers and ranchers in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. They know it’s not all about them. 
They know that they have to give too when there’s a need to 
give, and they’re doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some quotes from leaders in the agriculture 
industry from budget day, and I think I’d like to quote them. 
Levi Wood, a Saskatchewan farmer and president of the 
Western Wheat Growers Association, said this. He said, on 
budget day, he said: 
 

“Here in Regina today, the Wheat Growers are pleased to 
see the Government of Saskatchewan continuing to ensure 
a competitive farming and agriculture industry remain in 
the province,” said Wood. “That includes competitive tax 
rates and continuing to oppose a federal carbon tax on the 
province, which will hurt the profitability of farming and 
our whole agriculture sector. On the tax changes on farm 
fuel, they’re in place because fuel taxes are for funding 
roads, while farm equipment is overwhelmingly driven in 
fields, not highways, so we trust that money will make its 
way back into infrastructure.” 

 
[16:30] 
 
SARM, a news release said: 
 

Funding for the Provincial Rat Eradication Program and 
the Beaver Control Program, administered by SARM, 
remains consistent. The programs are receiving $1.4 
million and $500,000 respectively. SARM appreciates that 
the Government of Saskatchewan continues to recognize 
the importance of agriculture and has allocated $388.6 
million to Agriculture, including $ 125,000 for the 
Agricultural Health and Safety Network. 

 
The Ag Manufacturers of Canada, Leah Olson, president, 
tweeted this. She said, Saskatchewan budget good for ag 
equipment manufacturers: CIT, corporate income tax, 
decreasing. Revenue diversified. Refundable R & D [research 
and development] tax credit and Sask commercial incentive. 
 

Headlines: “Farmers take new fuel taxes in stride,” says Regina 
Leader-Post, March 23, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall ag budget, Ian Boxall, vice-president of 
Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan, said: 
 

“I think it was tough and it was tough on everybody, but 
there are some positives in . . . [here and] I think 
everything in the budget is manageable for producers,” he 
said. “I think farmers are willing to do their part to help the 
province get through these tough times.” 

 
Removal of fuel tax: Dale Heenan, grain farmer from south of 
Regina said: 
 

“We can live with that because we realize that they’re 
probably correct. That part’s fair, I can’t complain much 
on that. We’ve had a break for a while,” he said. 

 
Todd Lewis, president of the Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan, sees the changes to the fuel 
tax exemption are part of what producers need to do to 
help the province through these . . . [tough] times. [He 
said] “I don’t think it was unexpected. I think farmers and 
ranchers have recognized that there was going to be 
changes in it and I think the changes are something that 
most people were expecting and I think it’s manageable.” 

 
Ray Orb, president of SARM, said: 
 

So gasoline has a more minor effect. It still has an effect 
but I think because the ag sector is really strong right now 
that we’ll weather the storm and obviously we’re going to 
try to do our part to help the province balance the budget 
over the next three years to keep the economy rolling. 

 
Todd Lewis also said this. Todd Lewis is the new president of 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan]. 
He said, “Give credit where credit is due. The Ag department 
and Minister Stewart have done a good job of continuing 
research.” 
 
Ian Boxall from APAS as well also said that, “I was happy to 
see the province left the money in research for agriculture. I 
think that’s important.” 
 
Aaron Ivey, a cattle producer from Ituna, Saskatchewan, one 
that Mr. Speaker will know personally, said: 
 

“I think the template is out there that we can do 
co-operative type pastures quite effectively, and (our 
pasture [and he said his pasture] was) one of the first ones 
that transitioned,” he said. “There was probably a lot more 
growing pains and hiccups in that just because there wasn’t 
a template [then] or there wasn’t any examples to go 
around. We were kind of breaking ground on it. But I don’t 
think it’s going to be an issue at all. 

 
These are the kind of comments that we’ve received from the 
industry, Mr. Speaker. They recognize that they’re going to 
have to do their share to help with this budget, but they’re stoic 
about it. 
 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

You know, I’d like to talk for a few minutes if I could . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, glad to hear that — if I could 
on some of Saskatchewan Party initiatives in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, things like the International Trade Centre here in 
Regina, a $22 million investment; Livestock and Forage Centre 
of Excellence, $10 million, Mr. Speaker; the Food Centre in 
Saskatoon, Growing Forward 2 program for $13 million, Mr. 
Speaker. Western Livestock Price Insurance Program that we 
started in 2014 and has been a great success and is greatly 
appreciated by the industry. 
 
Crop insurance coverage this year, an all-time high, Mr. 
Speaker, $217 an acre on average across the province and a 
crop insurance budget, provincial part of the budget, that is — 
it’s shared with the federal government and producers — but 
the provincial budget for crop insurance is $172.2 million this 
year. 
 
The $217 an acre coverage now compares to $86 under the last 
year that the NDP was in power, Mr. Speaker — more than 100 
per cent, quite a lot more than 100 per cent difference. 
Increased unseeded acreage benefit with options of $50, $70, 
85, or $100 an acre available versus only the $50 option under 
the NDP. Committing to fully fund fed-prov programs upfront 
— the NDP always refused to do this, meaning late processing 
of Saskatchewan claims. Increased irrigation capacity, Mr. 
Speaker; programs to increase market access for our products. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one thing that has really been successful 
under this government. We all in agriculture remember times 
when we couldn’t sell what we produced and that is a problem 
that, you know, allowing for slowdowns in rail service and 
things of that nature, just doesn’t happen anymore. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve developed markets for our products and expanding 
markets that will stand us in good stead into the future. 
 
Farm and ranch water infrastructure program was a widely used 
and greatly successful program; compensation for livestock 
killed or injured by predators, we do that now, Mr. Speaker. 
The NDP always refused to do that. One hundred per cent 
wildlife damage compensation under our government. It was 80 
per cent maximum under the NDP. Increased agricultural 
research funding by 96.3 per cent over what the NDP did as 
recently as 2007; a beaver control program, not available under 
the NDP; 10 new extension offices. The NDP closed 31 rural 
offices. We’ve introduced eight of the largest budgets, ag 
budgets, in Saskatchewan history from ’29 to ’16. 
 
AgriStability administration moved to the province of 
Saskatchewan where we employ Saskatchewan people to do 
that and get much better results then we used to when the 
federal government looked after it, and much faster results. The 
NDP would not do that. Increased funding for a rat control 
program by 159 per cent since 2007, Mr. Speaker; and the 
largest education reduction in Saskatchewan history; record 
revenue sharing. All of these things, Mr. Speaker, keep 
agriculture strong and keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
You know, ag exports in 2016 from Saskatchewan agriculture 
were $14 billion. That’s our exports just from the ag sector, and 
that’s down from the previous year which was a record of $15.3 
billion. But in 2016, 2016 was a difficult production year. I 
think I can say that, generally speaking. Province-wide there 
was serious issues, but our producers . . . And partly because of 

the money that this government has spent in research, and of 
course our producers being early adopters of technology, that’s 
the second-largest crop in Saskatchewan history under very 
difficult circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canola seed was the top export commodity in 2016 at 2.9 
billion. Saskatchewan exports nearly 22 per cent of Canada’s 
total agri-food exports of 62.5 billion. The top three export 
destinations include United States, China, and India. And I 
mentioned the 15.3 billion record exports in 2015. Under the 
NDP in their last year of power, it was 6.4 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
That is a remarkable difference. 
 
Crop production, the second-largest crop ever at 35.6 million 
tonnes, 10 per cent above the 10-year average. The growth plan 
goal of 36.6 million tonnes which many, including members 
opposite and some agricultural pundits, said could never be met. 
When we announced that, two years later we met it, and we’ve 
met it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, realized net farm income in 2015 was 4.15 billion, 
73 per cent above the five-year average. 
 
Trade agreements benefit Saskatchewan producers, Mr. 
Speaker. The comprehensive economic trade agreement with 
the European Union, Canada-Korea free trade agreement. We 
had and still have, to some extent, some hope for the TPP, the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr. Speaker, which the Trump 
administration in the United States is trying to kill, but there’s a 
renewed effort among other countries to revive talks on that. 
And I hope that our federal government will be interested and 
engaged in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, western livestock price insurance is a recent 
program that we’ve introduced, and 64 per cent of producers 
that purchased the calf option through livestock price insurance 
received a payment in 2015. Mr. Speaker, this is a program 
that’s not subsidized in any way. Producers’ premiums pay the 
whole cost of this, and it’s a program that’s working very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’d better save a little time for somebody 
else. Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, I insist. I 
actually insist. 
 
I want to talk about some of the . . . You know I think I’ve said 
a lot about agriculture. I think I’ve covered the basics. 
 
But the NDP, the opposition, Mr. Speaker, are always talking 
about us squandering money. We’re squandering money on 
schools and hospitals and the Regina bypass and, you know, 
things of that nature, Mr. Speaker — squandering it, throwing it 
away. 
 
Here’s what they did, Mr. Speaker. They lost $15 million in 
Channel Lake. That was a Saskatchewan Power natural gas 
subsidiary. They lost $2 million in Guyana, a South American 
power company. I wonder what possible advantage that could 
have provided for Saskatchewan, even in the unlikely and 
deeply remote event that it ever could have been successful. 
 
They lost $16 million in NST Chicago, a US Midwest fibre 
optics company. They lost $9.4 million in Persona Inc., a 
Newfoundland cable company. Mr. Speaker, it boggles the 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

mind to think these expenditures are better uses of money than 
the infrastructure that we’ve built in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that they criticize us for every single day. 
 
They lost $24.7 million in Retx.com — that was an 
Atlanta-based, Atlanta, Georgia-based dot-com. I’m sure every 
Saskatchewan resident was proud to know that they spent 24.7 
million of their hard-earned dollars in Atlanta, Georgia. I bet 
that gives them all a warm feeling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They lost $6.7 million in tappedinto.com from Nashville, 
Tennessee. They lost $3 million in Clickabid.com, a failed 
Internet auction business. Mr. Speaker, they were questioning 
me on our online auction sales of farm land the other day. If this 
hadn’t been such a colossal failure, maybe we could have used 
that platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They lost $5.6 million in Soft Tracks Enterprises, a wireless 
electronic payment company. They lost 90 — that’s nine, zero 
— point eight million in Navigata Communications in British 
Columbia. They lost $10 million in Craig Wireless in Manitoba. 
They lost $17.2 million in Coachman Insurance in Ontario. 
They lost $8.9 million in Ag Dealer, a farm equipment Internet 
site. They lost 35 million in SPUDCO. We all know about 
SPUDCO. 
 
[16:45] 
 
They lost 8 million in mega bingo, the failed NDP bingo 
scheme. Can you imagine failing at bingo? Only those members 
opposite could ever accomplish that, Mr. Speaker. I’ve worked 
a thousand bingos to raise money for hockey teams and one 
thing and another and we never lost any money. They lost 40 
million on Austar Communications in Australia. They lost $6.5 
million in Minds Eye Entertainment, a money-losing movie 
company. They lost 2.42 in Business Watch International, a 
pawn shop money loser. They lost $2.2 million in Clinicare, 
medical-billing software. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made my point. This budget is a good 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and I support it. I will be supporting this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And I think I better sit down. I think 
there’s another hon. member that’s itching to get on his feet, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . You know, I just want to 
say ditto and sit down, and he stole my speech. I don’t know 
why you let him go ahead of me . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes. 
 
You know, first I just want to thank . . . I’ve been here for, just 
like the member that spoke before me, this is my fifth election. I 
want to, you know, thank my family for all their support. They 
don’t like to be named by name but they’ve been with me from 
the start, you know, 100 per cent support. You know that I 
wouldn’t be here without any of the family support I’ve had, 
you know. 
 
And the people that’ve worked in my office. You know, Donna 
and Lavonne have been there for seems like . . . Well Donna, 

we’ve been there for 20 years, going on 20 years, or 17 now. 
It’ll be 20 for sure, maybe, God hoping, maybe 24. Lavonne’s 
been with me eight, nine years at least. You know, they do all 
the heavy lifting in the office while I’m up here. But I want to 
thank them, my business manager, all the people that help me. 
 
My executive’s been with me since the start in ’99. A lot of 
them are starting to say, when are you going to start thinking 
about retiring? Maybe we’d like to maybe not run another 
election. But they’ve been with me from right from the start and 
still behind us and behind this party and this government for, 
you know, for all we did and for all we did for this province. 
 
And I’m glad to have served them years to see how much this 
province changed. I mean that’s why I ran, to turn this around. 
We seen how tough things were in the ’90s, you know, and also 
going back to as far as ’80s, the heavy debt that was put on this. 
People still talk about it. The opposition talks about that 
constantly. We don’t want to go down that road. And the people 
in Arm River don’t want to go down that road, like the Minister 
of Ag had talked about. I mean his constituents, same as mine. 
They’re hard-working farmers, ranchers, businessmen, union 
workers, casual labourers, restaurant workers, whatever. Every 
kind of a job, you know, covers from one end to the other in my 
constituency. They don’t want to go down the heavy debt road. 
 
I mean you’re right. Nobody likes to pay extra, a little extra on 
taxes. But you know what? I was home this weekend and I 
talked to a lot of people. And you know what? They understand 
that, you know, the hurt was spread over a bit. And if there’s 
money back again, we’ll be spending it on facilities, which we 
have been. Built, when we had money, built 13 brand new . . . 
[inaudible] . . . facilities, built schools, built highways. They 
know that the children’s hospital, they know that money will be 
. . . You know they’re grateful for that, when we had some 
money that we went down that route. We didn’t sit on . . . 
 
The members opposite will say, well we gave you all this 
money. Well why didn’t you spend it then? I remember a 
long-term care facility in Watrous. You know, the roof leaked 
for eight years there. You know, never fixed it. Every year 
they’d say, we need to get this fixed. We need a new facility. 
And we have our share. They never stepped up. So when we 
came into government, we stepped up. That’s where the money 
went: to help this province, to grow it. 
 
And it’s still one of the best. Right now we’re one of the best 
provinces, I’d say, in the Dominion right now. And probably 
when it comes to, for job security and for people wanting to 
move here, I’d say we’re number one. This province is still 
growing. You know, we . . . 
 
I want to touch a little bit about . . . Before I get into too far, 
there was a few things I want to touch about. First of all, I want 
to congratulate what President Trump has done for the pipeline. 
I mean, I’ve been on the SARL [State Agriculture and Rural 
Leaders], which is state rural agriculture leadership, probably 
for, I’ve been going there for 10 years. And we’d always bring 
that up, the state level, state representatives, and most of them 
agreed that it needed to go forward. Yet President Obama 
always managed to, even though he said he liked pipelines, 
always managed to hold it back. I’m believing that Trump will 
get this pipeline moving. It’ll help Saskatchewan. It’ll provide 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2017 

jobs. 
 
I’m hoping that our Prime Minister will get behind it. He says 
he is. I’ll take him at his word on that. There’s still some things 
I don’t like what our Prime Minister’s doing but, you know, the 
30 million that he’s gave now extra to Alberta, from what I 
understand, for their oil and gas sector, and has left us out, you 
know. And I’m thinking he’s probably left it out because we 
won’t sign on the carbon tax. And for a federal government to 
do something like that I think is pretty petty. 
 
And I’m guessing that’s why he’s did that, because he did that 
with the health money. You know, the provinces all wanted to 
stay together and to get more money because health care is 
growing in every province. That’s the biggest part of their 
budget, you know. And what did he did? He eventually, he cut 
every province. But he kind of peeled them off one at a time. 
Well we had to eventually sign or you wouldn’t get the money. 
We’d have been short three and a half billion dollars, you know, 
when it came from the feds. So I’m not very impressed. 
 
And then he’s . . . And with that I also want to just quickly 
mention the carbon tax end of it which, if he pushes that 
through, and I think he’s going to try, we’re going to fight it as 
much as we can. I still hear that door to door to door. They do 
not want to pay a carbon tax. You know, this will . . . Our 
province is just starting to come back, and this will send it back 
and hurt a lot of businesses, you know, going all the way from 
ag all the way to the oil and gas sector which is just starting . . . 
still struggling hugely as we move forward. 
 
You know, the member before me, you know, talked about, yes 
this is, you know, it’s a tough budget. I’ve been here for a lot of 
them, and I’ve seen the government, or the NDP when they 
were in government. You know, 2004, they raised PST that 
year. I was here in opposition, you know, and I don’t remember 
Van Mulligen going around saying, yes we’re going to raise it 
in the next election. I mean, nobody wants to raise taxes. 
 
That’s something, when I was on treasury board, that you look 
at the very last thing. So that decision is made very close to 
budget day because that’s a decision that, once you keep 
looking, we can either run two things. We’re either going to run 
massive debt, massive debt, which the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t want. They don’t want to go down that road of massive 
debt and kicking the can down the road. So we had to make 
some changes. 
 
And people, you know, they, in the long run . . . I was surprised 
when I was out and about in the constituency, what people were 
saying. They were saying it’s, you know, it had to be done. And 
you’ve spread the hurt around, and you’ve also yet though are 
still trying to help where you can as we move forward. 
 
You know, like there’s a few members opposite that, you know, 
were here at that particular time. But you know, what gets me is 
the ones that weren’t. They’re the ones that are doing the most 
yelling. And I’ll talk about their interim leader, you know, who 
gets up every day and just attacks and attacks and attacks on 
jobs cut. 
 
Well in 2004, you know, the NDP government at that time 
eliminated 500 government jobs, you know. There was changes 

were made to health delivery, which included facility closures, 
conversions, as well as reduction in long-term care beds. The 
budget eliminated the farm rebate for retail gasoline purchase. It 
included changes to the fuel tax exemption. There was cuts to 
agriculture support programs, putting together 31 rural service 
centres into nine. Northern environmental offices were also 
closed. And all those cuts were hard on rural and also hard on 
North. 
 
But you know, the member for — and I remember actually the 
time he got up and spoke — the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, he was the Environment critic at the time. His reply in 
his budget was, you know, when the NDP: 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately as a result of this need to 
reduce expenditures, we also had to reduce staff and this 
was not an easy decision to make . . . 
 
But in order to govern effectively, we had to have 
responsible finances and not to back down from the 
difficult . . . [situations]. 

 
You know, and I respect that member for that. I respect the 
members that were there that served in government when I was 
in opposition, because I’m in government and I’ve been on 
treasury board, and there’s no easy decision. There’s no easy 
decision when it comes to cutting a job or a service. But you 
have to do a balance of what’s best for the province as a whole. 
And those are the things that, as we move forward, that we’re 
doing as a government. 
 
So when the members that haven’t been through that on the 
other side get up, and they’re the ones that do the most banging 
on their desks and saying, well why have you cut this, and why 
have you raised this tax, and why are you doing that, yet in the 
same breath be asking, you need to spend more money here and 
you need to spend more money there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those two don’t work in conjunction. We 
seen that in the ’80s. We’re providing a responsible 
government. And I think as we move forward, and the people 
are . . . they’ll see that. I mean, there’s a few that won’t, but the 
majority of the people that I talked to say they respect tough 
decisions. But they also respect something else that I haven’t 
seen from this government . . . that I’ve seen from this 
government, I haven’t seen from the opposition, is a plan. 
 
And, you know, I’ll give one piece of advice, and it’ll only be 
one, to the member from Meewasin and probably Regina, 
maybe the member from Regina Douglas Park. If you’re 
planning on running for leadership, the last two leaders, they 
lost their seat. Now things usually run in threes, so I would 
maybe throw the interim leader under the bus and then come 
back. But if you come back, either one of you new ones, even 
the member from Elphinstone becomes the leader, have a plan 
because that’s what the people respect: a plan, a long-range 
plan. 
 
I seen that even as much as me and Calvert didn’t see eye to 
eye, the premier, but I respect him for that because he always 
had some kind of a plan. Romanow always had some kind. I 
haven’t seen that from your interim leader. I didn’t see that 
from Broten, and I didn’t see that from Lingenfelter. And I’ll 



March 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

tell you what: the people, that’s what they want nowadays, at 
least want to set a plan. They want to see something forward. 
 
And that’s what we, working together with this budget, is a 
three-year plan of how to keep working to keep this province 
growing because nobody wants to go back to where the young 
kids were leaving, population was dropping, and we didn’t have 
money for services. Because that’s what the most important 
thing of running a province is, to provide them services. And 
I’ll tell you what. We didn’t close . . . no hospital closures. 
There was no health facilities . . . There was no schools closed. 
 
Yes, there might be a few hits here and there. You know, the 
STC bus in the rural constituencies, well, will hurt a little bit, 
but I’ve seen it decline. I can remember when I was in 
opposition, the NDP government at the time cut routes. They 
cut, I forget how many towns that time. I don’t have it right in 
front of me, but I remember . . . [inaudible] . . . They even 
realized at that time that the bus service wasn’t going to go on 
forever. 
 
And we’ve tried everything we could and the employees tried 
everything they could to keep that service rolling and to try to 
make some kind of money, but it’s just, just a change of the 
times. I’ve had a lot of towns where I talked to people, and yes, 
one person used it once a month. It’s hard to roll a bus in there 
every day for that person, to collect them once a month. And I 
know that person; it’ll be a hardship on them. I understand that. 
 
But we’ve also increased, you know, money to low incomes 
through tax credits and various things to try to help people as 
we move forward. We’ve also, you know, cut personal income 
tax as we raised the PST. Tried to offset some of this because 
we realize that with the plan that we can’t rely on heavy . . . 
high-priced oil and gas revenues and potash. They may come 
back. They may not for a long time. 
 
There’s governments right now, and one of them’s to the west 
of us, is relying on that. They’re saying that, you know, we’re 
going to run 10 billion the last two years And you know what? 
Maybe oil will hit $100 a barrel. Maybe it’ll hit 150, but if it 
doesn’t, that province is going to be in big trouble. It’s going to 
be Saskatchewan the way it was in the ’90s, and nobody here 
wants that. 
 
You know, I could go on like the member in front of me did 
about the losses. I was there in opposition. Every government 
makes mistakes. But I’ll tell you what. In opposition you’ve 
made a lot more than we ever did. I’ll tell the opposition that. 
But we have made a couple; there’s no, there’s no denying that. 
People understand that. But I’ll tell you what. When you were 
in government, you made, the opposition, the NDP made a lot 
of them, and a lot of them were very costly. I’m not going to go 
down the list like the member did. He’s already put them out 
there. But for anybody that’s listening right now to this speech, 
you know that no government is perfect. 
 
But I’ll tell you what. I’m proud of the record that this 
government has run and how it’s turned this province around 
and how we’re still adding jobs, how we’re still adding . . . 
people coming, and how we’re still, how we’ve increased 800 
nurses. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1877 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1877 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1878 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Epilepsy Program Holds Purple Day Fundraiser 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 
 Melfort Archers’ Success at National Tournament 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 
 Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1880 
 Saulteaux First Nation Opens Youth Recreational and Cultural Centre 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1880 
 Successful Men’s Hockey Season for the University of Saskatchewan Huskies 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1880 
 Completion of Two New Schools in Regina 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1880 
 Investment and Innovation in Saskatchewan 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 
 Services Provided by Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1882 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1882 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1882 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1883 
 Operation of Wascana Centre Authority 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1883 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1883 
 Funding for Meewasin Valley Authority 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1883 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1884 
 Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1884 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1884 
 Funding for Libraries and Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1885 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1885 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1885 
 Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1886 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1886 
 



 

 Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1886 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1886 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1886 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1887 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1890 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1894 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1896 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1899 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1902 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1905 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


