






















































Hansard: April 24, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 76A  MONDAY, APRIL 24, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2271 
 April 24, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to introduce a group that are on the floor of the Assembly. But 
just before I do that — I know they’ll be introduced by a 
minister a little bit later on — but I see we have guests here 
from STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], Mr. Speaker, 
and I would also want to welcome them. 
 
They are led in your gallery by a former Finance minister for 
our government, Rod Gantefoer, who has served this province 
in a number of different capacities and also has been very 
essential to the establishment of STARS in the province which, 
we’re going to find out a little bit later on, has quite literally 
saved lives since we were able to have it established in the 
province after 2007. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming the group from STARS that’s in 
your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, you know it is a rite of 
spring in this place that we would honour those that are really 
best among us. They are exemplary of everything that is good 
about Saskatchewan, and I’m speaking, of course, of the 
recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today, in the presence of and awarded by Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, medals were presented to 10 deserving 
individuals from Regina, Debden, Yorkton, Osler, Lumsden, 
Prince Albert, Denare Beach, and Saskatoon. It was a real 
representative group of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should all be very humbled today by their 
presence, because these are public servants in every sense of the 
word. May I also suggest that they’re our heroes in 
Saskatchewan. They’re passionate about any number of issues: 
about ensuring those most vulnerable among us are taken care 
of; ensuring that we have a vibrant arts community or cultural 
community; that we remember what needs to be remembered, 
Mr. Speaker; that young people are fully engaged, even if 
perhaps they couldn’t afford it otherwise, or their parents could, 
in sports or culture or arts, Mr. Speaker. We also acknowledged 
this morning a couple who have spent a lifetime visiting people 
in prison, at the federal penitentiary in Prince Albert. And so 
these individuals, in many respects, are Saskatchewan heroes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their concern and empathy is not bounded by 

borders either. Their efforts have touched people outside their 
respective communities, indeed outside the province and even 
around the world. It’s been said that noble leadership “. . . 
answers not to the trumpet calls of self promotion, but to the 
hushed whispers of necessity.” Mr. Speaker, these individuals 
have seen service to others as a necessity. May we all be so 
informed. May we all be so directed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in a moment they will be introduced 
individually by their respective members of the Legislative 
Assembly. But on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, on 
behalf of a grateful province of Saskatchewan, I just want to say 
to each of them, thank you very much for what you have done. 
Have a wonderful rest of the day as recipients of the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we would welcome these 
Saskatchewan heroes to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the Premier here today and first off to, as the 
Premier did, to welcome Mr. Rod Gantefoer to his Assembly. 
He’s a friend to all in this Assembly. And it’s a pleasure to have 
him here today and particularly nice to have him here with the 
delegation from STARS — those that serve many across 
Saskatchewan, provide peace of mind. And they respond at a 
time of crisis in the lives of many, at a time where minutes 
matter, and where you too serve in a selfless way, putting 
yourself at times at risk for the betterment of others. So I join 
with the Premier in welcoming Mr. Rod Gantefoer and the 
STARS delegation that’s here today. 
 
And I’m very pleased to join with the Premier, as we did this 
afternoon, to welcome the recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medals. Helping our neighbours and working to 
build communities supporting the most vulnerable in our 
province — this is what we do in Saskatchewan. It’s core 
values within Saskatchewan to volunteer. And you know, here 
today, we have shining examples of those who give so much to 
so many, you know. And that says a lot because, in 
Saskatchewan, we volunteer in numbers that are second to 
none: the highest proportion of volunteers in Canada, some say 
the world. So the fact that these volunteers have risen to the top 
for a level of distinction says an awful lot because we have so 
many within our province that give so much. 
 
It’s also worthy to note that I want to thank the families and 
friends of those that are here today, those recipients, that 
support that volunteerism, who support the sharing of their 
time, the dedication that they provide, and their commitment. 
 
We have people on the floor of this Assembly that work to 
make Saskatchewan a more welcoming place, that work to 
ensure that everyone has the chance to grow and to thrive and to 
make sure that no one is left behind. They’re really the 
embodiment of our province’s motto, “from many peoples, 
strength.” And they do so not looking for glory as they wake up 
each morning. They do it out of a selfless service to others and 
to their community, which is all the greater reason why an 
award ceremony like this and the Saskatchewan Volunteer 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

Medal is so important, why it’s important for us to stand 
together and to celebrate these selfless acts, the volunteerism 
that strengthens our province. 
 
And although it’s hard to measure the exact impact of this 
group of volunteers or those that came before or the legions of 
others across Saskatchewan, know that you make a massive 
difference in the lives of many in our communities and in our 
province. And on behalf of a grateful opposition, a grateful 
province, we simply say thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege 
to introduce Mr. Colin Bachynski from the constituency of 
Regina University who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce Ms. Shelley Fraser from the constituency 
of Saskatchewan Rivers who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce Ms. Lori Glauser from the constituency of Yorkton 
who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
Mr. and Mrs. Harry and Eva Martens from the constituency of 
Biggar-Sask Valley who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
to you Ms. Faeeza Moolla from the constituency of Regina 
Wascana Plains who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce Mr. Reggie Newkirk from the constituency of 
Lumsden-Morse who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Ms. 
Janis Chorney Olesko from the constituency of Batoche who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Ms. Mary Wright from the constituency of Cumberland who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Mr. 
Peter Zakreski from the constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin 
who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
was mentioned earlier by both the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, we have a large contingent of people 
that were here for an event this morning honouring five years of 
STARS operating in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I was joined 
at that event by the Minister of Rural and Remote Health and by 
the Minister of the Crown Investments Corporation and by 
many caucus members as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to quickly go through the list of 
people who are in attendance. We have first of all what’s 
referred to as VIPs [very important person], Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not only very important people, but they’re very 
important patients. These are patients that have been carried by 
STARS in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have Carrie Derin from Regina, who incidentally is the very 
first patient that STARS has ever carried. We also have Garfield 
Beaudry from Raymore who’s accompanied by son Edwin. We 
have Chad Rogers from Assiniboia, along with wife Sonja. We 
have Bonnie Fortin from Elrose who is accompanied by her 
father, George Myers; Fran Wakelin from Saskatoon; Garry 
Gallant from Watson along with his wife, Myrna; and Jan 
Hoffart from Midale who’s accompanied by her fiancé, Darrel 
Druck, and her parents, Adolph Hoffart and Stella Hoffart. 
 
We also have a number of STARS staff with us today as well, 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery. We have Andrea Robertson who 
is the CEO [chief executive officer] of STARS. We have Ron 
Dufresne. We have Mike Lamacchia, Denise Belman, and also 
of course a couple people that the Premier introduced earlier 
and need no introduction in this House, Rod and Carole 
Gantefoer. We have Cindy Seidl. We have Mark Oddan, Megan 
Burns, Vanessa Headford, Fred Matiko, Darcy McKay, Greg 
Chorney, Denise Treleaven, Brenda Barootes, Beverley Douan, 
John Antal, Lyle Aspinall, Michael Nelson, Reagan Gardiner, 
and Jason Prokopetz. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to hear more about STARS during the 
members’ statements in just a few minutes. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take this opportunity to ask all my colleagues to join 
with me in welcoming the contingent from STARS to their 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming the delegation here today 
from STARS. Mr. Gantefoer, it’s very good to see you here 
today. As everybody else, the very important patients, I’m very 
glad to see you here today and that your outcome, thanks to 
STARS and our health care teams here in Saskatchewan, that 
you’re here today to celebrate five years of STARS. 
 
A big thank you, of course, to the paramedics, the nurses, and 
of course the flight staff who provide compassionate and 
professional care on what is often people’s worst day. So thank 
you for all that you do to make sure people have the care that 
they need in a timely fashion. So thank you and congratulations 
on your five years. With that, I’d like to ask my colleagues to 
also join in welcoming these folks to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming a 
group up in your west gallery. They’re from Campbell 
Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, grade 11 and 12 students from a 
history 30 class. They’re accompanied by Ms. Jill Labas and 
Mrs. Amanda Ebbett. 
 
It’s a great day for you to be here to see one of your school’s 
alumni be recognized, as well as a teacher, and the Bachynski 
family are also up in the west gallery, who are alumni. I’d like 
to have all members join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. I’m looking forward to talking to you 
shortly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I was 
remiss earlier on in not introducing another fairly famous 
individual that’s joined us in the west gallery. The guitarist for 
League of Wolves, Aspen Beveridge, is here in support of one 
of the volunteer medal recipients. And I had a chance to visit 
with Aspen; I think they’re going into the studio here shortly in 
Toronto. This is a great band; another, well, another of the 
many great bands we have coming from the province of 
Saskatchewan. But League of Wolves is certainly finding some 
well-deserved success, and I just want to welcome him to his 
Assembly and wish them all the best in the studio. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in fact we do have some 
real star power in this Chamber here today, and certainly it’s a 
pleasure to join and welcome the member from League of 
Wolves that’s here as well. 
 
But I also see a friend to many in this Assembly and a leader 
within our community and someone who’s recognized on the 

national and international scene, that being Ms. Zarqa Nawaz, 
the creator of Little Mosque on the Prairie, someone who’s a 
voice of clarity within the community, often at difficult times 
and dealing with sometimes difficult circumstances, and a 
powerful voice in our province as a province of many faiths, of 
many peoples, and someone that I have certainly grown to 
admire greatly within our community. So it’s my pleasure to 
welcome Ms. Zarqa Nawaz to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce two very 
special guests in your gallery today. Larry Kowalchuk, no 
stranger to many of us; his commitment to social justice and 
human rights is well known. Today he brings his son on his 
birthday, Micah Kowalchuk. I guess he’s a little older than 
typically we would think father and son relationships, but we 
think on his birthday Larry thought it would be great to bring 
his son to this legislature. Micah is also a serving, a practising 
lawyer in Saskatoon. So I would ask all members to welcome 
Larry and Micah to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the members opposite in welcoming Mr. Kowalchuk and 
his son to the legislature today. I don’t know what family 
dynamic would possess somebody to take their son to the 
legislature as a birthday present. I’ll leave that between them, 
but would ask all members to join in welcoming them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and to sell off the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like us all 
to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
provides a vital service to many seniors, workers, and families 
throughout the province; and that by scrapping STC out of the 
blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 
about how little it cares about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps to drive the economy with the 
parcel services that serve farms and other businesses. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and to sell off Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of the province. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Hendon, 
Wadena, Fosston, Porcupine Plain, Carragana. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners believe that this 
government didn’t know the role that spiritual care providers 
provide in our health care system, nor do the petitioners think 
the government fully understands the impact of these cuts. They 
point out that this budget unilaterally eliminates spiritual care 
within our health region facilities. They point out that spiritual 
care helps patients and residents and their families towards 
achieving holistic wellness, and that Saskatchewan will be the 
only province within Canada to not fund this support for its 
citizens. 
 
They point out that the Sask Party did not tell people of 
Saskatchewan prior to the 2016 election about their plan to cut 
funding for spiritual care in our health region facilities. The 
petitioners also point out that spiritual care provides a 
compassionate listening presence in times of crisis and the 
ability to respond to the spiritual and emotional needs of 
patients and residents. They point out that spiritual care 
supports families and patients and residents in making those 
difficult decisions that come with health care sometimes. They 
point out that spiritual care meets the needs of traditional First 
Nation, Inuit, and Métis people. And finally they point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that professional non-denominational, 
non-faith-specific spiritual care practitioners facilitate patient 
and residents in obtaining comfort and support from within their 
own faith traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly immediately stop the cuts to 
spiritual care programs in this province’s health region 
facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Prince 
Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
directed and ordered by the member from Prince Albert, I’m 
hereby standing in my spot today to present a petition on behalf 
of the member from Prince Albert area, and as instructed by the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
And this petition, as it relates to increased funding to the Prince 
Albert mobile crisis, Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert mobile crisis 
unit has had to close its doors during daytime hours, resulting in 
a loss of resources of people in distress. The daytime closure of 
the Prince Albert mobile has put stress on the Prince Albert 
Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may 
not be trained and/or qualified to provide quality counselling 
and intervention services to clients. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Call on the Saskatchewan Party government to increase 
funding to the Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so that they 
may once again offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition to 
support the Prince Albert mobile crisis unit are from Regina, 
from Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 
today to present a petition that’s opposed to Bill 40 and the 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people 
who have signed these petitions today want to bring to our 
attention the following: Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new 
definition for privatization that allows the government to wind 
down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum of the people 
of Saskatchewan who own that corporation, Mr. Speaker. In 
’15-16 alone, Crown corporations returned about $300 million 
in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and hospitals, and we 
know over the last 10 years it’s been around $3 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. We know those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan and not private investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of people across the 
province. Under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, 
Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income tax, 
provided that not less than 90 per cent of their shares are held 
by a government or province. So there’s only 10 per cent to 
play with there, Mr. Speaker. This bill would allow up to 49 per 
cent of a Crown to be sold without being considered privatized. 
So we know that this short-sighted legislation risks sending 
millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people 
of Saskatchewan. So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today are from 
Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of this province wanted to bring to your 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
provide a petition that was presented to me from seniors in the 
community of Prince Albert that were concerned about some of 
the budget cuts that affect them. So there was a group of seniors 
and service providers that met at a seniors’ summit in Prince 
Albert that was organized by the Prince Albert Seniors’ 
Advocacy Centre. And the undersigned individuals, they met 
for a whole afternoon to discuss services and lack of services 
within Prince Albert and area, and many presented and 
expressed great concerns about the most recent provincial 
budget. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

The undersigned hereby petition the Saskatchewan 
Government to reverse all budget decisions that 
specifically affect seniors adversely, such as the pending 
closure and shutdown of STC, the curtailing of library 
services around the province, the elimination of chaplaincy 
services in various health regions including Prince Albert, 
and the pending increase in fees in long-term care 
facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed these petitions come 
from the community of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 

petition to reverse cuts to the Lighthouse program. Those who 
have signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: in April of 2014 the minister of Social Services said 
that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off 
of existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
That same day the minister of Health said, “We want to ensure 
that individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a 
safe place to stay,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. The estimated savings for the government, 
announced in September, is under $1 million but the subsequent 
ER [emergency room] costs alone could be several million 
dollars. 
 
In 2015 the Provincial Auditor called upon the Ministry of 
Social Services to provide the correct amount of assistance, not 
to revoke this essential service and thereby put the most 
vulnerable at extreme risk. These ministers are now trying to 
place the responsibility for repairing budget deficits on those 
experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and who 
are working from day to day without proper services. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut back 
its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and take 
immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
And one in three Canadian workers have been impacted by 
domestic violence, and for many of them the violence will 
follow them to their workplace. Victims of domestic abuse 
should not be further victimized at work. And, Mr. Speaker, 
employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. Manitoba has already 
enacted legislation, and Ontario is on its way to enacting 
legislation that ensures job security for victims of domestic 
violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the pages of petition today 
come from Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. The cuts to these institutions of $36.8 million from 
post-secondary education, 6.4 million from technical 
institutions, and cuts of $8.2 million to funding for scholarships 
and student aid mean that Saskatchewan students, who already 
pay among the highest tuition in the country, are going to see 
greater costs for their education. It’s costly for students; it’s 
costly for families, and it’s costly for the whole province as we 
undermine this important economic driver. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The individuals signing these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Dundurn, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Organ and Tissue Donation in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this is national organ and tissue 
donor awareness week. The demand for tissue and organs for 
transplants continues to outweigh the accessible supply, 
especially here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan has one of the lowest donation rates among the 
provinces, at 9.9 donors per million compared to the national 
average of 15 per million. This disparity between supply and 
need has a profound human cost as well as an economic cost to 
health care and our province as a whole. 
 
This past year my colleague from Prince Albert and I had the 
privilege of taking part in the Human Services Committee’s 
inquiry on organ and tissue donation rates. This committee was 
given a mandate by the government to make recommendations 
to improve rates here. It was heartening to hear from devoted 
stakeholders working to improve our organ and tissue donation 
system and from individuals who have been impacted by 
donations who shared their lived experiences. 

It was from this testimony and additional literature that the 
committee made its 10 recommendations. The final report also 
includes a dissenting opinion put forward by my colleague and I 
that offered an additional eight recommendations that we 
believe, based on the evidence we heard, could dramatically 
change our current system for the better. 
 
Unfortunately the government thus far has chosen not to act on 
any of the recommendations, not even on those of their own 
members. But it’s not too late, Mr. Speaker. This government 
can still build on the meaningful consultation that took place 
and start implementing recommendations now. People’s lives 
depend on it. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in marking this week by 
thanking all those who took the time to share their expertise and 
their passion on organ and tissue donation with the committee, 
and committing to implement the recommendations of the final 
report. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Yom HaShoah 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
is Yom HaShoah, the Holocaust Memorial Day marked around 
the world to commemorate the six million Jewish lives lost 
during the Holocaust. These men, women, and children were 
friends and neighbours, shopkeepers and hard-working 
tradespeople not much different from any of us here today in 
this Chamber. Their lives were ripped from this Earth as they 
all marched to their deaths for one reason — because they were 
Jews. 
 
This, then, is a moment to remember these lives lost and honour 
their memory. In this moment we also honour courage and 
bravery in the face of death, in the face of unspeakable evil. 
This is also the legacy of the Holocaust. This is the solemn 
lesson we must never forget, Mr. Speaker: never again; that we 
can also look to the light of those who were courageous enough 
to fight no matter the odds, to have hope no matter the darkness 
of the circumstances. 
 
It is with hope then that we may look at the diverse people that 
make up our great province and take heart that each time we 
choose to accept people to our province, our home, is a step 
away from the kind of darkness that brought the Holocaust and 
toward a stronger, brighter future. 
 
I ask that this House now observe a moment of silence for the 
victims of the Holocaust. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

World Book and Copyright Day 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in recognition of April 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

23rd as World Book Day, a yearly event organized by the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization to promote reading, publishing, and copyright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, World Book Day was celebrated for the first time 
on April the 23rd, 1995. In 1995 UNESCO [United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] decided that 
the World Book and Copyright Day would be celebrated on the 
23rd of April as the date is also the anniversary of the death of 
William Shakespeare as well as the birth or death of several 
prominent authors. On this occasion, publishing houses, 
bookstores, libraries, cultural institutions, and associations of 
authors mobilize across the world to promote reading, 
publishing, and the protection of intellectual property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the focus will be on the blind and the 
visually impaired for whom there is difficulty accessing books 
and other printed materials, which constitutes an obstacle to 
their full and effective participation in society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, New Democrats recognize the power of literacy 
and education, and although the Sask Party is a little late to the 
game, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that they have corrected 
their terrible library cuts. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in recognizing this important 
day, and would also like to recognize the people of 
Saskatchewan for standing up to this government when it comes 
to libraries. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 

Expansion of Yorkton Oat Mill 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, our government is committed to making sure that 
Saskatchewan is one of the best places to work and invest. I’m 
extremely pleased to stand in the Assembly today to be able to 
announce that Grain Millers, one of the largest oat buyers in 
Western Canada, has announced a $100 million expansion of its 
plant in Yorkton, which is expected to be operational late 2018. 
 
This project will add 80,000 tonnes of production capacity to its 
mill where it manufactures a range of conventional and organic 
oat products. The Grain Millers expansion will create 25 new 
and permanent jobs as well as 110 jobs during the construction 
phase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my friend Terry Tyson, the director of grain 
procurement at GMCC [Grain Millers Canada Corp.] had this to 
say about the expansion: 
 

We’ve operated in Saskatchewan for 20 years. Yorkton is 
in the heart of oat country and, with its skilled workforce 
we have here, it is a great location for us to continue 
growing our milling business. 

 
I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. A bigger oat mill means 
that Yorkton already is home to two major canola crush plants, 
and now an even bigger destination for prairie grains and 
oilseeds. I ask all members to join me in welcoming the 
announcement and thanking Grain Millers for the plant 
expansion in Yorkton and investing in our province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation in Duck Lake 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise and inform members about a Habitat for 
Humanity key presentation that I attended in Duck Lake on 
April 21st. 
 
Two families achieved a very special dream — the dream of 
homeownership. This home is a joint effort between Habitat for 
Humanity, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, Correctional Service 
Canada, Willow Cree Healing Lodge, RBC [Royal Bank of 
Canada] Foundation, the town of Duck Lake, and other 
community partners and volunteers. 
 
Habitat provides an incredible service for helping families leave 
their housing challenges in the past. Our government 
recognized their critical work and remains committed to 
supporting this remarkable organization. 
 
With another valued partner, the Government of Canada, we are 
pleased to have contributed close to $56,000 to build this home 
through the Investment in Affordable Housing Agreement and 
Social Infrastructure Fund Agreement. Mr. Speaker, our 
government also contributed 65,000 toward a second Habitat 
home in Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge the students of 
Stobart Community School who helped renovate one of the 
homes, showing tremendous teamwork and community spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to thank our 
project partners and congratulate the new homeowners. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Air Ambulance Service Celebrates Fifth Anniversary 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to stand today to recognize the Shock Trauma Air 
Rescue Society, better-wise known as STARS, as they celebrate 
their fifth anniversary of saving lives here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, to celebrate their anniversary, the STARS held an event 
at their Regina hangar and their Mobile Education Unit is 
parked outside of the Legislative Building. I hope all members 
had an opportunity to visit and learn more about their program, 
and experience the state-of-the-art medical equipment used to 
train first responders and medical personnel right across our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the men and women of STARS have served 
Saskatchewan well, working to provide safe and reliable 
emergency care and transportation services. Since 2012 STARS 
has transported or provided care for more than 4,000 patients in 
more than 500 locations in Saskatchewan. Operating 24/7, 
they’ve served our province very well. 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

Their life-saving care and support service play an incredibly 
valuable role in the province’s emergency medical services. Mr. 
Speaker, our government has been a proud partner of STARS 
over the past half-decade. 
 
The Minister of Health and Minister Responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation announced that our government will 
be providing $20.5 million in funding to STARS in the ’17-18 
budget year. Even in a challenging year, our government knows 
how important STARS is to the people of Saskatchewan. We 
look forward to seeing STARS flying in our province for many 
years to come. Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating 
the STARS Saskatchewan team on their fifth anniversary. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Construction Begins on Overpasses 
in Warman and Martensville 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I, 
along with the Minister of Highways, had the honour of 
attending the groundbreaking for the new overpasses in both 
Warman and Martensville. This is a great news story for my 
constituency. On average, 14,000 cars drive on Highway 11 and 
15,000 cars drive on Highway 12 every day. The priority of this 
project is to address safety concerns, but it will also alleviate 
commuter traffic and improve driving conditions for the people 
of these communities and surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the general 
contractor looking after construction of these overpasses, Peter 
Kiewit Sons. Kiewit has been involved in Saskatchewan 
projects for over 50 years. His bid had the highest concentration 
of Saskatchewan partners of the three firms vying for this 
contract and is currently in negotiations with several other 
Saskatchewan-based contractors and suppliers. I would also like 
to acknowledge the support of the Government of Canada who 
is providing funding for this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is another example of how our 
government is working hard to make Saskatchewan the best 
place in the country to work, live, and invest. And we will 
continue to fix the infrastructure deficit left us by the members 
opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, every day I rise in this 
House and ask about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal. And whether it’s in this House or 
in the rotunda with the media or across the province, no matter 
who is asking, the Sask Party says, just trust them. Always they 
hide information and fail to answer basic questions. 
 
Well the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] has 
uncovered another scandalous secret. It’s clear the Sask Party 
haven’t been protecting CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail’s image. 

They’re trying to salvage their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party may . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And they’re laughing here, which is outrageous. Boy, you know 
a government’s worn out their welcome, Mr. Speaker, when 
they laugh after millions of dollars has been given away and 
wasted. You know, the Sask Party of course made 
Saskatchewan people pay for it through SaskPower spending 
$25 million for land that they’re still not using, just in time to of 
course make sure that two supporters made millions on the land 
scandal. Meanwhile they gave away 300 acres, twice as much 
land for free to CP Rail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they might try to justify this now, but it’s all more 
lines and more spin. How can the Premier justify making 
Saskatchewan people pick up the tab for yet another Sask Party 
corporate handout? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, maybe there was 
some laughter at the member’s preamble to his question 
because some of it — frankly, the premise of it — is laughable. 
And here’s what I mean by that. He wants to ascribe all of this 
deal, especially the CP land transaction, to this side of the 
House, to this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we heard from last week, this is the big . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member is heckling, who is 
the Deputy Leader of that party. He was the Highways minister 
for the NDP [New Democratic Party] on July 18th, 2007 when 
his note said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “In April, the province 
approved $33 million invested in the project.” The note talks 
about the fact that we want to work with the city of Regina and 
move the rail to the GTH. At that time it was called the Regina 
intermodal facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March of 2013, the former NDP minister, John 
Nilson, said in this House “. . . when the New Democrats were 
still government, there were initial amounts set aside that would 
allow this project to go ahead . . .” Mr. Speaker, these were the 
remarks of the NDP. 
 
I’ve got a whole bunch of other quotes from members opposite 
who claim credit for this particular deal, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
articles that were covered, and there’s a CBC article from 
February, 2007 that highlights that Saskatchewan NDP and city 
of Regina politicians were going to Ottawa to create support for 
the GTH. We know from that member’s, we know from that 
member’s, the Deputy Leader’s own briefing note when he was 
the minister responsible that (a) they wanted to respect the 
privacy of the transaction, and (b) that they set aside $33 
million to give to CP or to allocate for the land acquisition for 
CP’s relocation to the hub. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just not believable. 
The excuses and the lines are piling up day after day, but so are 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

the scandals, Mr. Speaker. Carpe Diem, a company known a bit 
around this building, has recently talked about wanting to take 
over STC. The Sask Party says they’re not breaking the Crown 
protection Act, so maybe Carpe Diem seized the day a little 
early with their announcement, Mr. Speaker. Last week they 
posted, “Currently hiring owner/operators for our new STC 
freight division.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, their STC. Maybe to the extent that we’re all 
shareholders but, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what they mean. Will 
the Premier today table any contracts to sell off STC equipment, 
routes, whatever to Carpe Diem and whoever else? All this, of 
course before his privatization bill, Bill 40, has even passed, but 
most importantly, instead of backroom deals with Carpe Diem 
or anyone else, will he scrap his damaging plan to sell off STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are no deals. There are 
no contracts for privatization. The company’s not for sale. The 
company . . . And it’s not hard to understand why it’s not for 
sale. It hasn’t made money since, I think, since 1979. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re simply winding it down. 
 
The subsidy . . . This is not an easy decision to make, but the 
per-passenger subsidy today for each of those passengers that 
ride STC is $90 per passenger. Those members opposite, when 
they were the government, when they were the government of 
this province, they shut down routes when the per-passenger 
subsidy was $25. For the NDP, they thought that’s too much to 
subsidize a passenger — $25 — and so they shut down routes. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now the per-passenger subsidy is $90 per 
passenger, so we are making the difficult decision. With thanks 
to those who have been working at that company for a long 
time, we are going to wind it down. 
 
The answer to the member’s question is there are no contracts, 
no deals. There’s nothing to be sold here. If others are going to 
operate a bus company in the province of Saskatchewan, they’ll 
apply to the Highway Traffic Board for those operating rights, 
just as companies do today, Mr. Speaker, on lines, some of 
them that the NDP shut down. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

The Education Amendment Act and Operation of 
School Boards 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s sort of strange, Mr. Speaker, to 
square the Premier’s comments with the fact that Carpe Diem 
has a posting to hire owner/operators for the STC freight 
division, Mr. Speaker. And this is the government that wants to 
take over education, take away control from our local school 
boards, put it in their own cabinet. So you have to understand 
why people are angry about their coup, their bill, Bill 63, to do 
just that. You know, and I’ll remind them, of course you know, 
certainly Carpe Diem is clear about what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker, with the STC freight division. 
 
And with the CP scandal finally coming out, and everything 
else that they’re hiding with their GTH scandal and, Mr. 
Speaker, with all the controversy that’s apparent with conflicts 
of interest over there, how does the Premier justify taking away 

all the power from locally elected school trustees? His minister 
of course cites decisions of some of the school boards that he 
doesn’t agree with. But, Mr. Speaker, 91 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people and 71 per cent of Sask Party supporters 
don’t agree with their massive cuts in our classrooms.  
 
So can the Premier at least admit that our kids’ schools are 
obviously in better hands with their local school boards than 
with the Sask Party, who’s just cutting deeper and deeper? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I do thank the member for this 
question. I want to thank the member for this question because 
this is an opportunity to have an important debate that will 
contrast perhaps views on either side of the House.  
 
There was a ruling, a court ruling last week, Mr. Speaker, that 
could prove to be very damaging for students in this province, 
for the separate school division and frankly for the public 
school division. It’s the Yorkton court ruling I’m referring to, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s the product of a lawsuit between two 
school boards, two Saskatchewan school boards, one separate 
and one public. And they have spent millions of dollars on legal 
fees suing each other, Mr. Speaker. Not in the interests of 
students, I would argue, in this particular case. Not in the 
interests of families of those students. But, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
decided to have a bit of a turf war and they have used millions 
of taxpayers’ dollars to fight this out. And now we have a court 
ruling. 
 
What’s left, Mr. Speaker, for the rest of us, is a court ruling that 
is incredibly serious and potentially damaging to the system. I 
want the House to know, I want the people of the province to 
know that I’ve asked the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 
Education to explore every avenue of remedy we may have to 
not have this ruling, frankly, pose the damage that it does to our 
school system. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is why we need legislation like Bill 
63. Mr. Speaker, this is why we need to be able to have the 
Minister of Education, the duly elected government of the 
province, making sure that boards don’t sue each other, making 
sure that boards don’t have two directors at the same time 
because they had fired and they rehired, making sure that 
dollars that we have for education go to the classroom and 
support teachers, Mr. Speaker. That’s where that money 
belongs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, they are silencing local voices and 
taking all control and power for themselves, period. That 
minister walked away from his signature and commitment to 
our kids’ teachers. That minister raised the taxes that 
Saskatchewan families pay for schools, but still cut even more 
from our kids’ classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of that minister and that Sask Party, the 
government is investing $121 million less to educate our 
children. And now he wants even more control because he is 
concerned that some trustees made some bad decisions. Mr. 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

Speaker, I don’t even know where to start with that. That 
minister backed down on one terrible decision today, so there’s 
hope. Will he now withdraw Bill 63? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no, 
absolutely not. Bill 63 is the tool that is going to prevent bad 
decisions from being made, bad decisions from being 
implemented, having school divisions that are paying for two 
directors because they fired, hired, and rehired. Mr. Speaker, 
those are decisions that we are not going to stand by and let 
happen in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made an enormous investment in our 
province in education. We have spent over $2 billion a year on 
education, on capital, on operating grants and, Mr. Speaker, 
those are things that we want to do to support our children. We 
are not going to have divisions make bad decisions. We will 
work with them to make sure they make good decisions but, 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 63 will go ahead. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — So much talk of bad decisions, Mr. Speaker. The 
fact is that Sask Party cuts are hurting our kids, and Living Sky 
is just one school division scrambling to figure out how to deal 
with the cuts to their funding. The Sask Party handed them a $6 
million deficit. The division’s education director said that the 
cuts “came as a shock.” And they’re taking all they can from 
their reserves, but they say they have no choice but to make 
deep cuts to the classroom, laying off 20 educational assistants 
and 15 teachers. The director said that it’s the most difficult 
challenge that he has faced in his entire career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these cuts don’t make any sense, and the minister 
can’t even justify them, except to say that they needed to cut 
because they ran out of money. Mr. Speaker, had they just made 
CP pay for the land that they gave them, that would have saved 
our schools. Mr. Speaker, how can the minister expect the 
people of Saskatchewan to have any faith in his judgment when 
it comes to the education of our children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the operating grant in our 
province has gone from $1.41 billion to $1.86 billion under our 
government. Mr. Speaker, the school division of Chinook has 
moved 25 people out of administration into the classroom. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re asking other divisions to look carefully at doing 
that because, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you where the resources 
should be: the resources should be spent in the classroom, not in 
the boardroom, not in the courtroom, but in the classroom 
where they’re benefiting children and are benefiting the families 
of our province. That’s what the members of this side of the 
House stand on, not what the members on that side of the House 
stand for. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 

Supports for Post-Secondary Educational Institutions 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, everywhere we look, this budget is 
taking money out of the pockets of families. We already know 
that the Sask Party has allowed tuition fees to rise to among the 
highest in the country. Now the Sask Party is making things 
even more expensive with cuts to tax rebates for tuition and 
textbooks. Students and families will be out thousands of 
dollars. It’s no secret that this government is looking to find 
money, but to take it from students, from their education, from 
textbooks, it’s a pretty obvious step in the wrong direction. 
 
Students are working hard to put themselves through school. 
Their families are making sacrifices to ensure a good future for 
their children, and for the province. When will the Minister of 
Advanced Education actually advance education and work to 
keep post-secondary training affordable and accessible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
opposite will know, tuition across Canada is not an 
apples-to-apples proposition because Stats Canada averages all 
universities in a province. The University of Saskatchewan 
itself has said, “When considered program by program with our 
comparator institutions in the U15, the U of S’s tuition is at or 
below that of our peers.” It also stated that Stats Canada’s 
report on tuition is “misleading and inaccurately represents 
Saskatchewan compared to other provinces.” 
 
Universities are autonomous institutions, Mr. Speaker. They set 
their own tuition fees, but when you compare first-year arts and 
science tuition fees in our two universities compared to those in 
comparable institutions across the country, we actually rank in 
the lower third to lower half, Mr. Speaker. And to support 
students, we also fund the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship which is universal, part of the 137 million being 
invested in student supports this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Staff Numbers at Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I still didn’t hear any rationale for 
eliminating those tax rebates to tuition and textbooks. This 
budget, it not only hurts students, but it hurts people working 
across the post-secondary sector. This minister’s job is to 
defend education, but how can she stand there and defend these 
cuts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when faculty brought concerns to her attention, 
when she was told she’d have trouble recruiting and retaining 
post-secondary instructors, she said, and I quote, “Well perhaps 
we should take our chances.” Well, Mr. Speaker, what this 
minister failed to say is that the cuts were so deep, we don’t 
even have to wait and take our chances. The job losses are 
already happening. Sask Polytechnic has been forced to lay off 
23 employees on top of the vacant positions they aren’t filling, 
on top of the 43 employees who took voluntary separation 
agreements. 
 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

How can this minister flippantly joke about jobs in this sector? 
Does she not understand that we need quality educators for 
quality education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of 
questions in that question, but on the Sask Poly situation, of 
course any time there are layoffs, Mr. Speaker, it’s cause for 
concern. Certainly we sympathize with those affected by the 
staffing changes. 
 
On an annual basis, Saskatchewan Polytechnic makes 
adjustments to the complement of faculty that reflects their 
program offerings for the coming year, Mr. Speaker. That 
includes allocating resources to provide student-centred and 
industry-driven programming that responds to labour market 
needs. I understand that part of that complement of faculty 
receiving layoff notices includes voluntary separations. The 
layoff process is of course defined in Sask Polytechnic’s 
collective agreements, and their process will align with such 
provisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector 
Compensation 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, these job losses in 
post-secondary are only the tip of the iceberg. For regional 
colleges and Sask Polytechnic, the minister said that this will be 
another $6.5 million cut from salaries, and no one seems to 
have a clue how they will get there. In the education sector, the 
minister initially said the 3.5 per cent would be found through 
cuts. He was contradicted in the letter from his ministry and 
eventually contradicted himself, but still no clarification.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we are talking about hundreds of millions of 
dollars in cuts, people’s jobs, but no one over there seems to 
have a clue how they’re going to do it. Will the minister admit 
he has no actual plan to plug this $250 million hole in his 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, I won’t 
admit that, to the hon. member, because the fact of the matter 
remains, Mr. Speaker, we identified $250 million in 
compensation — it’s right in the budget documents — over this 
year and the ensuing three years after this, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to finding that kind of compensation savings across the 
entire public sector here in the province. 
 
We have said to our employer groups, Mr. Speaker, some 41 
employer groups in this province, to get to the negotiating table. 
There are, I think, 15 to 17 collective agreements open right 
now, another dozen or so coming open by the end of this year, 
Mr. Speaker. We have said to these employer groups, here’s the 
fiscal situation we are faced with in this province: a $1.3 billion 
deficit last year. We’re asking the public sector across this 
province to contribute $250 million, Mr. Speaker, or 3.5 per 

cent of that $1.3 billion deficit. Those employer groups are 
going to get to the table and negotiate this with the employees, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard that bluster 
before. What we’re asking for is details. The Minister of 
Advanced Education claimed to be able to peg down how much 
and from where they were finding these savings, but admitted 
they had no way to enforce these cuts. And the Education 
minister is making it up as he goes along. 
 
How could the Minister of Finance just plunk a $250 million 
hole in the budget? Doesn’t he even understand the impacts of 
all these cuts they’ve made, cuts in our classrooms, in our 
communities, in our health care, all the way to funerals, Mr. 
Speaker. And everything, from a night out to car insurance, is 
getting more expensive. With all of this, how can he possibly 
justify the gifts to the wealthy and the well-connected? How 
can he justify the $60 million tax gift to corporations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Either the members opposite are in agreement with the 
collective bargaining process, Mr. Speaker, or they’re not. The 
Finance critic should stand in her place and say whether she 
agrees with the collective bargaining process or not because 
that’s where these arrangements are going to be had, Mr. 
Speaker, is at the bargaining table, Mr. Speaker. These 
employer groups sit down with the employee groups and are 
going to negotiate this kind of compensation . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, to recognize this 3.5 per 
cent of a $1.3 billion deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I sit here every day and I listen to the Education 
critic, and now the Advanced Education critic, and certainly the 
Leader of the Opposition get up every single day, Mr. Speaker, 
every single day, and demand more money in these respective 
areas that they’re critics for. Every single day they stand up, 
Mr. Speaker, and want more money for their particular areas of 
critics.  
 
Then they stand up and they say, you know what, we don’t like 
the revenue package you put together. We don’t like the 
revenue package you put together. And then the Leader of the 
Opposition will stand up and say, you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
we don’t like deficits in this province and we have more 
running deficits in this province and building up debt to pay for 
these operations of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is NDP doublespeak. 2004-05, Mr. Speaker, what 
happened in this Chamber? What happened in this Chamber 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

under an NDP government? They tabled a budget, Mr. Speaker, 
in 2004-05, that fired 500 civil servants in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, they reduced spending in 12 different departments in 
this government, Mr. Speaker. And then they raised the PST 
[provincial sales tax] from 6 per cent to 7 per cent and ran an 
$844 million surplus that year, Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of 
doublespeak we’re getting from the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Financial Situation of Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The public sector is left reeling from this 
budget, forced to pay for the Sask Party mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. They aren’t alone. This morning municipal 
leaders gathered to speak out against that minister’s comments 
last week. When asked why the Sask Party was taking away the 
ability for our cities, towns, and villages to challenge the Sask 
Party in court, she said, “Because they were going to.” They 
know they aren’t playing by the rules, so they’re changing 
them. 
 
Really, Mr. Speaker, they know they will likely get sued with 
the overreaching law they’re ramming through, so they are 
changing the laws even more. Mr. Speaker, doesn’t the minister 
understand that that’s not how things work in a democracy? 
 
The Speaker: — The members will respectfully listen to the 
question, and let’s respectfully listen to the answer. I recognize 
the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve said a number of times, this was a difficult budget. And 
we looked at all areas in which to find savings and efficiencies, 
and our municipal sector were not immune to that exercise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal leader said that they were adamant 
that they wanted revenue sharing kept, and I’m sure that they 
appreciate it because it is over 100 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing. In our bigger cities, it’s two and a half times what it 
used to be under the NDP. They like the predictability of it 
because under the NDP they didn’t know from one year to the 
next what they were going to get. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the second thing they wanted was 
infrastructure money, and in my budget the infrastructure 
budget has increased. Mr. Speaker, I think that the reductions 
that we’ve asked for, after year over year over year of increases, 
is reasonable. It’s two and a half per cent of the shortfall that 
we’re looking for in our budget, Mr. Speaker, and we’re asking 
our municipal sector to help with that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — If this move had been done in good faith, 
they would have done it in the open and they would have been 
clear, Mr. Speaker. But all of these cuts have been anything but 
clear. And it’s not just our municipal partners who are frustrated 
with this government; 86.3 per cent of Saskatchewan people 
surveyed this month said they did not support the Sask Party’s 
funding cuts to municipalities. And that doesn’t even count 

their bill to strip cities, towns, and villages across the province 
of their access to legal recourse. Will the minister put the brakes 
on this reckless approach and get back to the table with our 
municipal leaders? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — And again I will say that it is two and 
a half per cent that we are asking from our municipal 
governments. In the big cities it is only 1 per cent of their 
budget that we’re asking for them to find within their budgets. 
They do have reserves, Mr. Speaker, that they can look to, as 
well as they can look across their programming, such as we 
have ours. 
 
This was a very inequitable program that we have targeted. It is 
not available even to . . . I’m not even too sure if it was given to 
a third of the municipalities. I believe it was even less than that. 
All of the cities did not receive it. The majority of the small 
towns didn’t receive it, Mr. Speaker. It has a lot of history to it, 
to be sure. 
 
But we have a new landscape now, and I think we need to look 
at this program. We need to look for fairness. We need to look 
for equity. And we need to look for transparency because 
nobody seems to understand this program whatsoever. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Reporting of Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cuts to families 
are harsh contrasts to the gifts to the corporations and the 
wealthy and the well-connected. And the questions are growing 
about conflict of interests for those ministers. Mr. Speaker, 
there is an easy way to get rid of these questions. They just need 
to show support for our bill to get big money out of politics. 
 
They will want to rant about decades gone by, but let’s live in 
the now. Carpe diem, Mr. Speaker. We can all put this in the 
past, behind us. They can put the questions to rest. All they 
have to do is help us pass the bill. So will they bring 
Saskatchewan out of the dark ages in election financing laws? 
Will they support our bill to get big money out of politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, all registered parties 
publicly report their donations and the expenses. They do it so 
that the process is transparent. It’s not new. It’s online. It’s 
public. We file this information in our annual report. We file it 
with Elections Saskatchewan. In the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received nearly $30 million, the 
majority of which is from in this province. Only about 10 per 
cent comes from outside. 
 
Some corporations donate money. Some individuals donate. 
The average individual donation, $176; the average corporate 
donation, $1,233, Mr. Speaker. Nothing surprising there, Mr. 
Speaker. We will comply with the law as it is, and we’ll make 
sure that if people have questions, that the questions get 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

answered. Mr. Speaker, the problem with the NDP is they just 
don’t have an issue to go on right now. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Meewasin used a quote that the Minister of Advanced 
Education said, and I’m wondering if he could table that quote, 
please. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly document the 
quote provided by the member. And I wonder if they’d take the 
same opportunity to settle some outstanding business in terms 
of a quote that that Minister of Advanced Education used days 
ago in this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask both sides to table 
documents that they quoted from, and with that we’ll carry on 
to ministerial statements. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of amendments to The Fuel Tax Act, 
2000. These amendments will implement the 2017-18 budget 
initiative to reduce the fuel tax exemption on bulk purchases of 
farm-use diesel from 100 per cent to 80 per cent, effective April 
1, 2017. To implement this change, specific amendments to The 
Fuel Tax Act, 2000 include: 
 
Section 6 is amended to allow farmers and primary producers 
with a valid fuel tax exemption permit to purchase tax-reduced 
marked diesel fuel or tax-exempt propane for use in farming or 
primary production activities. 
 
Section 6.1 is added to require fuel sellers to collect tax on 
marked diesel fuel at 20 per cent of the full tax rate on sales to 
exempt permit holders and to sell propane tax-exempt to 
exempt permit holders or for heating use. 
 
Section 12.1 is added to allow marked diesel fuel for heating 
use to be sold tax-exempt when delivered into a tank used 
exclusively for heating or sold to a permit holder entitled to 
purchase exempt heating fuel. 
 
And section 17 amends subsection (2) and repeals subsection 
(4), requiring farmers and primary producers to report 
importations of marked diesel and exempt propane and pay the 
applicable fuel tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 22 is amended to add a reference to the 
new section 12.1 so the various offence provisions listed also 

apply to heating fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
amendments to The Fuel Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
reading of the Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise in my place to give the initial response, as I’ve 
done on numerous occasions on numerous bills, Mr. Speaker. 
And I just want to give a quick summary of what Bill 68 is all 
about for those that may be a bit confused as to why the 
government is taxing every sector of our province that they 
possibly can. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what Bill 68 does, it really, it removes the 
total tax fuel exemption for farmers, for trappers, for loggers, 
and fishers who . . . Now the government, the Saskatchewan 
Party government require them to pay 20 per cent of fuel tax for 
diesel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously this is something that’s going to hurt all 
these different sectors. We’ve had various farm groups that 
have come forward to complain about this action. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we also know that the effect on trappers, on loggers, 
and fishers as well is going to be profound. 
 
Now there’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, as we look 
at some of the actions of the Saskatchewan Party government as 
it relates to taxation overall . . . This year, Mr. Speaker, $1 
billion tax grab by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker — everything from children’s clothing to PST on food, 
as you order food in various restaurants, and now they’re hitting 
the farmers. Now they’re hitting the loggers. They’re hitting the 
trappers and they’re hitting the fishers, Mr. Speaker, with this 
particular bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that all the people that are 
paying all the extra taxes, whether it is property taxes in the 
cities, whether it is fuel tax as identified in this bill, whether it’s 
children’s clothing taxes, those bills, those taxes are 
compliments of the Saskatchewan Party mismanagement and 
waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you sprinkle a lot of scandal over that particular party, Mr. 
Speaker. People can quickly see that this billion-dollar tax grab 
by this minister through bills of this sort certainly proves our 
theory over here that this minister does not know what he’s 
doing when it comes to the finances of our province. And the 
opposition also collectively say that the entire Saskatchewan 
Party caucus do not know what they are doing when it comes to 
managing the finances and the hope in the province and the 
promise that our province has in its future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the actions lately as 
indicated by the proper management of our finances overall for 
Saskatchewan, and I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not 
only the official opposition that doesn’t have confidence in the 
current Minister of Finance as a result of taxation measures of 
this sort. I think it is the city mayors as well, and the towns and 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

villages mayors that have seen the increase or will see the 
increase in property tax. Because why? Because this Minister of 
Finance and the Saskatchewan Party government took away 
grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. They took away the grants-in-lieu. 
And what happens now is the cities are scrambling, after they 
have designed their budget, to try and find the millions of 
dollars that they have to find in their budgets. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, yes, there are tough decisions to be made at 
the municipal level whether it’s closing services or programs, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s also taxing the local citizens. And I want 
to tell every person in the province of Saskatchewan that live in 
our towns and our villages and our cities that, as you see the 
property tax increases come your way, you can thank your local 
Saskatchewan Party MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. You can thank the Saskatchewan Party caucus. You 
can thank the Minister of Finance for bringing bills of this sort, 
bills of this sort, Bill 68, because, Mr. Speaker, they have 
mismanaged the opportunity that they had during the years that 
Saskatchewan enjoyed record revenue, a booming economy, 
and a growing population. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, they have squandered the bright future 
we had at one time and now we are in a situation where we have 
deficit, we have huge debt, and people are beginning to lose 
confidence and faith, not only in the Saskatchewan Party 
government but throughout our province, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
seeing a lot of people very angry about that. 
 
But there is hope, Mr. Speaker. There is hope because 
obviously the message is getting out to the very backbench of 
the Saskatchewan Party, where they have finally found their 
backbone and argued against the library cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
Today now we hear that the library cuts are going to be 
reversed. We’ve had some capitulation around the 
grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. So we’re sitting here saying, well 
who is in charge over there? Is it the Minister of Finance or is it 
a few backbenchers? 
 
All we see now, we’re seeing that the Minister of Finance’s 
budget is in tatters, Mr. Speaker. Obviously there’s somebody 
doing something wrong over there because there isn’t the 
coordination that one would expect from a government that has 
been preaching doom and gloom for the last few months, and 
all of a sudden the Minister of Finance brings down a budget 
and his own backbenchers are fighting against that budget. 
 
And that’s why I tell people, when it comes to fighting back 
against our government on taxation such as described as Bill 68, 
Mr. Speaker, the fight has to continue, to keep fighting back on 
these taxation bills, back on things like STC as well, to 
encourage the people in Saskatchewan to know this, that there 
is promise in your action, that there is ways that you can 
continue fighting back. 
 
And yes, the library funding cut reversal was a small victory for 
the many fights that are out there, but nonetheless a great 
victory for those that fought hard to go against this minister’s 
willingness, the Minister of Finance’s willingness to cut the 
library program. And, Mr. Speaker, obviously there’s kickback 
from a few backbenchers over there and from a lot of people 

throughout the province that thought this cut to the libraries was 
bad and that they wouldn’t stand for it. The people rose up; they 
stood up. The opposition supported that effort, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ll continue to support those fights. 
 
The problem you have, Mr. Speaker, is that, as you begin to 
unveil this budget and they begin to capitulate at every second 
turn, then the question comes from the people of Saskatchewan, 
the professional people, they say, well who is in charge over 
there? Who is in charge over there? Is the Minister of Finance 
presenting his budget . . . They voted on his budget. They all 
passed the budget, and in a few short weeks they begin to 
change the budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly our position in opposition, 
that we think they do not know what they do when it comes to 
managing the finances or the future of our province. And that’s 
why it’s important to pay attention to every single bill that this 
minister and that government brings forward that has any 
financial implications to the province of Saskatchewan, to her 
future, and certainly to her current operations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great amount of concern that we 
stand in the Assembly and we begin to dissect what is wrong 
with the Saskatchewan Party, what they have done horribly 
wrong when it comes to the decisions they’ve made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those decisions, those decisions are a direct 
result of mismanagement, scandal, and waste. Because why, 
Mr. Speaker? They had a decade of record revenue. They had a 
decade of record revenue, a booming economy, and a growing 
population. So how is it that after a decade of such largesse in 
terms of financial support, in terms of business opportunity, and 
the support of all the optimism throughout the province, why is 
it today that we’re now facing a deficit of $1.3 billion? Why is 
it after this government’s done their term — and I pray and 
hope it’s their last term — by the year 2021, I think our debt’s 
going to be somewhere around $23 billion, Mr. Speaker? How 
could you take it from the pinnacle of success in Saskatchewan 
to the depths of despair when it comes to our financial 
management? 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, it is because they do not know what 
they’re doing. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is because of 
scandal, mismanagement, and waste. And that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, when you’re going to have a financial plan, Mr. 
Speaker, you have got to have the ability to plan it out first of 
all. 
 
And I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t have any confidence in 
that Minister of Finance’s ability to build a bright future for our 
province. And that’s the reason why, that is the reason why 
every opportunity that we have in the opposition to stand up and 
tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly what they’re doing, we 
must remind the people of Saskatchewan where they come 
from. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party inherited a booming economy, a 
growing population, and record revenue, and they enjoyed a 
decade of that prosperity, Mr. Speaker. And today, Mr. Speaker, 
our debt is forecasted to be 23 billion by the end of 2021. Today 
we’re dealing with a $1.3 billion deficit. Don’t forget, deficit 
and debts are different, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of people 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

understand the difference. And they’re having a tough time 
trying to figure out where they go from here because every 
second day, as we know in the Assembly, through the media, 
and the rest of the people of Saskatchewan know, they change 
their mind on some spending plan that they put through their 
budget. So obviously, Mr. Speaker, someone does not know 
what they’re doing over there. And I would suggest it’s the 
entire cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and especially the Minister of 
Finance, because obviously you change your mind every second 
day. 
 
There’s something wrong fundamentally within the system that 
they’ve created in which you’re able to not only begin to tax the 
heck out of people, but begin to change your mind on some of 
the issues that we’re seeing evidence of, Mr. Speaker. So I think 
on this note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot, a lot to say on any 
financial bill coming our way. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan now have felt the full betrayal of 
the Saskatchewan Party when it comes to the whole notion of 
taxation, Mr. Speaker. This is a party, the Saskatchewan Party, 
and I’ll say it again for the fourth time, that had such 
opportunity for a decade. For 10 years they had record revenue. 
They had a booming population. They had a growing economy, 
Mr. Speaker. They had all that promise, and where are we 
today? A $1.3 billion deficit for this year alone. We’re going 
towards a $23 billion debt by 2021. We don’t even incorporate, 
Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even incorporated what the P3s 
[public-private partnership] would cost us for building some of 
the projects throughout our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let it be known from our perspective, as we’ve always 
maintained, the Conservatives, the Saskatchewan Party, and the 
right-leaning parties of this province have never managed the 
economy of our province well. Every time they’ve assumed 
government, they have left our economy in tatters. They have 
left our books in the red and, Mr. Speaker, they have left 
Saskatchewan with no hope. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, we see that trend continuing. And 
I’m telling the people of Saskatchewan, this is a fine example of 
how conservatives, or the Saskatchewan Party, have now taken 
a billion dollars from your pockets. From buying a piece of 
pizza, Mr. Speaker, from buying a child’s pants, Mr. Speaker, 
from fuel tax rebates for loggers, for trappers, from fuel tax 
rebates for the farm community, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
people paying property taxes in our communities, the bill is 
building. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say this, but the people of 
Saskatchewan are the ones that are paying and will be paying 
for years to come as a result of the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker. We 
understand that. We understand that in the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think those across the way, especially those in 
that backbench that have sat idly by and had this blind faith that 
things would work out, Mr. Speaker, they’re beginning to hear 
that the people of Saskatchewan just about had enough of this. 
They’ve just about had enough of this. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing through Bill 68 more 
tax grabs and more job-killing tax grabs that’ll hurt the future of 
this province. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe this government 

is done yet. They’re targeting our Crowns, which generate 
revenues and, Mr. Speaker, that is the sad reality, is every 
opportunity that this province has to rebuild after the Sask Party 
is gone, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to shut the door on that. 
And one of those opportunities includes our Crowns. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have confidence in this Minister of 
Finance. I don’t have confidence in the Sask Party government. 
I don’t have confidence that they’ll do the right thing on any 
front. And we’re seeing evidence of that in spades day after day 
here as we sit in the Assembly. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I give my full support to the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, our Finance critic, as she is 
going to come forward on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, to tell 
people why these taxes are hurting our families, our 
Saskatchewan families, and why only the select few, and the 
select few rich people, get the benefit of the benefits of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, of Saskatchewan’s resource base, 
and of our future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, I want to 
offer our initial comments on this particular bill. We will have a 
lot more to say about what we think is the doctrine within the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, is that we continue to deny the 
mismanagement, the waste, and the scandals, Mr. Speaker, and 
all we’ll do is continue taxing the people and dressing it up as a 
necessary option for Saskatchewan, when it wasn’t a necessary 
option, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I will point out to the people of Saskatchewan, those 
are my initial few comments on Bill 68, and I move that we 
adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
This legislation implements various income tax initiatives that 
were announced on March 22, 2017 as part of the 2017-18 
provincial budget. These initiatives support Saskatchewan’s 
growth agenda by reducing corporation and personal income 
tax rates. 
 
This legislation also modernizes and simplifies many aspects of 
the provincial tax system, including elimination or reduction of 
a small number of personal income tax credits, while ensuring 
that Saskatchewan’s taxes remain fair to all residents and 
businesses, and competitive with neighbouring jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation reduces taxes for every 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

Saskatchewan income tax payer at every level of income by 
reducing Saskatchewan’s three personal income tax rates by a 
half point effective this July 1st, 2017 and by another half point 
effective July 1, 2019. These reductions will help foster greater 
productivity and investment within the provincial economy. 
 
Other personal income tax changes covered by this legislation 
include the elimination of the education and tuition tax credits 
effective July 1, 2017. Unused amounts carried forward from 
previous taxation years will remain available to be claimed, but 
new credits cannot be earned after June 30th, 2017. 
 
This legislation also temporarily suspends the annual indexation 
of the personal income tax system starting with the 2018 
taxation year. Mr. Speaker, this legislation makes 
Saskatchewan’s business taxes more competitive with our 
neighbouring provinces by reducing the Saskatchewan general 
corporation rate by a half point effective July 1, 2017 and by 
another half point effective July 1, 2019. 
 
When fully implemented, the general tax rate will have declined 
from 12 per cent to 11 per cent, the lowest rate in Canada. The 
tax rate reduction will be pro-rated for corporate taxation years 
that straddle the effective dates. In conjunction with this 
change, the manufacturing and processing profits tax reduction, 
which lowers the general corporate income tax by up to 2 
percentage points for eligible M & P [manufacturing and 
processing] income, is being maintained. This means 
Saskatchewan’s effective corporate income tax rate on eligible 
M & P income can be as low as 9 per cent, the lowest tax rate 
on manufacturing and processing in the entire country. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, also increases the refundable 
manufacturing and processing investment tax credit on both 
new and used equipment from 5 per cent to 6 per cent for 
corporations making qualifying expenditures. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The M & P income tax credit will continue to encourage capital 
investment by manufacturing and processing companies in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, the dividend tax credit for . . . sorry, Mr. Speaker. 
The dividend tax credit rate for eligible dividends will be 
reduced for each of the 2017 through 2020 taxation years to 
reflect the reduction in the general corporate income tax rate. 
These changes will reduce the effective dividend tax credit rate 
for eligible dividends from the current 11 per cent to 10 per cent 
by 2020, thereby maintain the current degree of integration 
between the provincial corporate and personal income tax 
systems for eligible dividend income. 
 
This legislation also provides for phasing out, over four years 
beginning in 2017, a special tax reduction which currently 
allows credit unions to pay tax at the small-business rate on 
income above the small-business threshold. Credit unions will 
continue to be exempt from the provincial capital tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation also introduces the administrative 
provisions that will allow corporations to claim a Saskatchewan 
commercial innovation incentive tax rebate. The Saskatchewan 
commercial innovation incentive is the first-of-its-kind patent 

box tax incentive in North America. Separate legislation setting 
out the eligibility criteria for this incentive has been previously 
introduced by the Minister of the Economy. That legislation 
will allow the Minister of the Economy to issue eligibility 
certificates to eligible corporations. 
 
The Income Tax Act, 2000 is being amended to allow eligible 
corporations to use their eligibility certificates to claim a rebate 
of corporate income taxes already paid. This tax rebate will 
effectively reduce the Saskatchewan corporate income tax rate 
to 6 per cent on taxable income earned from the 
commercialization of qualifying intellectual property in the 
province for a period of 10 years. Companies will be able to 
extend the benefit period to 15 years if the qualifying 
intellectual property is substantially developed in the province 
of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan commercial innovation 
incentive is designed to complement Saskatchewan’s existing 
competitive advantages and encourage firms to establish new 
operations in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation also reforms the research and 
development tax credit to better target smaller and 
medium-sized Saskatchewan innovation companies. A new 
refundable 10 per cent R & D [research and development] tax 
credit is now available effective April 1, 2017 for the first $1 
million in annual qualifying expenditures incurred in 
Saskatchewan by Canadian-controlled private corporations. 
 
Qualifying expenditures in excess of this annual limit, as well 
as qualifying expenditures incurred by other corporations, will 
remain eligible for the existing 10 per cent non-refundable 
R & D tax credit. The total of the refundable and 
non-refundable R & D tax credits that may be claimed by a 
corporation is being capped at $1 million per year. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the impact of provincial 
sales tax changes introduced in separate legislation is mitigated 
for lower income residents, this legislation enhances the 
Saskatchewan low-income tax credit effective July 1, 2017. The 
enhancement will increase the maximum basic adult component 
and the spousal equivalent component by $100, from $246 to 
$346; increase the child component by $40 per child, from 96 to 
136, to a maximum of $272 per family; and increase the benefit 
clawback rate from 2 per cent to 2.75 per cent. 
 
Individuals with annual income up to $32,643 will receive the 
maximum benefit of $346, while those with incomes between 
32,643 and 45,225 will receive a partial benefit based on their 
level of income. 
 
A number of technical amendments are also required to various 
sections of the Act in order to properly legislate the personal 
and corporate income tax reductions announced in the 2017-18 
budget and to update the M & P exporter tax incentives and 
primary steel production rebate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 



April 24, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
well, well, here we go again, Mr. Speaker. And as much as the 
minister may be pleased to move some of the amendments 
through the Bill 69, the people of Saskatchewan are not pleased 
to begin paying almost a billion dollars this year more in PST 
that the minister certainly unveiled on budget day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is happening as a result of this bill, as we look at some of 
the changes being proposed in Bill 69, Mr. Speaker, the matter 
of fact is that the Saskatchewan Party is cutting taxes for the 
wealthy and for corporations while they’re making families pay 
nearly $1 billion more in PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the tax hikes that were identified in the 
minister’s bill just a few seconds ago will cost the average 
family $442 more each and every year, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
a crying shame because as we all know, many families find it 
very difficult and they struggle each and every day, Mr. 
Speaker, to make ends meet. And now the government is 
reaching in their pocket and pulling out an additional $442 in all 
these little tax increases that they have planned through Bill 69. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the dubious pleasure of going to buy 
pizza from one of the pizza stores, and as I paid my $5, Mr. 
Speaker, the gentleman behind the pizza said, you need another 
30 cents, he said to me. And I said, what’s the 30 cents for? 
And he said, oh, we’re charging PST now on pizza, he said. Oh. 
I had to dig in my pocket and pull out another 30 cents for that 
piece of pizza, Mr. Speaker. And I was wondering, I wonder if 
this is the Sask Party’s strategy to slay the deficit of $1.3 
billion, one pizza slice at a time, Mr. Speaker. And I was 
thinking, how many pieces of pizza does a guy have to buy to 
cover the deficit of $1.3 billion deficit for this year alone? 
 
And I thought maybe I should ask the Minister of Finance, what 
would be your guesstimate as to how many pieces of pizza I’d 
have to eat to cover your deficit? But, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t ask 
him because I don’t trust his numbers. So I’m still trying to 
figure that out. And this is the reason why more learned people 
than I will have greater detail and greater arguments around 
what they’re planning on doing to recover from this deficit and, 
Mr. Speaker, more so the debt. 
 
And a lot of people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, know that 
there is a huge difference between deficit and debt. And as a 
result of last year, we’re $1.3 billion less in revenues than we 
had in expenses, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sorry, but the bottom 
line is that when we hear the Saskatchewan Party tell people, oh 
well, the resource revenue goes down. Well yes, you should 
have anticipated that. And we would find it funny over here if it 
wasn’t such a serious issue. 
 
But then we find out, well what’s your plan? What is your 
strategy? And as I said at the outset, all of the entire Sask Party 
caucus collectively crossing their fingers and their toes, hoping 
each and every day that the commodity prices will rebound . . . 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that ain’t much of a plan. That ain’t a plan at 
all. 
 
And I’m sorry, but the Minister of Finance during one of the 
committee sessions, I believe, indicated that his projections on 
the resource prices in the province of Saskatchewan were bang 
on. He said they were bang on. So which leads me to point out 

to the people of Saskatchewan, well if the Minister of Finance’s 
projections were bang on, why didn’t he tell the people of 
Saskatchewan prior to the last election that they were facing a 
$1.3 billion deficit? Why didn’t he tell them that he was going 
to reach in their pockets to help cover for their mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste, one pizza slice at a time, or one paycheque 
at a time, or one purchase of a child’s clothing at a time? Why 
didn’t he tell them that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And why didn’t he tell them that he was going to have all these 
corporate giveaways, Mr. Speaker, while families continue to 
struggle through higher power bills? But wait a minute, the 
higher power bills came as a result of their carbon capture tax, 
when they put in the carbon capture plant through SaskPower. 
That cost 1.5 billion. Or how about the $2 billion project around 
the bypass? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to show that our argument from 
the opposition on every bill they bring forward has to point out 
to the people of Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party do 
not know what they’re doing. And that’s why we lack 
confidence in their ability to even begin to address the whole 
notion around this past budget when they were talking about 
trying to achieve a balanced budget within three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what kind of calculator that the 
Minister of Finance is using, but we don’t have any confidence 
that within a three-year time frame that the Saskatchewan 
Party’s going to have the deficit figured out, Mr. Speaker, 
because based on their track record thus far, they have 
capitulated left, right, and centre, Mr. Speaker. They do not 
know what it takes to ensure that there’s a sound financial plan 
in place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, more importantly is that they simply do not 
lack, Mr. Speaker, they do not lack a team discipline to make 
some of the tough decisions to make sure that Saskatchewan 
stays on track financially. They didn’t lack it . . . They didn’t 
have it 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. They never had it five years 
ago and they certainly don’t have it today. 
 
So I think it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
know what is in these bills, as Bill 69, what impacts it’s going 
to have on their family. Who is going to be hurt by this 
particular bill? And, Mr. Speaker, the net effect, the net effect, 
Mr. Speaker, is that absolutely everyone in the province of 
Saskatchewan, everyone I know is going to be impacted by the 
taxation regime of the Saskatchewan Party government as a 
result of their scandal, mismanagement, and waste, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as you look at the impacts to families, on this particular bill 
itself, $442 more. Now if we incorporate the extra property 
taxes that they’re going to have to pay . . . They’re going to 
have to pay higher power bills, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 
have to pay other costs that the Sask Party is now taxing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the minister sits there and says, well we’re 
actually giving some reductions by one-quarter per cent on 
some of the tax brackets over the next three, four years. So it’s 
like me going back to the pizza place and saying here’s my five 
bucks for the piece of pizza and here’s 30 cents. But can you 
explain to me why I’m paying 30 cents? And if that pizza guy is 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2017 

like the Sask Party, he’ll say well we put a bit of pepperoni on 
that pizza. But you’re taxing the pepperoni so I’m paying more 
on that. Well we’re actually heating it for you. But you’re 
paying more on your power bill because of their carbon capture 
tax plan. 
 
So everywhere you go, Mr. Speaker, everywhere you go, you’re 
paying taxes and more taxes and more taxes because the Sask 
Party can’t figure out their financial game plan. Mr. Speaker, 
we have faced deficit after deficit after deficit under the 
Saskatchewan Party government and once again they’re here 
with their voodoo math to try and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that they’re on the right track. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we do not 
believe them for one bit. We know that they do not know what 
they’re doing. We know that half the caucus across the way lack 
the confidence in the Minister of Finance because he’s 
capitulated so many times the last few weeks. We know that 
they will not slay the deficit in three years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what’s more important is that we know that 
. . . It’s my belief that more than half of them will head out of 
Dodge here fairly soon because obviously, Mr. Speaker, as the 
province grapples with more debt and more deficit, some very, 
very tough decisions will have to be made in the future. Based 
on what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that they’re 
going to have any ability to deal with the deficit over a short 
three years, never mind the debt. 
 
So I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but on this side of the Assembly, we 
do not buy for one instant that the Saskatchewan Party 
government has this figured out. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, like myself, we will pay those taxes because we 
enjoy living in this great province. We will pay the taxes and 
the PST on that pizza I purchase, on the children’s clothing that 
my daughter purchases, on the property tax we pay back home, 
Mr. Speaker. These are some of the things that many of our 
people will be getting to pay. And the people throughout the 
entire province, right from Canora to Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, to 
Cannington, to Meadow Lake, they’ll be paying more taxes as a 
result of the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
And after all is said and done and the debt balloons to 23 
billion, which we will owe as a province — and I would 
speculate even more by the time the Sask Party is done — then 
who is going to pick up the pieces? Because I assure you that 
half of them across the way will either be gone on their own 
voluntary exit, Mr. Speaker, and they’ll be going on to greener 
pastures while somebody else here has to clean up the mess. 
But I’ll say this today, that every single one of their names will 
be read into the record of those that sat by in these tough times, 
in these tough times, to be part of a government that destroyed 
Saskatchewan’s future by taxing the people ad nauseam, by 
selling off the Crowns, by putting us further into debt to P3s, 
and really killing the opportunity for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Their names will be remembered, Mr. Speaker, and this 
Minister of Finance will also be remembered for his inability to 
balance our books, to build on the hopes and dreams, especially 
from a time and place when they had a decade-long opportunity 

with record revenues . . . Let’s not forget that. They had record 
revenues. They had a booming economy and they had a 
growing population. Let us not forget that. They had all that 
opportunity. And where are we a short 10, 11 years later, Mr. 
Speaker? We’re going to be aiming for a $23 billion debt by 
2021. We’re $1.3 billion in debt this year alone, Mr. Speaker, 
and yet we’re seeing a billion-dollar tax grab by the 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
And it’s no wonder that the people are saying, enough of this 
act; it’s time to get rid of the Saskatchewan Party and bring in a 
party that is able to build our future from a compassionate, 
balanced perspective, Mr. Speaker. And that is why, Mr. 
Speaker, on our rebound, on our effort to rebuild our party, we 
are obviously meeting with a lot of high-quality people that 
have some good history and great academic ability on the 
financial front. And we see evidence of that on the medical 
front; we’re seeing evidence of that on the educational front, 
that as we’re building our team, we know we’re building hope 
for the people of Saskatchewan. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, 
we tell the people of Saskatchewan to have patience, to 
continue fighting until the day we get rid of the Saskatchewan 
Party, because rest assured that the values that we have as a 
party is the same values that we hear echoed throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a change. It is time for a change 
because Bill 69 brings more taxation, more burden, and more 
doom and gloom in the future of Saskatchewan simply and 
primarily because the Sask Party can’t figure it out. And it’s 
because of their mismanagement. It’s because of their scandals. 
It is because of their waste. And now you will see, Mr. Speaker, 
a lot of them will be heading out of Dodge because all of a 
sudden the tough times are coming to Saskatchewan. That’s 
generally when the Saskatchewan Party and conservatives head 
out of town for greener pastures, when someone else, namely 
the people of Saskatchewan, have to clean up the mess. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on Bill 
69. And I move that we adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by this Assembly to do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:18.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2271, 2273 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2271, 2273 
  Beaudry-Mellor ............................................................................................................................................................. 2272, 2273 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2272 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2272 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2273 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2275 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2275 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2275 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2275 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Organ and Tissue Donation in Saskatchewan 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 
 Yom HaShoah 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 
 World Book and Copyright Day 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 
 Expansion of Yorkton Oat Mill 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2277 
 Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation in Duck Lake 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 
 Air Ambulance Service Celebrates Fifth Anniversary 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 
 Construction Begins on Overpasses in Warman and Martensville 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2278 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2278 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2278 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2278 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 
 The Education Amendment Act and Operation of School Boards 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
 Supports for Post-Secondary Educational Institutions 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
  



 

 Staff Numbers at Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 
 Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector Compensation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 
 Financial Situation of Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2282 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2282 
 Reporting of Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2282 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2282 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2283 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2283 
 Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2285 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2287 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


