






















































Hansard: May 17, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 90A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 17, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2553 
 May 17, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
members of the Assembly for granting leave. I do want to take 
some time here to recognize a number of individuals from the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business that are seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have with us today Marilyn 
Braun-Pollon, CFIB’s [Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business] vice-president for prairie and agribusiness. We have 
with us as well Jennifer Henshaw, CFIB’s policy analyst in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And as well we have, Mr. Speaker, 
Cole Hinzmann, CFIB’s public policy and entrepreneurship 
intern for Saskatchewan and his first visit to this building here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals have joined us today to present 
myself and the Government of Saskatchewan with a petition of 
over 1,000 small businesses that oppose a federally imposed 
carbon tax on communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear more in a member’s statement here 
shortly, but I do want to say on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, we appreciate the support of small business. We 
appreciate the support of CFIB on this very important issue. 
And through CFIB I want to thank, from the Government of 
Saskatchewan, each of those businesses that took time to sign, 
to stand up for their communities, their industries, and their 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask everyone in this Assembly to join 
with us in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming these important 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we’d like to really thank you for the work 
that you do for independent businesses here in Saskatchewan. 
It’s incredibly important advocacy work and a voice for those 
many independent businesses who on their own wouldn’t be 
able to advocate quite as well. So thanks to Marilyn, Jennifer, 
and Cole for being here today. 
 

And we know they’re also here to advocate for some of the 
unfair tax hikes in this particular budget as well. So we want to 
thank them for their advocacy on that work as well and really 
want to welcome you to your Legislative Assembly and wish 
you best in all the work that you do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to do an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is 
the newly re-elected Patrick Maze, who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. I’d like to welcome Patrick 
to the Assembly today. He represents 13,000 teachers in our 
province. And while we may not agree on everything, he’s 
certainly been a strong and passionate advocate for public 
education in our province and has been very good to work with. 
And I want to encourage him and his members to continue the 
great work that they do for the citizens and especially for the 
students of our province. So I would ask that all members join 
in welcoming Patrick to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Mr. Pat Maze to his Legislative 
Assembly, to congratulate him on his re-election, and thank him 
for his advocacy work and his tireless dedication to representing 
the teachers across this province and also in support of publicly 
funded education in the province. And I’d invite all members to 
join me in welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I have the honour of introducing a 
number of guests from Estevan who have joined us in the 
legislature today. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I do need to ask for 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Bob’s your uncle. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I have two introductions to do today, Mr. Speaker, for 
very important guests. So first, I’m going ask these guests to 
please give a wave when you are introduced: Connie 
Wahlmeier, Trisha Carriere. I can’t see them. Where are . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . They’re behind me. Okay. Wade 
Kotelo, Michelle Houston, Sydney Smith, Mindy Bonderoff, 
Deborah Farago, Sharon Steffensen, Larry Orser, Isabelle 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

Beahm, Tia Dayman, Abbie Brokenshire, Amy Quinn, Trinda 
Jocelyn, Cheryl Kvamme, Susan Colbow, Cindy Billesberger, 
and Jessica Shier. 
 
These guests, Mr. Speaker, are here on behalf of Estevan 
Diversified Services and we are recognizing them today to 
highlight the work they have done to implement 
recommendations in the Saskatchewan disability strategy. Staff 
and participants from Estevan Diversified Services created a 
human rights book called Your Life, Your Rights. And the 
students here today used their talents to create really beautiful 
and amazing artwork in the book. We just celebrated their work 
by adding the book to our Legislative Library. I don’t know 
how many high school students have a book in the Legislative 
Library of Saskatchewan, so that’s pretty cool. 
 
I want to note that the Estevan Diversified Services created this 
book following consultations from the Saskatchewan disability 
strategy when they realized the individuals they serve, as well 
as their staff, did not fully understand the human rights that 
belong to each of us. Because of this they decided to create 
Your Life, Your Rights using clear language that is easily 
understood by all people. 
 
Additionally, students from the Estevan Comprehensive School 
spent 1,200 hours after school creating the beautiful artwork we 
see in this book. I think this shows that the Saskatchewan 
disability strategy is already making a difference in the lives of 
people experiencing disabilities. It also shows that all people 
and communities can find ways to use their skills and talents to 
take action to implement the recommendations in this strategy. 
 
I want to thank the staff and participants who’ve joined us here 
today for their innovative and significant work in making a 
difference in the lives of Saskatchewan people experiencing 
disabilities. So please join me in welcoming these guests. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also 
acknowledge three very special guests in your gallery as well. 
They are Jacque Tisher, the founder and CEO [chief executive 
officer] of Hope’s Home — Jacque, would you give a wave? — 
Nicole Cook, the chief operating officer of Hope’s Home; and 
Kelsey Stewart, the fund development and marketing manager 
of Hope’s Home. 
 
You know, Jacque Tisher is truly a trailblazer, not only in 
Regina, but also in Canada. In 2003 the Tisher family fostered a 
beautiful baby girl named Hope Dawn Marie. Hope was born 
with spina bifida and spent most of her 10 months on earth in 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Tishers were never able to bring Hope permanently home 
due to the difficult processes involved in meeting her extensive 
medical needs. Hope’s brief life inspired a legacy. Jacque, a 
pediatric nurse, combined her professional experience with her 
experience as Hope’s loving parent to create an innovative 
solution for families like hers. Jacque’s main strategic goal was, 
and is, to provide the necessary care for children with complex 
medical needs, their siblings, and typically developing children 
in a fun and safe, inclusive environment. This helps keep 
families together as well. Today, Hope’s Home helps families 
in Regina, P.A. [Prince Albert], Saskatoon with daycare, 
respite, supportive living, and transition care. One of their 

homes is in my constituency of Regina University. 
 
They say great leaders attract great people, and while I only 
recently met Nicole, I can certainly say that this is definitely 
true also of Kelsey Stewart. Kelsey Stewart is a young woman 
to watch. In addition to putting together a phenomenal event 
you’ll hear about soon, Kelsey came from another very 
important partner, Habitat for Humanity, where she was one of 
the youngest people in Canada to be a trip leader on six 
international builds, in addition to being a lead on many builds 
here. 
 
I would like to welcome these very distinguished people to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the Minister of Social Services in welcoming these folks to 
their legislature. You do outstanding work for the communities 
throughout the province. And we want to thank the folks from 
Hope’s Home, the wonderful work that you do, and the Estevan 
Diversified Services too. 
 
And as human rights critic, I think it is very important that you 
do take that perspective of human rights and disability. It’s a 
huge, huge thing that we all, all of us in all our communities 
have to come to understand. And so thank you for all your 
work. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of visitors I 
would like to introduce. First from the University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union, we have David D’Eon, the 
president of the student union. And if David could give a wave 
here, that’d be great. And Deena Kapacila who is the 
vice-president of finance and operations. And they’re having 
meetings down here in Regina, and we want to welcome them 
to their legislature. 
 
And I have as well two other very special guests I have to 
introduce: my daughter Cameron Forbes, who’s here today; and 
my granddaughter Felix Rose Forbes. Now you can’t really see 
her, but if Felix could give a wave — there you are. Yes. So, 
she’s here to see what her granddad, where her granddad works. 
So I will ask . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know. 
Anyways, I would ask all members to give all these folks a 
warm welcome to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member opposite and welcome David D’Eon, 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

president of the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. 
Reading a bit about him, I learned from an article posted just a 
few days ago that David is an avid traveller who took some 
time away from university to travel across Canada and even 
worked in a bank in the Northwest Territories for a while. After 
four years away, he returned to the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] to finish his studies in political studies and 
ultimately led a successful campaign for president, Mr. Speaker. 
It was a close race, and I would like to congratulate him on his 
victory. 
 
Joining him today is Deena Kapacila, USSU [University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union] vice-president of operations 
and finance. She’s also a political studies student and was 
recently part of the Daughters of the Vote delegation in Ottawa. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them later this afternoon after 
question period, would like to thank them in advance for taking 
the time, and I ask all members to welcome David and Deena to 
their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
welcome 32 young Spartans, a grade 10 class from 
Sheldon-Williams Collegiate here in Regina, in Regina 
Lakeview, to their Legislative Assembly. This is a grade 10 
social studies class, and no stranger to us is their teacher, Ms. 
Michelle McKillop and Mr. Jeff Perry as well as educational 
assistant, Ms. Lorrielynn Oleynik. 
 
And I want to welcome each of you to your Legislative 
Assembly, to thank you for your interest, and the dedication of 
Ms. McKillop to ensuring that these young students have a 
sense of the work that is performed here in the Legislative 
Assembly. And I think this has been maybe the fourth group 
that we’ve seen already in this session from Sheldon-Williams. 
So I’d invite all members to welcome this group to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to welcome some special guests to the House. 
 
First of all, I’d like to introduce my CA [constituency assistant], 
Susan Colbow. Susan, give a wave there. Very nice. Susan was 
actually . . . I inherited her from Doreen Eagles. She worked for 
Doreen. So it was actually a blessing. She’s wonderful around 
the office, very diligent in her work, and it’s just a great 
pleasure to work with her. 
 

But on top of that, she’s a huge asset to our community. Susan 
volunteers in so many ways within Estevan. In fact she’s a 
member of the Estevan Kinettes and has been for 17 years. And 
in 2018, she gets the honour of being the Chair for Telemiracle 
42 right here in Regina next year. So it’s a big job, and I know 
she can do it. She also volunteers for many organizations in 
Estevan, one of them which is sitting on the board of Estevan 
Diversified Services, which is one of the reasons she’s here 
today. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So that leads me into my next introduction of Connie 
Wahlmeier. Connie is the resource centre supervisor for 
Estevan Diversified Services, and she was the book project 
manager for Your Life, Your Rights, which we’ve heard the 
Minister of Social Services talk about today. Over the years, 
Connie’s been a good friend to me and a good supporter of 
mine. I appreciate the work she does at Estevan Diversified 
Services with all of the clients there. I thank her for all the work 
that went into getting Your Life, Your Rights put together. I hear 
the project took two years or a little bit more, but now that it’s 
here, it’s a welcome gift to the Legislative Library. 
 
And I know she didn’t do this alone. She had a whole team of 
people; some of them are here today. We have students. We 
have teachers. We have some of the clients. We have some of 
the board members, some of the staff. So I just extend a big 
hello from the legislature and a big thank you for all the work 
you do for Estevan Diversified Services, and I ask all members 
of this Assembly to join me in welcoming all of them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
ask for extended leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to recognize two northern folks that travelled a great 
distance to be here today. Joining us on the floor, of course, 
from the great family, the Jobb family, all the way from 
Southend is the famous Bella Jobb. Bella of course works with 
the Gary Tinker Federation as a volunteer and certainly does a 
lot of work to support northern people that are facing 
disabilities. 
 
And joining Bella today, none other than northern disability 
champion Mr. Gary Tinker, who is here today to talk about the 
effects of the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
cuts as it pertains to bus services for northern people and for 
those that have disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no question that the volunteers like Bella, that 
come a long ways to support Gary, are very much appreciated. 
And certainly to point out as well, from the Gary Tinker 
Federation perspective, I often hear my colleague, the Leader of 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

the Opposition, talk about the 20-kilometre run that he takes 
every now and then and the marathons that he participates in. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our northern champion walked 675 
kilometres on crutches many years ago to bring out awareness 
about the disability issues facing northern Saskatchewan. And 
that is a long trek. 
 
So again I want to thank Gary for his incredible work and to say 
to him that you’ve matched our leader in terms of physical 
fitness — surpassed him, rather — and to point out that all his 
work of champions like Gary Tinker and the support people out 
there like Brenda, like Bella Jobb, these are what the northern 
people represent. I’m very proud to have you in our Assembly 
today. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
In Cree I said I’m glad they’ve come to this place of assembly, 
and that this is their place as well and that they have nothing to 
fear here. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member opposite and welcome Bella and also Mr. Gary Tinker. 
He’s well recognized for the good work that he does for the 
province for those with disabilities and other areas, Mr. 
Speaker. So I want all members to join with us and the 
government and welcome Gary Tinker to his Legislative 
Assembly, and Bella. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave for extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. To you and through you, 
Mr. Speaker, certainly I welcome all the guests that are here, so 
many that have been introduced that are friends. Nice to have 
you here. But to introduce in your west gallery, a grade 7 
student that’s bright, brilliant, and an incredible basketball 
player. Reese, can you give us a wave here? It’s nice to have 
Reese in the Assembly. Reese’s mom, Christy Blazieko, is a 
good friend. She’s an exceptional teacher up in Saskatoon. 
She’s also a real leader on the executive of the Saskatoon 
Teachers’ Association. And it’s my pleasure to welcome Reese 
to her Assembly here today. I ask others to join with me in 
doing so. 
 
I want to recognize as well, we have Jeff Perry, the president for 
the Regina teachers’ association here today. Jeff, thank you for 
your service and for your voice. Thank you for being here 
today. And we have Michelle McKillop of course here today, is 
a teacher at Sheldon and someone who’s very active in her 
profession as well. So I welcome both of you to your Assembly. 
 

And it’s nice to welcome my buddy, Pat Maze, to the Assembly 
here today, someone who of course is a dedicated and a strong 
voice for teachers but, most importantly, students all across our 
province. 
 
But some things you might not know about Pat is he’s also a 
beekeeper: keeps bees, has great honey. He’s a great dad for 
four kids, Mr. Speaker. He’s an all around good guy and a good 
friend, half-decent fisher. If he’s claiming otherwise, maybe test 
him a little bit on that, Mr. Speaker. But it’s my pleasure to 
welcome a good friend, Pat Maze, a very important voice for 
students and teachers and education here in our province, to his 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I am delighted to introduce, in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a good friend and a former 
colleague, Donna Strudwick. Donna, please give us a wave. 
 
Donna is a former administrator for the RM [rural municipality] 
of Edenwold. She was a long-term board member on the RM 
Administrators’ Association. Later this afternoon, her and I and 
the Minister of Highways and the member from Cypress Hills 
will be travelling to Saskatoon for the annual awards banquet at 
the RMAA [Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan] convention. So I’d like to apologize to Donna in 
advance for submitting her to the Minister of Highways for that 
many hours. But I look forward to the trip up, and discussion, 
and I look forward to the evening. And I’d ask all members to 
please give Donna a warm welcome to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — With leave, for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — All right. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of the House, it’s my privilege 
to introduce some folks in the east gallery here today. 
 
There are many people here today again concerned about the 
cut to the hearing aids plan, Mr. Speaker. Some of them were 
here just about a month ago, Mr. Speaker, and I know they had 
an opportunity to meet with ministry officials. And in 
committee they heard that their questions had been answered, 
but that couldn’t be farther from the truth, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
here again today to convey to the minister and to the ministry 
officials that this cut is not a good decision and will have a huge 
impact on families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to introduce, we have Paula Anderson here. Her 
daughter has hearing loss. We have Olivia Anderson, whose 
sister has hearing loss; and Braelyn Anderson, who is 14, who 
is living with hearing loss, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

We have Garry Elriss, whose granddaughter has hearing loss; 
Joanne Anderson, who has two granddaughters with hearing 
loss; Trisha Donald, her daughter has hearing loss; Payton 
Donald, who is 13 and is living with hearing loss; Kumiko 
Yokoyama is a parent with a child with a hearing loss; Jayne 
Morris, her daughter Mary-Jayne has hearing loss. 
 
We have Robert Mellau from Saskatoon, his daughter has 
hearing loss. Claudia Baptiste is the mother of a 12-year-old 
with hearing loss and is the president of the Saskatchewan 
Alexander Graham Bell Association, Mr. Speaker. We have 
Diane Edwards, who is a retired teacher of the deaf in 
Saskatoon. Tabitha Clayson is the mother of Finnegan Clayson, 
who has profound hearing loss bilaterally. 
 
Michelle Halushka, she’s the mother of Dakota Halushka, who 
has hearing loss and wears hearing aids; and Marilyn 
Barrington, who is a board member of the Saskatchewan 
Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing. She is a retired consultant and teacher of the deaf and 
hard of hearing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More information continues to emerge. I know even in sitting 
together today, they identified even more issues that this cut to 
the hearing aid plan will produce, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
minister has a letter from 16 pediatricians and two pediatric 
audiologists here, he just received. The evidence continues to 
mount that this is a short-sighted decision, and the folks here in 
the gallery, among others across Saskatchewan, hope that the 
minister will reverse his decision. 
 
With that, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I’d like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming these guests to the Assembly. I 
appreciated the opportunity to sit down with them a few weeks 
ago, a number of them. I’ve arranged for, I think there was 
either a meeting or a conference call with ministry officials to 
try to address any concerns they have. I know there’s another 
meeting scheduled for tomorrow. Certainly we will do 
everything we can to address their concerns. In the meantime, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please join with me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the Minister of Health as he introduced earlier Ms. Donna 
Strudwick, who’s seated in your gallery. I also wanted to 
introduce her. The Strudwick name and the Strudwick family is 
synonymous in Balgonie for the hard work that they have done 
to develop that community, whether it’s through agriculture or 
through Donna’s work at the RM. Mr. Speaker, they’re still 
very instrumental in that community. 
 
But I would say that her toughest work was back in 2007; she 
was my campaign manager and was fortunate enough to bring 
through a win despite the candidate, Mr. Speaker. 

So I’d like all members also to welcome Donna to her 
Legislative Assembly and give her sympathy riding up to 
Saskatoon with the two ministers and the member from Cypress 
Hills. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 
moment to acknowledge and briefly introduce Carol Kos, who’s 
sitting in our gallery looking on the proceedings. She’s been 
here every day, almost every day this session just watching the 
proceedings. I actually met her at the gym, but now we’re 
Facebook friends, and she’s expressed a great interest in the 
proceedings here. So, Carol, thanks for your dedication and 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce 20 grade 12 students from Winston Knoll. Give us a 
wave. They’re in the west gallery, I believe. Yes, up there. 
They’re in the west gallery, I believe, Mr. Speaker, and their 
teacher, Mr. Michael Silvius. I welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly, and I look forward to meeting with them after 
question period and answering any questions they may have, on 
behalf of the member from Rochdale. So I’d like all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take 
an opportunity to join the minister and the member from 
Athabasca to welcome Gary Tinker here. Gary Tinker, I just 
want to say, you are truly a leader in the North, especially with 
people with disabilities. 
 
And I had the honour of sitting on Gary Tinker Federation as 
the Chair for a number of years. And I just want to say, Gary is 
committed to helping and awareness of people with disabilities. 
Many of us have challenges, but it’s okay that, you know, you 
can overcome those challenges with support and people who 
understand and show their support. So I just want to say to 
Gary, thank you so much, Gary, for the kindness you show to 
many people, your leadership, and truly the activism that you 
do for people with disabilities. I welcome you to your 
legislature. 
 
As well, Bella, welcome. I know you’re from my side of the 
province — the good side, we’ll say to Buckley. We argue once 
in a while. 
 
So I would like to welcome both of you. I ask all members to 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 59 of 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

the best, brightest, and most well-behaved grade 7 students 
from École Cardinal Leger School, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. 
Give a wave. Hi. And I’d like to especially pick one out of her 
classmates, my daughter Abigail Olauson is here. She’s bright 
and a good worker and a good volunteer, and she’s the apple of 
my eye. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining them today are their teachers, Ms. 
Gudmundson, Mr. Neufeld, Mme. Brisebois, and Mme. 
Erlandson; and chaperones, Mrs. Shipley, Mrs. Denis, and Mrs. 
Zdunich. 
 
I’d like everybody to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC provides a vital service to many seniors, workers, and 
families throughout the province; and that by scrapping STC 
out of the blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 
about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps to drive the economy with a parcel 
service that serves farms and other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and the sell-off of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
[14:00] 
 
It is supported by many leaders and thousands and thousands of 
people who are very upset. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
proud to add my voice to the voice of members on this side of 
the House to . . . and a thousand businesses from the CFIB to be 
against a federal-imposed carbon tax being placed upon this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And this side of the House has placed 
their position firmly on the floor of this Assembly so the people 
of the province know where we stand, and we’re against the 
federal carbon tax. 
 
We’re asking the opposition members to do the same at some 
point in time here in the next couple of years because some of 
them are for it, some of them are against it, and we just don’t 
know where they stand right now, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 
hoping that, on behalf of the people in the province, they’ll add 
their voice to this side of the House and oppose the federal 
carbon tax so we can make sure that everything in this province 
does not go up in price, Mr. Speaker, because we know that a 
carbon tax will increase prices of groceries, gasoline, farming, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’ll affect everyone throughout our province. 
So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Big Beaver, 
Coronach, Assiniboia, Willow Bunch, Prince Albert, Glaslyn, 
Medstead, Leask, Shellbrook, Pelican Cove, Holbein, Debden. I 
so submit, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cut 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, just a few weeks ago in 
committee, we had a discussion about this cut and the minister 
told me, well this isn’t a service offered throughout the 
province, and it was inequitable. So instead of expanding this 
important service, Mr. Speaker, they chose to cut it. 
 
The petitioners point out that in this budget the Sask Party 
government has eliminated funding for spiritual care services 
within our health care facilities. They point out that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, to not fund this support for patients, residents, and 
their families seeking wellness. They point out that the Sask 
Party didn’t talk about this at all in their election platform just a 
year ago, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that spiritual 
care responds to the spiritual and emotional needs of patients 
and residents and provides compassionate listening presence in 
times of crisis. 
 
They point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making difficult decisions, and they point out that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents in obtaining comfort and support, regardless of their 
faith or belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Neudorf, Melville, Assiniboia, McLean, and Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to rise in my place today to present a petition on 
cellphone coverage for small northern communities. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no question that northern Saskatchewan 
communities should have access to the same quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

So the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for the northern communities like St. George’s 
Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and 
Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell coverage as 
southern communities enjoy, as I’ve said earlier. This 
would provide support to our northern industries as well as 
mitigate safety concerns associated living in the remote 
North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Laird. They’re from Saskatoon. They’re from Maidstone. 
They’re from Dore Lake. They’re from Meadow Lake. They’re 
from St. George’s Hill. They’re from Dillon. They’re from Big 
River, Mr. Speaker. They’re from Regina. They’re from 
Cornwall Road in Sherwood Park as well, Mr. Speaker, and 
also, as I mentioned, Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve 
indicated time and time again, this particular petition on 
cellphone coverage for the small northern communities are 
signed by many people from all throughout Saskatchewan. And 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition concerning pay equity here in 
Saskatchewan. And the undersigned residents of the province 
want to bring to our attention the following: that the citizens 
here believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that all women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
And we know the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar that 
a man makes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today come 
from Regina, Saskatoon, Wolseley, Grenfell, Paddockwood, 
Prince Albert, Wapella, Moose Jaw, Melville, Indian Head, 
Lumsden, Yorkton, Tisdale, North Battleford, the Battlefords, 
Maidstone, Marcelin, Spiritwood, Hafford, Edam, Shellbrook, 
and many other communities. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of child care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Those who have signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following: that across Saskatchewan 
licensed non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently; 
to the fact that many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property tax, and this is something 
that’s not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
They want us to remember that child care is essential to the 
economy, yet most centres struggle to balance their budget. And 
this issue threatens both the number of child care spaces as well 
as the quality of care. 
 
They want us to remember that child care has an enormous 
positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and yields high 
rates of economic return, and that child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and as 
such it’s appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as 
schools. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and further exempt 
all licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by citizens across 
the province. Those that I will present today have been signed 
by residents of Weyburn and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence will follow them to 
their workplace. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to 
the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. 
Speaker, Manitoba’s already enacted legislation, and Ontario’s 
on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
all survivors of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House tabled a 
private members’ bill a few weeks ago that called for the 
implementation of these exact measures where . . . We know 
that time is running short on this session, so the government has 
a limited amount of time where they can take that bill on and 
pass it into law. We do hope they do so relatively quickly, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s been called on by many stakeholder groups and 
although it is a small measure, it is a measure that can be 
implemented today to help people in a very big way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the individuals signing the petition today come from Maple 
Creek. And I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Early Childhood Education Month 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, May has been proclaimed Early 
Childhood Education Month in Saskatchewan. This month we 
recognize the many childhood educators who work throughout 
our province and celebrate the benefits they provide for children 
in their care and for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality early childhood education is foundational 
to the development of healthy children and a healthy society. 
From ensuring school readiness, to emotional regulation and 
teaching children how to get along with others, early childhood 
educators make an enormous contribution to the lifelong 
success of future generations. 
 
The dedication of our early childhood educators here in 
Saskatchewan is evident. Not only do they provide high-quality, 
positive learning experiences for our children, but they also 
promote strong relationships between Saskatchewan families 
and communities. Unfortunately, due to this government’s 
short-sighted and mean-spirited budget, our early childhood 
educators are struggling to ensure that Saskatchewan children 
get the care that they so deserve. From callous cuts to funding, 
to the refusal to fix unfairness in taxation for childcare centres 
across the province, the Sask Party is forcing cuts to early 
childhood programs and supports that Saskatchewan children 
and families require. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me today in 
recognizing the unparalleled importance of early childhood 
education, and thanking all early childhood educators in 
Saskatchewan for the tireless work that they do, despite 
underfunding, to ensure that future generations of our province 
are provided with every opportunity to thrive and grow. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to ask guests of our Assembly today 
to refrain from using electronics which also includes taking 
pictures of the proceedings. 
 
I recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 

Fundraiser Held for Hope’s Home 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to recognize Hope’s 
Home. This community-based organization was launched by 
Jacqueline Tisher, who is in your gallery, in 2005 in memory of 
a foster child named Hope. Hope’s Home has established 
unique programming designed to strengthen children’s 
cognitive and social development. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on May 6, Hope’s Home hosted a fundraiser 
entitled Swinging with the Stars, which paired eight of the 
city’s most influential people with eight professional dancers. 
One of these eight was Rachel Mielke, CEO of Hillberg & 
Berk, who made a very generous contribution to the event. 
Rachel contacted Brett Wilson, a well-known Canadian 
businessman and philanthropist, who also supported the cause. 
 
That amount was generous, and it ignited friendly competition 
between Rachel and the other dancers, affectionately known as 
the magnificent seven. The Justin & Greg Facebook Live show 
promoted a donation challenge and started a hashtag called 
#StopRachel. In the end, the magnificent seven did 
out-fundraise Rachel, but the real winners were the children at 
Hope’s Home, with an incredible total of $103,000 being 
raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event shows that no matter what, there’s 
always hope. I ask members to join me in thanking Hope’s 
Home for all they do to support children in need and to thank 
the organizers, the donors, the supporters of Swinging with the 
Stars who made this a great success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Regan and Robin Yew 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in this House today to recognize two constituents of mine, 
brothers Regan and Robin Yew, and their contributions to 
hockey in Saskatchewan. 
 
Born and raised in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Regan and Robin started 
skating at the age of five and instantly fell in love with the 
game. They began playing organized hockey in Meadow Lake 
for a few years and were coached by their father all the way up 
to bantam. With the support and dedication of their parents, 
Iona and Lloyd Yew, both boys have made their way from 
minor hockey and are currently playing for the London Lakers 
in the Canadian Junior Hockey League. 
 
But playing hockey hasn’t always been easy for the Yew 
family, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had to overcome many obstacles, 
and the costs were not always easy for the family to pay. Lack 
of local facilities meant the Yew brothers often had to make a 
five-hour round trip to Meadow Lake for games, tournaments, 
and practices, and a 14-hour round trip to Saskatoon to train in 
the off-season. Both brothers also had to sacrifice their free time 
and chance to play other sports to concentrate on hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regan and Robin have worked very hard to get 
where they are at today, and they have accomplished so much. 
I’d like to ask all members to join me today in congratulating 
these boys for their dedication to hockey and for showing 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

Canada the great talent that our community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
northern Saskatchewan, and our province as a whole has to 
offer. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Weyerhaeuser Honoured by Ethisphere Institute 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to announce 
that for the eighth time, Weyerhaeuser has been named world’s 
most ethical company by the Ethisphere Institute. 
 
Ethisphere is an international organization dedicated to the 
creation, advancement, and sharing of best practices in business 
ethics, corporate social responsibility, anti-corruption, and 
sustainability. Weyerhaeuser offers many compliance and 
ethics-related tools and processes including its code of ethics, a 
variety of training modules, and an issue-resolution process. 
 
Weyerhaeuser operates an OSB [oriented strand board] plant in 
Hudson Bay in my constituency, employing 190 full-time 
employees and 15 summer students. Several full-time 
contractors are hired for logging, hauling, road building, and 
mill maintenance, which equates to approximately 200 indirect, 
full-time jobs. 
 
The OSB plant produces approximately 560 million square feet 
of OSB and the primary products are sheathing, flooring, and 
web stock, which is truss joist material. This is enough for over 
50,000 homes. 
 
Not only is this company an excellent employer, but they’re 
outstanding members of the community as well. Over the past 
10 years, Weyerhaeuser has donated approximately 500,000 to 
various community projects including $100,000 to the new 
Hudson Bay Community School, 70,000 to the Hudson Bay 
hospital, 30,000 to Hudson Bay ball diamonds, and 20,000 to 
the Mistatim community hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Weyerhaeuser on receiving 
this honour and look forward to continued involvement in the 
Carrot River Valley constituency. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
Annual Conference 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to stand today to share about the Women Entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan Inc. 2017 annual business conference. This was 
an amazing event held during Women Entrepreneurs Week and 
was attended by many dignitaries, including the member from 
Regina Rochdale, Trish Cheveldayoff, Christine Hrudka, 
Rachel Mielke, and June Draude. 
 
This event held at TCU Place in Saskatoon was an amazing 
showcase of some of our province’s best and most successful 
entrepreneurs, as well as some of the promising start-ups that 
are on their way to success. Also Women Entrepreneurs of 

Saskatchewan unveiled their new logo at this event. 
 
Women entrepreneurs are a force to reckon with as we add to 
our province’s stability and vibrancy, and create opportunity for 
others in all sectors of the economy. They are driven and 
always wanting to make a difference, and Saskatchewan 
empowers women to be successful. 
 
In 2016 there were over 34,000 self-employed women in this 
province, an 11.4 per cent increase over the past decade. These 
women are making a significant impact on the economy. I ask 
all members to join me in thanking Women Entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan for putting on this annual event and joining in 
promoting women’s entrepreneurship in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Small Businesses Opposed to Carbon Tax 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We heard the Minister 
of the Environment introduce some special guests this morning 
from the Canadian Federation of Independent Business. They 
are here at the legislature today to share with the Assembly and 
the whole country that small businesses in Saskatchewan are 
opposed to a federally imposed carbon tax. 
 
The CFIB has canvassed their membership and learned that 76 
per cent of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs oppose the carbon tax. 
They are here today with petitions titled “Timing couldn’t be 
worse for introduction of a carbon tax.” Mr. Speaker, the 
signators of more than 1,000 small businesses from every 
corner of the province . . . Further, the CFIB has learned that 
businesses see punitive measures as the least effective way to 
reduce carbon emissions. Mr. Speaker, small businesses in this 
province have serious concern with a one-size-fits-all approach 
and believe the Government of Saskatchewan should be 
recognized for its current use of carbon capture technology to 
reduce carbon emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the new member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin supports the federal government’s imposed carbon 
tax, and we know that the member from Nutana supports the 
principles of the Leap Manifesto. And the silence has been 
deafening on where they stand on pipelines and if they support 
the policies of the federal and BC branches of their party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government stands with these 1,000 
small-business owners and the entire province to say no to an 
imposed carbon tax. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Manufacturing Growth in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, statistics show that Saskatchewan 
was tied for the highest manufacturing growth in Canada for the 
month of March — nearly 20 per cent growth, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s more than twice the national average, and proof of our 
increasingly diversified and resilient economy. We are seeing 
the strength of this economy in the face of low commodity 
prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

We are experiencing steady job numbers, nation-leading 
building permits, and increased drilling forecasts. Couple that 
with the first new potash mine in decades — the K+S project — 
also the Esterhazy K3 mine, the PCS [Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] expansion in Rocanville, and some very strong 
signals from BHP on their Jansen project, we see an economy 
that is continuing to move forward. 
 
Now I want the members opposite to look to the gallery, look at 
our guests from CFIB today and listen to their message. They 
represent a lot of job creators in this province. They understand 
the devastating impact a carbon tax will have on our 
nation-leading manufacturing. So to the members opposite, 
drop the politics and work with us. Work with us against this 
job-killing carbon tax. Work with us to support Canadian 
energy and pipelines, even if the BC and national NDP [New 
Democratic Party] won’t. Work with us on innovation like the 
patent box legislation that we passed yesterday. 
 
Members on this side of the House will keep working with 
Saskatchewan manufacturers so they can continue to lead the 
nation. I invite the members opposite to do the same. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister who 
was forced to stand up and answer the questions when the 
Premier dodged them once again said that the former minister 
of the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], who was and is 
plagued by scandal, did not use the private political server for 
emails regarding the GTH. So I guess my question is, does the 
Premier stand by this statement? And how does he know? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as I’ve . . . I answered that 
question yesterday, Mr. Speaker. The former minister did not 
use the party server for government business. 
 
What I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, is that the server is secure. 
There were no breaches, and we have fully complied with FOI 
[freedom of information], with The Archives Act as well, Mr. 
Speaker, as evidenced by the fact that the email the member 
referenced from the Premier was caught by FOI. That had been 
a consideration from the government point of view all the way 
along. 
 
And as members well know, we all have many accounts, 
whether that be our party account, our MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] account, government account, caucus 
account, and private accounts. And members opposite have 
been known, well known to use their personal accounts for 
government business. 
 
We know that we can all do a better job of making sure we use 
the proper account for the appropriate business or their party 
account for government business. We all can do a better job, 
and we’ll do that going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, these are important 
questions, and that was about as straightforward as you can get. 
Day after day, and the Premier dodges it and can’t take to his 
feet and answer that very straightforward question. 
 
You know, it’s obvious with their budget that that Premier and 
this Sask Party have forgotten who they’re working for. Forty 
thousand Saskatchewan people are out of work. Supports are 
being cut for students in their classrooms. The most vulnerable 
are being even further marginalized, but it’s the biggest 
corporations that the Sask Party are helping out with their 
giveaways. 
 
It makes no sense until you realize that the Premier was doing 
government work with party resources. It all went through the 
Sask Party server, of course, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 
Premier doesn’t have a mandate from Saskatchewan people for 
his budget, but we’re wondering if maybe he thinks he has a 
mandate from those that fund his party, the fundraisers of his 
party, for the desperate sell-offs, the callous cuts, and the 
corporate giveaways. After all, they’re all working on the same 
server. Can the Premier not separate his political interests from 
our provincial interests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, honestly. With 
apologies to Thomas Mulcair who made a reference like this 
yesterday, the preamble, his preamble has more twists and turns 
and non sequiturs than a White House press briefing. And 
frankly, it’s full of incorrect facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there are some elements of debate in the preamble around 
the budget, for example, Mr. Speaker, wherein a number of 
tough decisions were taken, difficult decisions were taken in the 
interest of getting this province back to a balanced budget, 
ensuring that our economy would remain strong, and also 
ensuring that we could afford to sustain important 
quality-of-life programs for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He decried some of the tax relief, Mr. Speaker, in his preamble 
with respect to the corporations of the province. When the NDP 
were in power and they implemented the very . . . in fact deeper 
corporate tax cuts than what are contemplated in our three-year 
plan, way deeper — 29 per cent by them and 9 per cent of the 
budget. What did the NDP call it when they were in 
government? Why they said, “. . . cutting business taxes and 
other measures to stimulate the economy . . . [will] sharpen our 
competitive edge.” That’s what the House Leader said when he 
was on the government side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We do believe it’s important to provide the right signals to the 
market so that we could see manufacturing numbers like we’re 
seeing in this province, so that we could see job numbers like 
we’re seeing in this province. That includes more competitive 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. The net result is the second-best job 
creation record in the country versus dead last when they were 
in office; 60,000 more jobs in the province of Saskatchewan 
today that will help us pay for quality of life in health care and 
education for years to come. 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer, and that 
Premier has no mandate from Saskatchewan people for his 
devastating budget. But we do know that the Premier was using 
the same private political email account to deal with a giveaway 
to the biggest corporations, to discuss international trade deals, 
collect sensitive commercial information, and Mr. Speaker, also 
to collect big money from Sask Party donors. 
 
Can the Premier of Saskatchewan not see anything wrong with 
this? And will he stand by, will he stand by the statement of the 
minister as it relates to the scandal-plagued minister’s 
utilization of that political server? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what utter nonsense from the 
member opposite. What he’s alleging, it’s absolute fantasy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would just say this, this was a difficult budget. Difficult 
decisions were taken and there are groups in this province who 
quite rightly are concerned and they’re raising their case here in 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is there’s plenty of issues for the 
members to raise that aren’t fantasy, that aren’t complete 
contrivances of the members opposite, of that member in 
particular. If he wants to tread on conspiracy that’s nonsense — 
which I’m categorically rejecting now as just that — Mr. 
Speaker, if he wants to do that, waste a question period, he’s 
happy to do it. 
 
We’ll stick with both the record of the government and our plan 
going forward in the budget that he did kind of reference in a 
side-swipe in his preamble. That budget provides for a 
three-year plan to get back to balance in this province. It 
provides for measures on the tax side that will keep our 
economy strong. It provides for the largest budget in Social 
Services in the history of the province, a 9 per cent increase, 
even as we’re facing some challenges on the revenue side. 
 
It provides for strategic investments in health care so that 
Regina and Saskatoon could see relief in terms of emergency 
rooms in the province. It provides for continued momentum for 
surgical wait times. It provides for the business climate that’s 
just seen Saskatchewan lead the country in terms of 
manufacturing sales and, Mr. Speaker, a record that includes 
60,000 more jobs today than when members opposite were in 
government, when they were doing more than engaging in 
conspiracy and fantasy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a server at the Sask Party 
office holds government communications and information, 
public and private and commercially sensitive information. It 
also holds the Sask Party big donor list. The Premier really sees 
no conflict with this? Really? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Unbelievable. Fantasy conspiracy 
theories from the Leader of the Opposition about engaging in 
international trade negotiations betrays a complete lack of 
understanding as to how these things work, Mr. Speaker. I 
know the member opposite has never been in government but 
he has members who have been in government. 
 
When we’re dealing with trade discussions, largely they’re dealt 
with at the officials’ level. The officials will brief the minister 
responsible. The minister responsible will brief the Premier for 
direction. That’s how it works, Mr. Speaker. First ministers are 
not engaged in email negotiations about international trade 
agreements. That is not how it works. 
 
But as I have said, Mr. Speaker, the account is secure. All of the 
rules with regard to FOI, with regard to archives have been 
complied with and we’ll continue to do that going forward. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is getting all shook 
up and refusing to answer any questions, but that’s not all right. 
And we’re going to keep hunting for answers like a hound dog 
because, Mr. Speaker, the fact is it’s not just suspicious minds. 
People across Saskatchewan want to know what the Premier is 
doing, the work of government on a private political server 
housed at the Sask Party office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier wants a little less conversation but the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve a straight answer. Does the 
Premier honestly see no problem with using the same email 
server that he’s using to fundraise with, that’s he’s using to 
fundraise with, and to do the work of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I think it’s illustrative, Mr. Speaker, 
that the member opposite can’t even keep a straight face asking 
that question. They clearly prefer to engage in fantasy 
conspiracy theories. There are, as the Premier indicated, many 
legitimate issues they could be raising in the Assembly that are 
rightfully important to people across the province. They’ve 
chosen to engage in fantasy conspiracy theories with members 
asking questions that they can’t even keep a straight face while 
asking, Mr. Speaker, because they’re very aware that it is a 
fantasy conspiracy theory. 
 
And that member particularly, who has been using his personal 
address to engage in government business, along with a number 
of his colleagues who have done so as well. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a word for that. It’s called hypocrisy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Interprovincial Agreements on Post-Secondary 
Educational Resources 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, while the Sask Party serves tax 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

breaks for corporations, they’re making life more expensive for 
families in so many ways. And they’re raising fees in every way 
for post-secondary students, too. They’ve scrapped the tuition 
fee and textbook tax credits, and by cutting funding from 
universities, Sask Poly, and regional colleges, tuition fees are 
going up again. 
 
On top of that, the Sask Party has yet to fund the third year of 
the cost-saving, open-source textbook agreement with Alberta 
and British Columbia. Why is the Minister for Advanced 
Education further abandoning students by cutting off 
open-source textbooks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite can rest assured. Since 2015 our government has 
invested $500,000 in projects at Sask Poly and our two 
universities to create, adapt, and adopt open educational 
resources including digital textbooks, Mr. Speaker. This was 
part of a three-year memorandum of understanding signed in 
2014 under the New West Partnership Agreement. 
 
As part of this MOU [memorandum of understanding], the 
institutions were asked to develop 21 such resources, including 
open textbooks. Subject to budget appropriation, additional 
grants will be provided this year, Mr. Speaker. While the 
three-year MOU has expired, collaboration between provinces 
continues and officials from the three provinces are in 
discussions to evaluate the current agreement and to determine 
next steps, Mr. Speaker. And Manitoba, the newest member of 
the New West Partnership, may have an interest, and we’re 
hoping to engage them in the process. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve invested $500,000 so far. When 
the members opposite were in government, they invested zero. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Canada Infrastructure Bank 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has already hiked 
taxes, raised fees, and increased power rates. And now if they 
continue to put their corporate, wealthy, and well-connected 
friends ahead of Saskatchewan families, the Sask Party could 
allow the new federal Infrastructure Bank to make life in our 
province even more expensive. Under this privatization plan, 
private corporations get loan guarantees from the feds with the 
promise of big returns through tolls and user fees, paid for by 
the rest of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Sask Party allow these new tolls or fees? 
Or will they stand up for Saskatchewan families and make sure 
that any dollars that come from Ottawa will not come with a 
requirement for tolls, user fees, and rate hikes for Saskatchewan 
families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

glad that the members opposite are engaged with the critical 
importance of infrastructure funding within our province, and 
should note that for infrastructure funding in partnership with 
municipalities, is increased in this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have any details on the federal 
government’s bank, and so we’re looking forward to looking at 
those details. We do have concerns and we will be examining 
them as we go forward, as we also do not have any details on 
the future infrastructure funding from the federal government 
that they’re saying is going to be available — but we don’t 
know for what projects, what will be the criteria, or anything 
else. So we’ll be working with the federal government to try to 
gain those details. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party refuses to put 
people first. With STC, they say they are scrapping it and 
selling it off to save money, but they refuse to consider what the 
real cost will be for scrapping it. How are they so short-sighted? 
 
Other provinces have paid the price for rush sell-offs. Hundreds 
of million dollars gone, just for a one-time cash grab. If the 
Sask Party really stands by scrapping STC, why won’t they do a 
value-for-dollar audit before they throw it away? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question from the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
STC is not being sold off; it’s being wound down, Mr. Speaker, 
as I mentioned before. Mr. Speaker, again I’ll mention to the 
member opposite that the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, ridership 
continues to decline — 18,000 rides just last year, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s 35 per cent since 2012, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I mentioned many times before, since 2007 the subsidy 
has gone from $25 all the way up to $94 per ride, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s between 85 and $100 million over the next five years 
that that could cost, that this government could put to other 
priorities in this government, like social services, like 
education, and like health, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Sask Party has no mandate to scrap STC. Their sell-off is going 
to have the biggest impact on the most vulnerable people in the 
North. STC is a crucial service for so many, and, Mr. Speaker, 
the shameful crisis of missing and murdered indigenous women 
and girls in this country have made the need for safe public 
transportation — especially for First Nations communities — 
even more clear. 
 
In British Columbia, the provincial government is working to 
expand bus service along the notorious Highway of Tears. But 
in Saskatchewan, that Sask Party is moving in the totally 
opposite direction. How can the minister spin numbers and pay 
no attention to the impact that the sell-off of STC will have on 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

the North and on indigenous women and children and girls 
travelling on the remote highways in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I’ll remind this member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
not a sell-off. This is a wind-down of STC, Mr. Speaker. So just 
to be clear, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. Speaker, it was a very 
difficult decision, especially, Mr. Speaker, as it affects the 
hard-working 224 employees at STC. And we do want to thank 
them for their service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as the North goes, Mr. Speaker, I should note that I’m 
very happy that this government provides $4.1 million, Mr. 
Speaker, for northern medical transportation program, Mr. 
Speaker, which had a total last year of 4,946 transportation, Mr. 
Speaker. Of that number, Mr. Speaker, 356 were by plane; 
1,410 were by ambulance; 3,146 was by taxi, Mr. Speaker; and 
34 were by bus, Mr. Speaker, for a total of 4,946. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, public safety impact and no 
answer. Why, Mr. Minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 
Mr. Speaker, it was a very difficult decision, Mr. Speaker, but 
we had to go through. There was 85 to $100 million over the 
next five years, Mr. Speaker, that was projected to be the 
subsidy to STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we did look at where else we could spend that money, Mr. 
Speaker — in social services, Mr. Speaker, and they are 
additionally providing some assistance to people in 
transportation, Mr. Speaker. We looked at health as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And health as well, Mr. Speaker, provides assistance 
in transportation for blood services and for other things, Mr. 
Speaker. So we have looked at the impact on people, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Hearing Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, with no mandate and with no 
analysis of the impact, the Sask Party cut the provincial hearing 
aid program. The minister has had his facts wrong on this file 
from the beginning. In fact, he was so wrong that it’s not even 
clear he realized what they had cut or how it would hurt 
families across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, parents, kids, doctors, and advocates are worried 
about this cut. We know the minister has promised to 
teleconference tomorrow. These folks have had meetings before 
and nothing has changed. They weren’t offered a seat at the 
table and the minister certainly didn’t offer to reinstate the 

funding. 
 
Without that funding, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s words mean 
nothing. So instead of waiting for another meeting that leads 
nowhere, will the minister commit to reinstating the funding for 
the hearing aid plan today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
had the opportunity to meet with some of the parents that are 
here today a few weeks ago. Subsequent to that, I asked 
ministry officials to meet with them. I’m not sure if that was an 
in-person meeting or a conference call. I know another one is 
scheduled for tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, certainly our officials are 
glad to hear concerns that they may have going forward. 
 
But the point of this very simply, Mr. Speaker, is that issues 
around the hearing aid plan that the member consistently has 
raised in the past — cochlear implants, bone-anchored hearing 
devices — those programs and the treatment around those, 
preliminary and post-operative, those are going to continue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Any concerns that the parents may have, we’re going to do our 
best to address them. The ministry right now — in fact as we 
speak right now I believe, Mr. Speaker — are on their weekly 
conference call with the health regions working on this. The 
intent is again for the province to get out of the business of 
selling hearing aids and the audiology services around that, but 
those other services to continue with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, ensuring children have access to 
hearing is not a business. It is a core service of government, 
contrary to what this minister has said in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
To be clear, by cutting this program, the government has hurt so 
many and saves only $3 million. The minister has said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . when health services in the province take almost 40 per 
cent of the budget, if we’re going to get a handle on 
expenditures, obviously there will be some impact on 
health. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, the cut to the hearing aid plan was the biggest 
program cut in health care, and it is point zero five per cent of 
health funding — point zero five. This clearly isn’t the 
government getting a handle on their expenditures. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why this cut and why this program? Why is 
hearing loss clearly not a priority for the Sask Party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, that’s just simply wrong. It 
is a priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. And the member 
opposite in the past has insinuated about other programs around 
hearing, that somehow that this budget cut was going to impact 
them. In the past she’s referenced the newborn screening. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s more work to do. We could certainly have a 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2017 

more robust screening device for newborns, Mr. Speaker, but 
let’s be clear: this budget has had no impact on that. 
 
Those programs that are in place, which by the way, Mr. 
Speaker, vary from region to region, which we don’t think is 
right. We think it needs to be uniform across the province, one 
of many reasons that we’re moving towards one health region. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did that member say about 
consolidating the health regions? She said it’s code for cuts, that 
every time there’s been an amalgamation in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, that all it did was led to cuts. What she neglected to 
mention, Mr. Speaker, is the last two rounds of health 
consolidation were under an NDP government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, if he thinks cutting audiologists 
that support the only city in this province that has early 
detection and intervention screening programs, if he thinks 
cutting all the audiologists who support that program won’t 
have an impact, he is sadly mistaken, Mr. Speaker. We will be 
the only province in the country that doesn’t have some 
mechanism to reduce costs for all children, Mr. Speaker, all 
children. We will be the only province who doesn’t have that. 
 
Saskatchewan has one of the worst records in the country when 
it comes to early detection and intervention programs for 
hearing loss. We need to ensure that kids get screened and 
diagnosed. We need to ensure that they have access to 
follow-up services, and we need to ensure that hearing aids are 
affordable and accessible when they are needed. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan pediatricians are speaking out and 
are “. . . deeply concerned about the announced cuts to funding 
to the hearing aid plan.” Mr. Speaker, they say these cuts will 
have the biggest impact on infants of zero to six months old 
with hearing loss, children eight months to five years who need 
to be monitored for hearing loss, and infants and children with 
complex medical needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a decade of Sask Party mismanagement, and this 
is who they choose to heartlessly hurt. I ask again, will the 
minister reverse this cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
ironic. In the previous answer I mentioned the member opposite 
insinuating in the past that somehow these changes to the 
budget were somehow going to have an impact on newborn 
screening, and then in the subsequent question, she does that 
very same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve made it very clear that the newborn screening 
programs that are in place are very ad hoc. As she mentioned, 
Saskatoon has the most universal one, and even then it’s only 
Mondays to Fridays. Other health regions are basically only on 
referral. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to look at that. We think 
potentially we can do better. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, again let’s be perfectly clear. This budget has 
had no impact on that. Those programs are the identical 
programs that have been in place in those regions since before 
we were in government, Mr. Speaker. So in the meantime, 
that’s going to continue. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, we take this very seriously. Our 
ministry officials will continue to meet with the parents. We’ll 
try to address any concerns that we have, if at all possible. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to make sure that this only affects the issue 
around the hearing aids themselves and not those other 
programs that are offered. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers from questions 412 through 422. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 412 to 422. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 423 through 432. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 423 to 432. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 433 through 435. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
questions 433 to 435. 
 
I’m advised that His Honour is here for Royal Assent. All 
please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:50 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 52 - The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 

2017 
Bill No. 51 - The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Repeal Act 
Bill No. 53 - The Provincial Health Authority Act 
Bill No. 54 - The Provincial Health Authority Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2017/Loi de 2017 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Provincial Health Authority Act 



May 17, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

Bill No. 63 - The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 43 - The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 55 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Economy — Audit 

Assessments) Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 56 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 

2017 
Bill No. 64 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 50 - The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
Bill No. 70 - The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 68 - The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 69 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 30 - The Freedom of Information and Protection of 

Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 31 - The Local Authority Freedom of Information 

and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 59 - The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2017 
Bill No. 60 - The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 44 - The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 

2016 
Bill No. 62 - The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 61 - The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation 

Incentive (Patent Box) Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, the Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies it requires to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 71 - The Appropriation Act, 2017 
 
to which bill I respectfully request your Royal Assent. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:54.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:55.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2553 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2553, 2557 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2553 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2553, 2555 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2553 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2556 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2556 
  Reiter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2556, 2557 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2556 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2557 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2557 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2557 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2557 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2558 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2559 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2559 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2559 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Early Childhood Education Month 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2560 
 Fundraiser Held for Hope’s Home 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2560 
 Regan and Robin Yew 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2560 
 Weyerhaeuser Honoured by Ethisphere Institute 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2561 
 Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan Annual Conference 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2561 
 Small Businesses Opposed to Carbon Tax 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2561 
 Manufacturing Growth in Saskatchewan 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2561 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2562 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2562 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2562 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 
 Interprovincial Agreements on Post-Secondary Educational Resources 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 
 Canada Infrastructure Bank 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2564 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2564 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2564 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 
 Provision of Hearing Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2565 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2565 
ORDERS OF THE DAY — WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2566 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2566 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


