


















































October 30, 2017 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2651 
 October 30, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock and 20 seconds, I call 
this Assembly back to order. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here in this House tonight on this 
the occasion of the response to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to start by thanking important people in my life. The 
most . . . You, Mr. Speaker, are very important, but not quite as 
important in my life as my 19-year-old, my 19-year-old 
Hennessey, who is . . . Sorry to hurt your feelings. My 
19-year-old Hennessey, who’s in her second year at McGill, 
who was home for the summer and puts up with me and my 
work over the course of the summer, but is leading her own life 
as an adult, which is a really interesting experience, actually 
having a grown child. And I’ve also got my foot in a slightly 
younger world with my almost 10-year-old Ophelia. 
 
It’s interesting, my kids put up with an awful lot, are very 
patient. And last week actually we had a mini-crisis. So 
Tuesday was the day before the Throne Speech. My daughter 
wakes up and was a little bit puffy, and so we realized it’s 
probably an allergic reaction. She has some antihistamine 
throughout the day, it looks a little bit better.  
 
By the end of the day I know that I’m not going to Regina on 
Tuesday night, it’s going to have to wait until Wednesday. And 
we have an emergency trip to the ER [emergency room] on 
Tuesday night before the Throne Speech at 1 in the morning 
and the doctors and the nurses, the staff were wonderful. My 
daughter looked like a little pink pumpkin for the rest of the 
week. My really cute daughter, her eye was swollen shut and 
her . . . it was bad. It was a bad week, Mr. Speaker. What a way 
to start the first sitting of the legislature. 
 
But my daughters have lots of support in their lives, including 
my mom and dad who still just live two blocks away from me 
and are having their own challenges with aging, Mr. Speaker. 
My dad experiences some dementia, and my mom has been his 
caregiver. So they’re a little less, they’re not quite there as 
much for me as they’ve been able to in the role as the tables are 
turning a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But despite the challenges in 
their life my mom, the day of the Throne Speech, came over to 
my house and hung out with Ophelia so I could come down 
here and be a part of that, Mr. Speaker. So my mom and dad, I 
am still hugely appreciative of all that they do for me. They’d 

walk to the end of the earth for their kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my sister Michelle has been the big part of the reason I can 
do this job, Mr. Speaker. She and her husband John are really 
close with both my kids, Mr. Speaker. And my sister now we 
have lots of kids, there are seven kids in my family. But my 
sister doesn’t have children of her own and she now provides 
. . . she’s a caregiver for my mom and dad and helps out there 
but also helps me. So I feel incredibly grateful to have the 
support network that I do, Mr. Speaker, that enables me to do 
this job and to do my very best to serve the people of Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
I’ve got wonderful staff in my office. Vanessa, who had to take 
a sudden leave in August, I sure miss her in my office, but Judy 
who is my part-time CA [constituency assistant] has been great. 
And I was happy to welcome Dan Richert into my office, who 
has been there in an emergency crisis to get some staffing in 
there. And Dan’s been great and does a great job of helping out 
folks in my constituency and supporting me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to just give a shout-out to my best friend Moe, who 
keeps me laughing in this job and on a daily basis when I need 
it most, and I think I need it quite often, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to thank the staff in the building, the legislative staff who 
always do such a great job of supporting us whether it’s in the 
library, Mr. Speaker, the Clerk’s office, the committee branch, 
the cafeteria, everybody in this building. They’re amazing 
professionals and such great support. And I want to give a 
shout-out to our staff in our caucus office who do a lot with 
limited resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Centre pointed out that we’ve 
had occasion on this side of the House to welcome a few 
additional members in the last year and a half, Mr. Speaker. We 
had three new members at the last election, Mr. Speaker, three 
wonderful, strong women, Mr. Speaker. And last February we 
welcomed the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, and just a 
short while ago we welcomed the new member from Saskatoon 
Fairview, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have to say I’m very proud to be part of a caucus that is 
half women, Mr. Speaker. Six out of twelve of us are women. I 
think it’s incredibly important that our legislatures, our elected 
bodies, look like the makeup of the province, Mr. Speaker, and 
are representative of the people we serve. I know we’re getting 
closer on our side of the House here, Mr. Speaker, and I look 
forward to having the opportunity some day, Mr. Speaker, to 
make up a government that is half women, Mr. Speaker. That is 
something that I look forward to. I can tell you in my 
experience as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
that I’ve seen many different iterations of this caucus in my 
eight years here, starting in 2009 where there were 20 of us. 
I’ve been part of a caucus where there’s been nine, ten, eleven 
and now twelve. And my male colleagues are wonderful, but I 
have to tell you that it really does make a difference. 
 
Intellectually, I know this. You can look at all the literature and 
see how having a diverse set of decision makers around a table 
makes a real difference. And I can tell you that is my 
experience in our caucus, Mr. Speaker. It was actually validated 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

last year at a strategy session with a former MLA who came in 
and sat around the table with us, and he commented about the 
openness and the way in which we all dealt with each other, Mr. 
Speaker. In that time there were five women and five men, so 
we’ve added two to our ranks, but it is really a wonderful thing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So today, what we’re talking about, the Throne Speech. We’re 
all giving our responses to the Throne Speech. So I’d like to 
start with a little bit of context. So we have a Premier who is at 
the end of his career, Mr. Speaker. Times are a little tougher 
here in Saskatchewan. The political climate is a little tougher, 
and the context of the last few months post-budget and even 
prior to that, with things like the introduction of Bill 40, which 
would have seen the privatization of up to 49 per cent of our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So context here; I’d like to read from a story from July 14th, 
2017 that uses words like poor planning. It says here — it’s a 
StarPhoenix story, Mr. Speaker: 
 

It’s never a good idea for governments to do that because it 
makes them look like they don’t know what they’re doing 
— that they hadn’t done sufficient planning or hadn’t done 
effective consultation, and don’t have confidence in their 
own plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so that’s in reference to the government rolling 
back budget cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Mr. Rasmussen is saying it doesn’t look like the government 
knows what they’re doing or that they’ve done sufficient 
planning, Mr. Speaker. I take that a step further and say: doesn’t 
just look like it, Mr. Speaker; it’s very clear that that’s the case. 
This government has not done sufficient planning and does not 
appear to know what they’re doing at this point. 
 
We can look to government flip-flops or changes to budget 
decisions or what they might refer to as government listening, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to refer to it more as pulling at least one 
finger out of their ear, or perhaps to put it another way, as Mr. 
Rasmussen said, poor planning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have some of their walk backs — and not that I don’t 
welcome these, Mr. Speaker; I think we welcome them on our 
side of the House — but they’ve put . . . I think it illustrates a 
lack of planning, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen them make changes 
on how PST [provincial sales tax] was going to apply on 
construction projects. We’ve seen a walk back of the libraries 
funding; funerals; the hearing aid plan, delaying it for kids to 
make sure . . . They’ve cut the hearing aid plan, Mr. Speaker, 
but they’ve realized they needed audiologists to insure that kids 
had access to those services or public audiologists because the 
capacity wasn’t there in the private sector, Mr. Speaker, so 
they’re delaying that. 
 
We’ve got Bill 40, sort of, Mr. Speaker. We thought it was a 
complete repeal of Bill 40 but as it turns out that isn’t the case. 
And another example, the 10 per cent cut to mental health that 
we learned about in April of last year, Mr. Speaker, and then 
after months of community-based health organizations being 
dragged over the coals and not sure whether they were losing all 
their funding or part of their funding, the minister realizing that 

in fact our health care CBOs [community-based organization] 
do really important work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Changing their stance on sleep apnea machines, I think this is 
an interesting thing. On September 13th, 2017, the sleep apnea 
machines . . . The quote from the Health minister is, “Following 
consultation with respirologists and review of processes in other 
jurisdictions, we’ve determined that the same annual savings 
could be achieved from an alternate approach,” said the Health 
minister. “This approach will reduce costs for patients and 
allow better access for those who need it, while still achieving 
the same savings for the province.” 
 
Well I’m glad that the minister realized several months after the 
budget that there was a different way of doing things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Or like the 10 per cent cut to CBOs, Mr. Speaker. He’s quoted 
on August 17th — so again several months after we heard that 
the CBOs were going to be cut — he’s quoted as saying, “After 
conducting the most comprehensive review of health-funded 
CBOs in close to 10 years, we have decided not to proceed with 
the 10 per cent reduction,” Mr. Speaker. And then he goes on to 
say, “We understand that the uncertainty around funding during 
this review period has caused some worry.” 
 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, and it illustrates very clearly a 
government makes a decision, puts out a directive — we’re 
cutting 10 per cent from our CBOs; we want CBOs to tell us, 
justify what they do, Mr. Speaker — and not realizing that 
many of those CBOs, the health regions that fund those CBOs, 
put together a very intricate plan. Like those CBOs aren’t 
bodies unto themselves; they fit into a plan to make sure that 
people have the health care they need, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very 
glad on those cases that the minister or ministers responsible 
walked those back, but I think it illustrates a clear example of 
this government not planning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, there were things that I 
liked. I have to say first of all that there are no shortage of 
issues impacting people in Saskatoon Riversdale and 
throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to focus 
mostly on my critic areas, which in this case it’ll be health and 
seniors’ issues, although there are . . . My absence of comments 
in some areas, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t mean that they’re not 
important. I just know I have colleagues who will cover many 
subjects like education very ably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some of the things that I appreciated in the Throne Speech, I 
was very happy to hear that the government was going to 
implement basically the dissenting opinion, the minority 
opinion by my colleague and I around donor physicians, Mr. 
Speaker. And we learned last year after many hours of listening 
to evidence and going through evidence that donor physicians 
are the linchpin in improving donor rates. 
 
Saskatchewan and Alberta, I believe, are the only two provinces 
that don’t have donor physicians. Rates have gone up 
everywhere else in large measure because of donor physicians, 
and donor physicians are the people . . . Actually, Dr. Moser, 
who is a physician in Saskatoon, had described to me on 
another discussion back in 2015 that donor physicians are . . . I 
will give you a definition of them. They help educate their 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

colleagues around donation. They review any missed 
opportunities. They can review missed opportunities on a 
case-by-case basis. They work with regional health authorities 
and help with collaboration. They’re an incredibly important 
part of making this happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I almost fell off my seat actually when I heard that the 
government was going this direction. Back in 2015 actually this 
government passed a bill that . . . We went through three 
readings for The Human Tissue Gift Act in 2015 that enabled 
mandatory referral and donation after cardiocirculatory death. 
There needed to be regulations. But the former Health minister 
actually had done work on that bill, but the transplant program 
had requested at that time, aside from that bill, they also wanted 
donor physicians. And so this has been something that’s been 
asked for for several years, Mr. Speaker. So I was happy we 
could put it in our minority opinion. 
 
But this is something the government has known for several 
years now, Mr. Speaker, and is just acting on it now. I was 
surprised that it was included in this budget because as late as 
last spring, Mr. Speaker, I asked in estimates about it, and the 
government, for love nor money, couldn’t say donor physician. 
They talked about a liaison position in their recommendations. 
In committee we talked about . . . they talked about donor 
coordinators, which are an important part of the system, but 
they’re very different than donor physicians, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So I was very happy to see the government go this direction, 
and I believe firmly that this will help increase our organ 
donation rate, which is one of the worst in the country, Mr. 
Speaker, which will not only be good . . . provide people, 
patients who choose, the families of those who are losing a 
loved one, with the opportunity for their loved one to donate 
organs, Mr. Speaker, which can often be part of the healing 
process. 
 
Consent isn’t the issue, Mr. Speaker, consent around organ 
donation. I just want to read this into the record. That’s 
something that we heard in our committee, that consent isn’t in 
fact the issue. It’s not having a system in place that catches 
those opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we heard from page 12 on our report that we did, Mr. 
Speaker, the organ donation report, the Kidney Foundation of 
Canada conducted a study in Alberta to understand the potential 
for organ donation. According to Ms. Van Deurzen, the study 
shows a high public willingness to donate, and only 10 to 20 per 
cent of potential donors are lost due to lack of consent. The 
remaining 80 to 90 per cent of missed opportunities are 
systemic failures that could be fixed within the health care 
system. She indicated that these stats are consistent with other 
jurisdictions surveyed in the US [United States], Mr. Speaker. 
 
So consent is less of an issue, Mr. Speaker. It’s having those 
structures in place, and the big piece of that to put those 
structures in place are donor physicians. So I’m really very glad 
that the government decided to go with the dissenting opinion, 
Mr. Speaker, in the work that we did last year on organ 
donation. And in fact, the bill that passed in 2015, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve been working on regulations around mandatory referral 

and donation after cardiocirculatory death, but that bill has not 
yet been proclaimed. So I’m looking forward to that bill being 
proclaimed. Hopefully maybe even we get there this session, 
depending on what’s all in the bill, Mr. Speaker, if it comes 
back before us to enable donor physicians. So organ donation 
was one of the things that I appreciated in the speech. 
 
I have to say, promising to keep election promises, Mr. 
Speaker, so in the 2016 election campaign, the Sask Party 
committed to individualized funding for kids under six. So the 
government has said kids will receive $4,000 per year. So that 
was a promise two budget cycles ago, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government who has yet to keep that promise, but I hope that 
since they’ve put it in the Throne Speech, budget number three 
may be a charm, Mr. Speaker. The seniors’ tax deferral on 
property tax, Mr. Speaker, again, that was something around, I 
just have to say around individualized funding. I actually 
presented petitions on that prior to that last election from 
constituents who believe this was an important measure, but it’s 
not without its challenges. 
 
You think about those kids. You hit six years old, Mr. Speaker, 
and the individualized funding falls off, and as we know, 
there’s a huge gap for kids who go from health into education 
when it comes to getting necessary supports. So I just want to 
flag that as a concern, Mr. Speaker, that those early years are 
really important, but kids with autism spectrum disorder still 
need supports beyond six, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to point out that $4,000 really is a drop in the bucket 
when it comes to therapies and supports. And there are some 
families who it will enable them to access . . . they’ll have 
additional money to put towards therapies, but the reality is 
there are many families for whom $4,000, they still won’t be 
able to access the necessary supports that they need, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I was happy to hear about the promise to keep the 
promise from the 2016 election campaign on the seniors’ tax 
deferral. Again this was something that we’ve been pushing as 
well. I’ll talk a little bit more about that in a couple minutes 
here, Mr. Speaker, but I was happy to see that. 
 
Around impaired driving, I had the privilege a few years ago in 
2013 to sit on a committee with members of both sides of the 
House on road safety. And a part of that was around impaired 
driving, Mr. Speaker. I was happy last year to finally have the 
government move on the three-day vehicle impoundment for 
those in the warning range, Mr. Speaker. That was something 
my colleague from Cumberland and I pushed in 2013. It took 
three years but we were happy to see it, especially in light of 
looking at recent stats. 
 
So just an article from October 29, 2017: “Drunk driving deaths 
up in Saskatchewan in 2016.” So I just want to note we didn’t 
increase those penalties until late last year, Mr. Speaker. I think 
it was the end of October or early November. But “A total of 57 
people were killed in Saskatchewan in 2016 in collisions 
involving alcohol,” according to SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], Mr. Speaker. 
 
So impaired driving is still an issue here in Saskatchewan. So I 
appreciated the government talking about the possibility of ride 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

sharing, particularly in smaller communities, Mr. Speaker. I 
know coming from a centre like Saskatoon, it’s great to have 
taxis, but I know there’s lots of people in other communities 
who don’t have access to those kinds of services. So I 
appreciate that. I think change of culture also involves making 
sure that people have an opportunity to have a drink and get 
home safely, making sure that people have the necessary 
services. 
 
But I think, as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre pointed 
out, that the goal should be for everybody who’s employed or to 
go home safe as well, Mr. Speaker, and so making sure from an 
occupational health and safety perspective that anybody 
involved with ride sharing that they are protected, Mr. Speaker. 
And my colleague from Saskatoon Centre pointed out some of 
the struggles I think that the taxi industry has had working with 
SGI and WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] around safety 
shields and a number of other issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s absolutely imperative that . . . I know the taxi 
association has said they are not . . . that they’re supportive of 
ride sharing, but there needs to be a level playing field, Mr. 
Speaker. But I am very encouraged about the idea of people 
having safe rides home, Mr. Speaker. Any one, any death on the 
highway or on any road, Mr. Speaker, because of alcohol or any 
other impairment for that matter, whether it’s other drugs or 
even prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker, can be a problem. Some 
of the things that I’d like to point out that were missing, that 
jumped out at me, that were really absent in this Throne Speech 
and I would have liked to have seen the government go there. 
 
A Throne Speech is about government priorities, Mr. Speaker. I 
was sorry to see that mental health, generally speaking, wasn’t 
part of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. There’s a mental health 
and addictions action plan, a 10-year mental health and 
addictions action plan that’s almost three years old, Mr. 
Speaker, and the government has not moved very far on that. 
But particularly around mental health — and I’ll get into some 
of these in a little bit more detail shortly here, Mr. Speaker — 
I’d just like to lay out some of the things I would have liked to 
have seen. 
 
Particularly around mental health too I would have liked to 
have seen, I think it’s important for people in Saskatchewan that 
we address the youth suicide crisis, Mr. Speaker. And coupled 
with that, I think we could have talked about reconciliation. 
There could have been an apology for the Sixties Scoop. I’d 
like to see our government pursue that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that was absent in this Throne Speech was 
addressing the HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] crisis, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll get into that in a few minutes too, but we have 
some of the highest rates in Canada as well. Interpersonal 
violence, Mr. Speaker; we’re the highest of the provinces. 
We’re twice the national rate, Mr. Speaker, of interpersonal 
violence. And this government’s made a move, following 
actually . . . My colleague from Douglas Park had worked with 
our colleague from Saskatoon Centre to come up with a bill last 
spring on interpersonal violence to allow a lease to be broken, 
Mr. Speaker, when someone was fleeing a violent situation. 
And the government moved on that, which we’re very happy 
about. They took a part of the bill and included that. 
 

But a really important piece that they missed, Mr. Speaker, is 
job protection and some guarantee of wages, Mr. Speaker. So 
when you’re fleeing a difficult situation, sometimes you have to 
be absent from work, and to have job protection is the first 
thing. You have to feel like you’re not going to lose your job in 
order to make sure you and/or your children are safe. But part 
of that proposal could also involve paying some of those days, 
Mr. Speaker. And we would have liked to have seen that 
happen. 
 
Again, I mention reconciliation. So how do we bring the calls to 
action to life? I think that that could have been a really great 
legacy for our Premier as he heads out the door, Mr. Speaker, 
and I was disappointed to see that not as a key theme in our 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
As the Health critic, a palliative care strategy, we’ve all talked, 
or many of us have talked to folks here who’ve explained why 
palliative care is really important here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Recently due to a Supreme Court decision and the 
federal government moving on medical assistance in dying, I 
think it becomes even more imperative that we have a proper 
palliative care strategy. And I’m supportive of medical 
assistance in dying, but I think on the flip side of that we need 
to ensure that people have a full range of choices, Mr. Speaker, 
that they have their pain managed and treated the best they can. 
 
And the reality is, there are pockets of good, Mr. Speaker, but 
we could benefit from a palliative care strategy, a dementia 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. We have an aging population here in 
Saskatchewan. By 2041 — this was an interesting statistic I 
heard last week at the rural dementia summit — by 2041, 
seniors will have the highest rate of mental health issues in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. I think this is something that . . . When’s 
the best time to plant a tree? It would have been a while ago. 
The next best time is now, Mr. Speaker. I would have liked to 
have seen us pursue a dementia strategy, Mr. Speaker. So those 
are things, sort of general things, that I think are missing in the 
Throne Speech. 
 
But I’d like to get into a little bit more detail why I think those 
are areas that we should have pursued, or this government 
should have pursued, around mental health, Mr. Speaker. So as 
I mentioned, we have an almost a three-year-old mental health 
and addictions 10-year action plan. So almost a third of the way 
through it, Mr. Speaker; very little has been done on that plan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have to point out that of all the dollars spent on health care in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, only 5 per cent of those dollars 
here in Saskatchewan are committed to mental health. In 
Saskatoon Health Region, which is the largest health region in 
the province, only 4.5 per cent are committed to mental health. 
The national average is seven, Mr. Speaker, and in countries 
that are doing things much better than us, about 11 to 14 per 
cent are the numbers in a country like Australia that is doing 
much better on mental health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reality is the rates are going up. You go to RUH [Royal 
University Hospital] or the Dubé, they’re always over capacity, 
Mr. Speaker. The numbers haven’t diminished in recent years; 
they’ve gone up. And partly we need to think about how we do 
things differently, Mr. Speaker. We need better access and 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

better support in community. 
 
I would argue that we need to do things completely differently 
around mental health when people are in crisis. I think we need 
to prevent people from being in crisis, but if they do reach a 
crisis I don’t think our standard emergency room or heading to 
a hospital is the right place to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Australia, actually in 2013, there was a presentation to the 
Saskatoon Health Region on the emergency department wait 
time, the patient flow initiative in 2013. And we heard one of 
the things they were doing in Australia was creating psychiatric 
emergency care centres. So some of them are attached to 
hospitals or acute care facilities, but some of them are 
stand-alone, but what they are is short-stay and assessment, or 
assessment and short-stay units. So you can come; you get 
assessed promptly in a much healthier environment. You might 
stay for two or three days and get stabilized. That’s a really 
wonderful model, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was glad to finally see the government agree to fund the 
temporary assessment unit at RUH, the seven-bed assessment 
unit, which will be built at RUH. But that space isn’t the same 
space. So the Dubé family donated a million dollars for capital. 
And the government for months now hadn’t been willing to 
fund the few positions it would take to staff that properly to 
ensure that instead of waiting . . . So someone who is having a 
psychotic episode or is anxious or experiencing suicidal 
thoughts, Mr. Speaker, the last place they want to be is sitting in 
bright lights, in a noisy hallway, at best in a really 
uncomfortable, dark, dank room but often in the hallway 
because our ERs are busy. And mental health, unless you’re . . . 
in the way we rank emergencies, Mr. Speaker, are often further 
down on a list, Mr. Speaker. So I’m glad the government has 
agreed to support those positions, because the capital money is 
there. 
 
[19:30] 
 
But the problem is, when they move over, when the adult 
emergency moves over to the children’s hospital, that same 
option won’t exist. There will be nice physical spaces. There’ll 
be nice rooms for everybody, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not just the 
room. It’s the service. It’s the way in which we treat mental 
health patients. 
 
I know my brother, who lost his son four years ago . . . I 
thought this was a really great example. And so what we do, 
instead of creating a warm and inviting atmosphere for people 
who have mental health and addictions issues, who at the best 
of times have a heck of a time getting help, Mr. Speaker, we put 
roadblocks in front of them. And even the smallest little speed 
bump will keep them from accessing those services, Mr. 
Speaker. And instead of creating that warm and inviting 
environment, what we do is when someone’s in a crisis, we take 
them up to the hospital and we push them through a door 
behind which there might not be the appropriate services, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think we totally need to rethink how we do 
emergency care. 
 
And I know back in 2014 I asked in committee. It’s called the 
third-door option because you’re not entering a hospital for a 
scheduled procedure and you’re not entering through the 

emergency department. The third-door option is like a 
short-stay unit or these assessment and short-stay units. And I 
know that I was told in committee in 2014 when I asked if that 
was an option at the children’s or the new adult ER in the 
children’s hospital, I was told that we don’t want anybody to 
wait, Mr. Speaker, which is true. But mental health patients are 
unique, Mr. Speaker, and need to be treated, I think, in a 
different way. 
 
So another thing that I would have liked to have seen, and I 
think that it’s important to note. So we have over capacity 
regularly at . . . Sorry, I want to go back to the assessment unit. 
So it’s great that it’s going to exist at RUH in Saskatoon but the 
reality is that same kind of treatment happens at any acute 
facility here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So we have to think 
about that model and changing the model, not just at RUH but 
everywhere. 
 
One thing I would have liked the government to talk about, 
there are currently . . . The only children who aren’t going to be 
in the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, are those who have 
mental health issues. They will still be in the separate unit at the 
Dubé which is great that they have their unit but the whole 
point of a children’s hospital is to provide that interdisciplinary 
support. And the fact remains is the kids will continue to be 
stigmatized and set aside rather then benefitting from all the 
services that will be available at the children’s hospital, Mr. 
Speaker, which I think is a shame. And we could have also 
taken those beds at the Dubé, the separate children’s unit, had 
we moved those kids to the children’s hospital and used those 
beds for adult patients, Mr. Speaker. So I think that that’s a 
shame and a missed opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think we need . . . The building of the North Battleford 
Hospital, Mr. Speaker, is under way. And I’ve heard . . . I know 
people who’ve toured it and have seen it and have said goods 
things about it, Mr. Speaker. But in conjunction with that North 
Battleford Hospital, several years ago this government, the 
Ministry of Health, and the health region did a really great 
report about the building of the hospital. But the other things 
that are needed which are step-down beds, different kinds of 
supported housing, Mr. Speaker. So you leave an acute 
psychiatric facility and you’re not just pushed back onto the 
street or wherever you might have been, Mr. Speaker. So 
step-down beds provide that added support and the ability to 
readjust and get the support you need to get back to living your 
life, Mr. Speaker. And that, it seems to have fallen completely 
off the radar. 
 
We can’t talk about mental health though, Mr. Speaker. Those 
are just a few of the issues that I know. There’s so many around 
mental health. The 10 per cent cut that this government 
proposed — and I’m really glad that they’ve seen the error of 
their ways, Mr. Speaker — but that 10 per cent cut threw 
organizations into complete flux. They had trouble. Like how 
do you make a budget, Mr. Speaker, when you’re not sure if 
you’re losing all of your money or part of your money? These 
are key services in communities around mental health: 
Sanctum, which is an HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 
hospice in Saskatoon; the Canadian Mental Health Association; 
organizations that support women with reproductive health. 
Anyway, that put all kinds of people in crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

So we can’t talk about mental health without talking about the 
crisis of youth suicides in the North. Just recently actually, Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of September the Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations released a discussion paper on youth 
suicides. I heard earlier, I think it was the member from 
Canora-Pelly who was talking about highways and highway 
safety and said, you can’t put a price on a life, Mr. Speaker, and 
I couldn’t agree more. And I think this is why we really need to 
redouble our efforts to support people in the North on coming 
up with strategies and creating hope, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can’t even fathom a 10- or 11-year-old child wanting to take 
their life, Mr. Speaker. It’s just unfathomable to me. I think 
about Ophelia, who will be 10, and I think about the hope and 
the excitement that she has in life, and I think about kids who 
don’t have that, Mr. Speaker. Poverty, intergenerational 
violence and trauma because of residential schools, Mr. Speaker 
— all kinds of reasons why this is happening. But this 
government could’ve and this Premier could’ve made a bold 
statement in this Speech from the Throne and committed to 
seriously addressing the youth suicide crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are some appalling statistics, Mr. Speaker. Since 2005 
when deaths began being coded by ethnicity, there’s been close 
to 500 deaths by suicide recorded of First Nations people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Approximately 62 per cent of all 
those suicides are by persons under 30 years old, Mr. Speaker. 
The reality is the rate for First Nations girls aged 10 to 14 is 26 
times higher than that of non-First Nations girls, Mr. Speaker 
— 26 times higher. First Nations boys, six times more likely to 
commit suicide or to die by suicide, Mr. Speaker. And 25 per 
cent of all death by suicides in that time that we’ve been 
keeping stats on ethnicity were teenagers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are stats, Mr. Speaker, but these are real people. These 
are real children and family members who have moms and dads 
and aunties and uncles and cousins and friends. And are part of 
a community, and leave a huge, gaping hole in that community, 
Mr. Speaker. I cannot even wrap my head around that. 
 
I have to point out when we talk about mental health, so it’s a 
much broader . . . It’s not just about providing mental health 
services. It’s about providing housing; it’s about providing 
education. I think about kids on reserve who get, I think it’s 
about 60 cents on the dollar compared to my child who’s at a 
school . . . 60 cents on the dollar compared to my child who’s at 
a school in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. You think about things like 
that. You think about government cancelling NORTEP 
[northern teacher education program], which saw huge success 
around training northern teachers and keeping teachers from 
community in the North. 
 
Corey O’Soup, who is our Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker, 
who is not a New Democrat by the way — he was the Sask 
Party candidate in 2009 in Saskatoon Riversdale. And just last 
week actually, in response . . . There had been an article or a 
story in the Guardian citing an 18-month wait for children for 
mental health, to see psychiatrists in the UK [United Kingdom], 
Mr. Speaker. And he responded on Twitter by saying. “The wait 
list . . . in SK to see a child psychiatrist is up to 2 years! Our 
kids are literally dying as we continue to fail to meet their 
needs.” Mr. Speaker, I think that that speaks volumes and I 
think that that should have been in our Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The HIV crisis. I want to point to a couple of articles here 
where words like “state of emergency,” “cause for alarm” are 
all words being used to talk about our HIV rates here, 
HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome] here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So just a little snapshot into recent numbers, Mr. Speaker. So 
we actually saw numbers drop. In 2012 they were at 177; 2013 
they were at 129; 2014 they were at 112; and then in 2015 we 
saw 160. And the preliminary numbers in 2016 were 170, Mr. 
Speaker. The HIV rates are two times higher in Saskatchewan 
than the national average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to quote . . . This is an article from the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] posted on May 5th, 2017, 
where: 
 

An infectious disease physician with the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region says Saskatchewan is in what 
he calls a “state of emergency” as the number of new HIV 
cases in the province continues to rise. 
 
[He points out that] “It’s a complicated dynamic that 
defies a simple solution, I think, and a simple 
explanation.” 

 
But that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try to do the work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the ministry, in response to those numbers, has said that it’s 
expected the data to show a rise since there is more testing for 
the disease, but Dr. Wong points out that that accounts only for 
part of the explanation, Mr. Speaker. So it requires political will 
to address this kind of problem, Mr. Speaker, and we need to be 
doing that. 
 
Another doctor, actually Dr. Stewart, Kris Stewart, a physician 
in Saskatoon who’s part of the Saskatchewan HIV 
Collaborative, said slight progress has been made, but he’s not 
sure it was the result of a request. So there was a request a year 
ago to declare a state of emergency. And Dr. Stewart says, 
“We’re the only jurisdiction where the incidence has gone up 
recently. So that should be a cause for alarm.” 
 
He goes on to say, Kris, Dr. Stewart goes on to say, “Very often 
these are young people, their whole lives ahead of them. 
Sometimes they have children. In this time and place in the 
world, we should be doing better than this. And we’re not,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This should have been a Throne Speech that started the work on 
addressing the HIV crisis, Mr. Speaker. Words like “cause for 
alarm” should have been cause for alarm, to see it show up in 
our Throne Speech. 
 
Around seniors, I mentioned the property tax deferral, Mr. 
Speaker, which I was happy about. It was an election promise 
two budgets ago already. And I hope and I trust that it will be in 
. . . There’s been two budgets since that election promise. I 
know you looked suspicious, Mr. Speaker, but in fact there have 
been two budgets since that promise. 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

And what this government’s priorities have been. For example, 
in the last budget where they could have introduced this tax 
deferral, they chose a corporate tax cut which they’re now 
rolling back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this was this government’s priority, a corporate tax cut over 
a tax deferral for seniors, Mr. Speaker. But as happy as I am 
about the seniors’ deferral, the property tax deferral, we have to 
point out that this government has seen increases in drug costs 
for seniors. Not only have they increased it from a $15 pay to 
20 to 25 per prescription, but they also took thousands of people 
off that program with a change to the threshold, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else have they done? PST. PST has been a huge issue. 
Not just on daily goods and services, so the increase from 5 per 
cent to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker, but the addition of PST on 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. That was the one issue this summer I 
heard tons about in my office: seniors who buy dental 
insurance, health insurance, mortgage. Some of them still have 
mortgages who will maybe be applying for this deferral. But 
now they’re paying PST on their insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have one senior — if I have the email here — who wrote to 
me: 
 

Hi, Danielle. 
 
I wanted to express my discontent with the government 
budget and expansion of the sales tax. It really hits middle- 
and lower-class people and hurts them, versus people with 
more income. As an individual with fixed pension income, 
I am now facing unreasonable higher expenses starting this 
month, specifically with the 6 per cent on insurance. I now 
have to pay that on health care premiums, dental care 
premiums, supplementary death benefit plan premiums, 
house insurance, and vehicle insurance [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
I’ve heard that a lot this summer in my office, Mr. Speaker, and 
actually on the doorstep in Fairview as well. Many people are 
not happy with the 6 per cent, and that is a . . . I heard from 
many seniors, I think, about the . . . I don’t have a lot of seniors’ 
complexes or buildings in my constituency, but I do have some, 
and the health insurance one really stung a lot of them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a government . . . So they’re talking about deferral on 
taxes for housing. But at the same time, this government is 
choosing to get rid of seniors’ housing or affordable housing 
units in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In fact in some 
communities, just talking to some communities, if these units 
haven’t been sold, Sask Housing is going to tear them down and 
return them to their respective communities, Mr. Speaker. That 
makes absolutely no sense. These buildings by and large from 
my understanding, folks that I’ve spoken to, they’ve been fairly 
well maintained. I think there’s always a solution, and I don’t 
think selling them or getting rid of them altogether, tearing 
them down, is the right answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Podiatry services. This government in this last budget cut 
preventative podiatry services, so there wasn’t . . . People still 
had to pay to some degree for podiatry services, but now all that 

subsidy is gone, Mr. Speaker, unless you happen to have 
supplementary health benefits, Mr. Speaker. So a 
modest-earning senior who is not on any assistance program has 
to come up with money for preventative podiatry services. 
 
We had a doctor from Moose Jaw, a podiatrist in Moose Jaw, 
tell us that people will lose limbs, Mr. Speaker. You think about 
the high rate of diabetes and the cost of diabetes, the cost of 
someone losing their limb, Mr. Speaker, and this government 
cuts podiatry services. 
 
The hearing aid plan. So I mentioned earlier that this 
government has delayed its decision or delayed the full 
implementation of the cut of the hearing aid plan when it comes 
to children. But this was a mechanism to help seniors or help 
folks with affordable hearing aids, Mr. Speaker. Hearing aids, I 
don’t know who can afford hearing aids. If I was in a position 
with the income that I have, I don’t know how I would afford 
hearing aids, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t imagine a senior on a 
fixed income having to come up with 5 or $6,000. That is a 
reality. 
 
The increase to long-term care rates was a reality. That was 
something in this budget as well, Mr. Speaker. It was 
interesting. I just want to draw your attention back to in June 
. . . In the 2016 election, again in the 2016 election, this 
government, the Sask Party committed to 17, pardon me, a $7.5 
million reduction in executive pay, Mr. Speaker, and they were 
going to commit that to the front lines in long-term care, Mr. 
Speaker. So they were going to expect regions to find pay in 
upper management or in senior level positions, in executive 
positions and put that into long-term care. So that was in June 
of 2016 where we heard that in the Throne or pardon me in the 
2016 election campaign. 
 
And then I asked about it in committee, and I was told that that 
was the plan. And then just last May, as of May 1st, 2017, I’d 
asked and I was told as of January 31st, 2017, 4.9 million had 
been saved and then they were expecting to save another 1.2 
million by the end of the fiscal year for a target of, I think, $6.1 
million which is shy of the 7.5 million. But 6.1 million would 
be good to be directed into the front lines. But I was told that of 
that, only $1 million of that, Mr. Speaker, was going to make it 
onto the front lines in long-term care. And anybody who’s been 
in a long-term care facility knows, Mr. Speaker, how 
short-staffed those facilities are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I couldn’t finish this speech without talking about seniors and 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. That cut I wish 
this is something the government would’ve also rolled back. I 
was amazed. Knocking on doors in part of my constituency, I 
didn’t expect STC be a huge issue in Montgomery but in fact it 
was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve over spoken, Mr. Speaker. I always think I don’t have too 
much to say; I’m always surprised. And there’s much more I 
could, but I know that I’ve used up more than my fair share of 
time. So I appreciate people’s patience with me, Mr. Speaker. 
And with that I will be supporting my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana’s amendment, and I will not be supporting 
the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Martensville-Warman. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start 
this evening by welcoming the newest member to this Chamber, 
the member for Saskatoon Fairview, on her recent election. I 
had the opportunity to participate in a debate with her when she 
ran in 2016 and I found her to be quite capable and articulate 
and knowledgeable. And I am sure that her time will be well 
spent here. So I wanted to welcome her to this Chamber. 
 
I also want to recognize the Premier and what he’s done for this 
province. I know that all of us take different paths to get to this 
Chamber. Mine was a little bit more solemn than others as I was 
running to replace, well I can’t replace my dad, but to fill the 
seat that he once occupied. And I want to thank the Premier 
specifically. I know that my dad and I share some tendencies, 
but the Premier was quick to recognize that I was definitely just 
me in my own right and allowing me to fulfill different roles 
that he gave me in my time here. 
 
And I want to acknowledge as well, Mr. Speaker, the absolute 
dedication that he has to advancing our province and promoting 
us wherever he goes. He has been probably the fiercest 
champion that this province has ever seen, and he will be 
missed. I’m sure that collectively we can fulfill that role, but he 
did so much for us, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank him for his 
time here. I know that being the leader of a party is a huge 
commitment and the Premier of this province is an enormous 
one, so thank you to him. 
 
To the constituents who have sent me here, I want to thank 
them for their ongoing support. I’ve been here for ten and a half 
years and I get the sense that people are pretty happy at home. 
Our constituency office is not probably as busy as some. I had a 
lady phone in a couple of months ago because she was waiting 
on a donors list and was concerned about the time that she had 
been waiting. I’m happy to report that since then she’s had her 
procedure, and she’s doing very well. But in this Throne 
Speech, having the rate of organ donation increase through 
efforts that we can make in conjunction with the health regions 
just indicates to me that after 10 years of being in government 
we’re still doing things that the people of this province require, 
as this Throne Speech is filled with new ideas. 
 
As everyone here understands and most people have spoken to, 
I want to thank my family. To my girls, who are now 20 and 23, 
and I don’t know where the time goes. They had the 
opportunity this summer to go to Europe on a five-week 
backpacking trip and I think they hit five different countries. I 
managed to sneak into London without them knowing and 
surprise them at a train station. There were many tears because 
they honestly didn’t know that I was coming, and I got to take 
them to Paris for three days. And so that was exciting for all of 
us. It was particularly exciting for them because I paid for all of 
that part of their trip, so they were pretty excited about that. But 
nonetheless we had a really good time and made some great 
memories and spent our last night there drinking wine under the 
Eiffel Tower. Their liquor laws are slightly more lax than ours; 
I will talk to my seatmate about that after my speech. 
 
And to my fiancé, John, I want to thank him for his patience. 
Relationships are difficult coming into this job. I think they’re 
probably a little bit more difficult when they’re started within 

this job, and I’ve been gone for the majority of our relationship. 
So thank you to him for his patience. He’s a pretty exceptional 
guy. 
 
I also want to thank the Premier for my new responsibilities as 
Minister of Energy and Resources. We don’t get to dictate what 
portfolios we’re given, but I secretly always wanted this one, 
and so I was pretty excited about getting about it. It’s hard to 
follow in the shoes of my colleague, the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, because I know that he has a passion for 
this file, but I will do my best. 
 
And shortly after I was named minister, I had the opportunity to 
go to Calgary and meet with industry folks and stakeholders 
and hear from them about their concerns, what’s going well for 
them, some of the challenges that they’re facing. And one of the 
things that I heard repeatedly is that they appreciated the 
consistency of how things were done in Saskatchewan. They 
knew what the rules were and could make their business plans 
accordingly. There’s uncertainty in other areas, but 
Saskatchewan, it was their perspective that things were going 
pretty well here and they certainly appreciated that. 
 
And I think that many of us probably have some worries about 
what we’re seeing on the federal scene, whether it’s the Liberal 
government. We saw recently the cancellation of the Energy 
East project. I know that the federal Liberals like to say it was a 
business decision. Well of course it was a business decision, but 
it was a business decision based on changing of the rules in the 
NEB [National Energy Board] process which is completely 
under their purview. And it’s unfortunate these rules were 
changed for a pipeline that would have been so very important 
not just to Saskatchewan and Alberta but to our country as a 
whole. 
 
I think there’s also concern with the new federal NDP [New 
Democratic Party] leader — I’ll get to that in a little bit — and 
his position on some of these things. And I’d be interested to 
know what his colleagues here, the NDP in Saskatchewan, feel 
about some of those positions and whether they will stand up 
for our province or stand up for their party because those right 
now are two completely different things. And that is a concern, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the recently elected leader of the federal NDP has been very 
public about his dislike, displeasure, non-support of pipelines in 
this country which is obviously concerning to us, Mr. Speaker. 
And one of the reasons that he said that he doesn’t like them is 
because it increases oil production and international exports of 
our products. Well what a horrible position to take, Mr. 
Speaker, that the problem with pipelines for him — one of the 
many reasons, I would imagine — is that it might actually 
increase our exports. I don’t know that that’s any way to grow 
our economy, but that would be NDP economics which is a 
little frightening. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only does he not like pipelines, he 
doesn’t like exports, doesn’t want production of oil and gas in 
this country. He actually went so far to say . . . I have a quote 
from a media interview he did just this August, August 21 of 
this year. And he said, “we know that certain technology . . .” 
And this was in direct response to oil and gas questions, not 
some other technology: 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

And we know that certain technology is finite and not 
sustainable. And to me it doesn’t make sense for us to 
make investments in technology that’s not going to be 
sustainable and create an economy that’s long-lasting. 

 
We know that certain industries, while we’re heavily 
dependant on them now, aren’t going to be the industries 
of the future. So it doesn’t make sense for us to . . . [invest] 
in the technology that isn’t going to develop sustainable 
jobs for Canadians. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, oil is in the ground; it’s coming up every 
day. And if he thinks that for some reason natural resources in 
this country are going to suddenly dry up so there’s no point in 
investing in them today, it’s completely erroneous. 
 
There is a study recently . . . Excuse me, I’m losing my voice 
today. There was a study recently, a global energy forecast 
which between 2014 and 2040 . . . Obviously the consumption 
of global energy is going to go up. But what’s interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, is the actual makeup between natural gas, oil, nuclear, 
coal, and renewables, that mix actually doesn’t change. And 
that’s factoring in the commitments made under the Paris 
climate accord that recently took place. So even with all of 
those provisions factored in to what the future energy use 
globally is going to be, the mix with natural gas, oil, and coal, 
which are things that are produced in this province, in this 
country, will not change. 
 
So then the question is, if we’re going to not invest in these 
technologies in our province and in our country, we’re not 
going to invest in pipelines or approve pipelines — the need for 
all of these energy sources does not change — so then the 
question becomes, where does it come from? It’s not going to 
come from Canada. It’s not going to come from Saskatchewan. 
It’s going to come from someplace else. So then where does it 
come from? Then we start importing things from places like 
Saudi Arabia. We export our jobs to other countries and forgo 
investment, technology opportunities, and jobs in our own 
country and our own province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are kind of the focus of both the federal NDP leader 
and the focus of the federal Liberal leader, is we’re going to 
phase out coal. We’re going to phase out oil sands. We’re not 
going to let pipelines be developed. And at what expense, Mr. 
Speaker? At the expense of this very province. 
 
And so again it will be interesting to see what the position of 
our provincial NDP is going to be. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know 
some of their positions. And as both parties in this House are in 
the midst of leadership elections, so you know, people are 
talking. But before entering into the leadership race — or this 
current one because I think this is his third go at it — the 
member for Saskatoon Meewasin had co-written a paper talking 
about the phasing out of coal in our province. So again, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP going after yet another industry. 
 
And all of this is sort of backed on the premise of, it’s more 
environmentally friendly to not have these things. So if these 
people think that, at the end of the day, all of our energy is 
going to come from solar panels and windmills, they are sadly 
mistaken and they will . . . are now figuratively living in the 
dark. They will then be literally living in the dark because 

they’re not going to have the power supply to keep their lights 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on the issue of the environment . . . And I’ve listened with 
great interest over the last few months because up until now we 
don’t really know where the NDP stand on environmental 
issues. They don’t have any plan for anything, although the 
member for Regina Rosemont has said previously that we need 
plans for all of these things. Well that’s all fine and good but 
they don’t really have one. 
 
Except I think probably about, I don’t know, seven months ago, 
probably during the spring session, suddenly their new plan on 
the environment is to encourage us to implement the legislation 
that we introduced in 2009. That is now their environmental 
plan, which I find a little strange, considering, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Because I went back through the record just to make sure. I was 
the minister at the time, so I thought I was paying attention to 
what was going on in the House, so I went back just to 
double-check. The NDP voted against that legislation, all of 
them. It’s on division. It’s in the public record. And now the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana and some of her colleagues, I 
believe, are telling us that their environmental plan is to force 
us to implement legislation that we already introduced even 
though they’ve already voted against it, which I found quite 
interesting. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And even at their convention just this past weekend — and I 
won’t read the whole thing into the record, but I will read the 
end of it — one of their resolutions — it’s SC-02 — says: 
 

Whereas the Sask Party’s own Green Technology Fund 
would protect us from having Ottawa force their tax on 
Saskatchewan families; whereas the Green Technology 
Fund has already been passed through the legislature; 
whereas The Conference Board of Canada has estimated 
that the Green Tech Fund would add billions to the 
economy and create thousands of jobs [which is interesting 
that they are so now promoting something that they voted 
against not so many years ago, ends with], be it further 
resolved that as a first step to fighting the federal carbon 
tax and climate change, the Saskatchewan NDP call on the 
Sask Party to implement their own Green Technology 
Fund that would make the biggest polluters pay for 
pollution they cause, invest and diversify in our economy, 
and create jobs. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, apparently that is their new environmental 
plan, and I find it interesting that this is all predicated on the 
fact that if we do this, a federal government can’t impose their 
own plan on us. So I’m going to go back to their new federal 
NDP leader who said not so very long ago in relation to what’s 
going on here with the economy and what’s going on with the 
federal government, he said, and I quote, “Well Brad Wall has 
now resigned, so that’s going to be easier to bring a carbon tax 
on Saskatchewan.” 
 
So what exactly is their position? And I haven’t heard one of 
them say anything against their leader’s position. All I’ve heard 
so far from them about Mr. Singh is the interim Leader of the 
Opposition in an interview with a Moose Jaw outlet recently, 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

praising, almost gleeful at his election as their new leader. Well 
I would hope that they would be slightly more gleeful about the 
future of our province than this man who wants to shut down 
every resource that our province has so that they can then 
implement a federal carbon tax on our province because that’s 
what their party stands for, Mr. Speaker. And I would expect 
that they would be standing up for our province and not 
standing up for their party, but we haven’t seen that from them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So all we’ve seen from them is just a complete void of 
inspiration for anything new. We see that with their leadership 
race where they have not just an also-ran, but an also-also-ran. 
We saw that again at their convention this weekend. The only 
proposals they have is to take us back to undo a bunch of stuff. 
There is no new ideas in any of their proposals, just a 
regurgitation of what we’ve heard from them in this Chamber 
for the last 10 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, after 10 years of waiting for the NDP to come 
up with some new ideas, all we see in this Chamber is what we 
saw in the election in 2007, and we know what the people of 
this province decided to do then. We saw a tired NDP, no new 
ideas, no vision for our province, for our future versus a 
Saskatchewan Party. And after 10 years, looking at this Throne 
Speech, 10 years later still bringing new ideas to the table, Mr. 
Speaker, ideas that are reflected in the people that we talk to 
every day, as I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, for 
the lady who was looking for increased effectiveness in the 
organ donor program, Mr. Speaker, and it remains that way 
today. 
 
And I would imagine three years from now when we go back to 
the polls, the people of this province will see exactly the same 
thing that they saw in 2007. They can have the same old, same 
old from the old NDP, Mr. Speaker, or an inspired vision for 
our province with new ideas from this side of the House. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment. I will 
be supporting our government and this Throne Speech. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
pleasure for me to join the Throne Speech debates this evening. 
It’s always hard to follow my very well-spoken colleague from 
Martensville but I’m going to do my best. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to start with some of the words 
that were in our Throne Speech at the very start. I think it’s a 
column from Mr. Ron Petrie, and being close to Thanksgiving I 
think it’s something that we should all read and know why 
we’re thankful to be in this province. 
 

Let it be known that I am grateful. Grateful to be where I 
am, for starters. As a younger man, brash and full of 
swagger, I considered my calling to be Vancouver, 
Montreal, even New York. Only now do I appreciate that 
what I actually fancied was merely the ideal of my farm 
boy self, destined for the big city . . . 
 
Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy that we started our Throne Speech with 
these words because it really resembles some of the thoughts 
I’ve had over the last few years being an MLA and having the 
opportunity to move to Regina. 
 
I’m from a small town by Swift Current called Rush Lake and 
born and raised on a farm there, a family farm with my uncle 
and my father. I always assumed I’d grow up and maybe leave 
Saskatchewan like many of us did in the early 2000s after we 
graduated from high school. A lot of my friends left and we 
decided not to follow. Most of that had to do with a young lady 
I met in Swift Current one night and we hit it off very well and 
decided to have our life take us to Regina and we went to 
university here. 
 
I think the story about our Throne Speech, and started our 
Throne Speech with this and let us be thankful, is a very good 
demonstration of we should all be thankful that we do live in 
Saskatchewan. On both sides of this House we want to work 
hard to make sure this is the best possible province for our 
families and for our children and our grandchildren. 
 
The title of the Throne Speech is “Growing Stronger,” and I do 
believe I see our province growing stronger each and every day. 
I’ll go through how we want to get our province to become a 
stronger province for our children and for our grandchildren. 
The investments we’re going to make now are what is going to 
put us in good stead and lay a solid foundation for our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our population is growing faster than it has in the 
earliest days of our province. During the last decade of growth, 
Saskatchewan has grown by more than 160,000 people, 
reversing the decline of the previous decades. 
 
During a decade of growth, Saskatchewan recorded the 
second-best job creation record. It had the second-highest 
growth in the average weekly earnings. We led the nation in 
retail sales and manufacturing sales growth, and our exporters 
set new records with agriculture leading the way. Our farmers 
are the best in the world at what they do and they have taken 
another good crop despite challenges posed by nature. 
 
The Saskatchewan plan for growth focuses on international 
engagement, investment, innovation, fiscal responsibility, and 
investments in infrastructure and education. Mr. Speaker, I 
think these are important aspects of our Speech from the 
Throne. It shows our way forward. We’re going to look at 
attracting new investment from outside business and I believe 
that . . . [inaudible] . . . ensuring our financial house is in order. 
I know that in the Throne Speech it’s mentioned that we’re 
$400 million ahead of where we thought we’d be at this time 
and the government debt is 400 million lower than forecasted at 
budget time. 
 
And people often ask me, as MLAs on both sides of the House, 
we’ve been talking with constituents, going around, and they 
said, why are you focused on debt reduction so much? Why is it 
important for your government to balance the budget in the next 
three years? I say, because I think our government is no 
different than the small business in Yorkton or a farm in Rush 
Lake. We expect our farmers, our small businesses — and they 
expect themselves — to balance their budget at the end of every 
month. And they take that responsibility and they have a pride 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

of that when they know the books are balanced. And I think 
their government should be held to that same standard. 
 
So I say it’s not just a goal in itself to balance the budget. We 
balance our budgets so that outside investment realizes we take 
fiscal responsibility seriously. That means when we balance the 
budget we can have stable taxes. We can ensure that we have a 
proper environment for investment so when companies do look 
from across the country or across the globe where they want to 
invest, they look at Saskatchewan because we have the best 
fiscal record in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
And I think that’s very important for us to realize: a balanced 
budget on itself is not the goal but the goal is to attract that 
outside investment. That outside investment runs our economy, 
grows our economy, grows our GDP [gross domestic product], 
grows our weekly earnings, and that allows us to do what 
governments should do and invest in the quality of life and 
invest and ensure that the most vulnerable in our society are 
taken care of. 
 
Like our Premier has always said, growth is not a pursuit in 
itself. We pursue growth so that we can finish the story, so that 
we can ensure that we can commit to have autism funding for 
six-and-under children. And that’s not the goal, just to have 
autism funding for six and under. That’s a start of our goal, but 
we want to do better than that. And we always say that the job’s 
not done, there’s always more work to do. We invest in . . . We 
reach for our balanced-budget goal, but we ensure that we can 
invest in new schools like Connaught, like Sacred Heart, like 
the 18 new P3 [public-private partnership] joint-use schools 
across Saskatoon, Regina, and Warman. That’s why we try and 
track investment into our province. That’s why we ensure that 
our fiscal house is in order, so people know that when they look 
at Saskatchewan, we have a stable fiscal house, and we are able 
to ensure that people want to invest in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s a few things in this Throne Speech that really jumped 
out at me right away when it was read by the Lieutenant 
Governor, who we should mention that is probably Vaughn, our 
Lieutenant Governor’s, final Throne Speech. And we appreciate 
the work she’s done. And when she served as Lieutenant 
Governor, she carried on the good work of Dr. Barnhart in 
reaching out to children across the North. And she will be 
missed because she did a wonderful job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like I was talking about, in the Throne Speech a 
few things that do jump out to me in particular was when the 
portion came up on education. This year 21 new schools 
accommodating more than 11,000 students opened their door 
for the first time. I’m not sure, and is the Minister of Education 
. . . I’m not sure if that might be the most new schools that have 
opened at the start of a school year ever — ever, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that speaks to some of the commitment that we have. As a 
father of three young children, I know education’s going to be 
important for me for the next 20 years. 
 
Twenty-one new schools opened across the province, and 
people are doubting our commitment to education. Mr. Speaker, 
those schools are located in nine sites in Regina, like I said, 
Saskatoon, Warman, Martensville, and they were completed in 
less than two years. In Regina alone, the new École Connaught 

Community School and a new Sacred Heart Community School 
opened along with the mâmawêyatitân centre, a unique 
integrated facility that includes a new Scott Collegiate, a 
recreational complex, a public library branch, a community 
police station, and a First Nations elders’ ceremonial room. 
 
A lot of people in Regina may not realize this, Mr. Speaker, but 
when you take a drive down Elphinstone, it is amazing how 
many new schools you pass driving down that one street in 
Regina. And that’s something that each and every MLA on this 
side of the House should take pride in, the commitment we’ve 
had into education over the last 10 years, over our last decade of 
growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, protecting communities. Earlier this year the 
federal government announced its intentions to legalize the 
non-medical use of marijuana by July 2018. This is something 
that has given me pause to cause for quite some time because 
we did a consultation with over 35,000 submissions talking to 
people, trying to understand where the people of Saskatchewan 
were on the legalization of marijuana. It’s something that we 
need to take seriously. It was dumped on our lap by the federal 
government, and we’re looking at what we can do and what we 
are able to do by July. 
 
And in July, Canada’s premiers raised concerns about the 
feasibility of the federal government’s implementation date, 
noting that more time may be needed. But this review is guided 
by four objectives: preventing the growth of the underground 
marijuana market, restricting access to minors, ensuring road 
and workplace safety, and protecting public health. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to read that into the record and 
say this government realizes that it’s going to be a challenge 
with the legalization of marijuana. But I believe it’s a challenge 
this caucus and this cabinet is up to. And we’re looking forward 
to moving in the direction and meeting the targets laid out by 
the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my government also introduced legalization 
enabling SGI to offer affordable insurance to drivers working 
for ride-sourcing companies like Uber and Lyft. I think this is 
probably one of the most interesting pieces on our Throne 
Speech because it’s yet another new proposal. And I’d say 
there’s quite a few new proposals in this Throne Speech, and 
that’s something our colleagues from across the way haven’t 
really come up with lately, is any new proposals. I know that 
they debated Uber and Lyft at their convention this week, and I 
believe they voted down some ideas around Uber and Lyft. 
 
And I find it interesting that the member opposite was on the 
highway traffic safety committee, her and I, and we agree on 
some things. I’d say disagree probably on more than we agree 
on over the last course of, what, six years. But Uber and Lyft, I 
think is something both sides of this House should get behind. It 
gives another alternative to people making a very, very poor 
choice in drinking and driving. 
 
And having Uber come in . . . And I listened to the words from 
the member from Saskatoon Centre around safety around Uber 
operators, and he made some good points. But rest assured, I 
believe the Minister of SGI has been working with some of that, 
and I believe it’s just . . . It’s not a fix-all. It’s not going to fix 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

the drinking and driving issue, but it’s another arrow in the 
quiver of the government, another arrow that people can decide 
and make a better choice if there’s more alternatives available, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also acting on the committee’s 
recommendations. The government has created a new 
protection and response team consisting of 250 armed officers 
who have the authority to arrest and detain those suspected of 
committing crimes. The PRT [protection and response team] is 
composed of 120 police officers from the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] and municipal police services, 40 
commercial vehicle enforcement officers who have given 
expanded powers, and 98 conservation officers. 
 
On this side of the House, there was a rural crime committee 
formed that went around our province and talked to 
communities that are facing some pretty serious crime issues in 
their areas. And the member from North Battleford led this 
crime task force, and he had members go around the province 
and listen to concerns. And there’s some farms around certain 
areas that have been broken into six times in a month, Mr. 
Speaker, and they can call the police but they realize they’re not 
going to be there for two hours. So what do you do for two 
hours? 
 
So there is some legitimate concerns around this rural 
Saskatchewan, about what can be done about protecting their 
livelihoods, protecting their lives, protecting their loved ones. 
And they’re looking for some answers, Mr. Speaker, and the 
PRT is a good step forward in ensuring that rural Saskatchewan 
families are safer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July, amendments to The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Act and The Residential Tenancies Act 
came into force. Mr. Speaker, this session the government will 
look at creating a process to improve the disclosure of decisions 
made by the Office of Residential Tenancies. This will assist in 
ensuring problem landlords and problem tenants can be readily 
identified in the marketplace, which again leads into some of 
the concerns around domestic violence, where both sides of the 
House take this issue very seriously. 
 
I know the former Attorney General and Minister of Justice did 
a lot of work on this file along with the interim leader from the 
opposition. And I think I would say that this is one of the pieces 
of legislation where collaborative work done together is shown 
in this House, and it’s nice to see when the two sides work 
together, things can be done a lot quicker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring prosperity and competitiveness. 
International engagement is a priority for our government 
because trade drives Saskatchewan’s economy. More than 
100,000 jobs in our province depend on exports. During our 
decade of growth, Saskatchewan exports to emerging markets, 
particularly in Asia, have grown by staggering amounts. 
 
Saskatchewan’s exports to China have increased 530 per cent 
over the past decade to 3 billion last year. Exports to India are 
up 272 per cent to 1.5 billion. Exports to Pakistan up 293 per 
cent to 548 million, and exports to Indonesia are up 130 per 

cent to 543 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of numbers just 
rattled off, but these numbers are what drives our economy. 
These numbers are what allows us to help people most in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more numbers I want to bring up 
here throughout this speech, and one is the number of times that 
Jagmeet Singh, the new leader of the federal NDP party, has 
had positive comments regarding pipelines — zero. Mr. 
Speaker, the number of NDP MLAs who have, MLAs and MPs 
[Member of Parliament], who have stood up to the federal NDP 
party with their non-pipeline building — zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is zero NDP MLA leadership candidates 
who oppose the federal carbon tax. That is outstanding, the fact 
that both reruns of NDP leaders have not opposed the federal 
carbon tax. And I’d say that would be one of the most important 
issues any government is going to face in Saskatchewan in the 
next 10 years is a federal carbon tax. It would kneecap our 
economy, kneecap agriculture. And this is something where the 
numbers we talked about, about expanding international 
markets will not happen if we have to put in a carbon tax. And I 
know that the number of candidates that are opposed to the 
federal carbon tax on this side of the House is five because each 
and every one of them will continue that fight against Ottawa to 
ensure that we don’t allow them to impose a carbon tax that will 
kneecap our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then a few other comments I’m going to make before I 
close my comments on the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP, they were talking about teacher losses today during 
question period, and I wonder how many teachers were lost in 
the 16 years of the NDP when they closed 176 schools. I 
wonder how many teachers lost their jobs then. I wonder how 
many students had to go to different schools when they closed 
176 schools. I wonder how many EAs were lost when they 
closed 176 schools. And the comments from across is these 
stats are old. These stats are old. These stats don’t matter. But 
people remember what happened last time an NDP government 
was in power. They remember that they completely forgot 
about rural Saskatchewan. They remember that they closed 
schools across this province. 
 
They also remember that they closed 52 hospitals across this 
province including the Plains hospital in Regina. And I think 
they say these are old comments, but every time I go door 
knocking in Walsh Acres, at least three people bring up the 
Plains hospital a night. So you remember when they closed that 
Plains hospital. It is actually one of the reasons why I’m able to 
stand in this position as MLA for Walsh Acres for two terms is 
because they closed the Plains hospital. And it might be the 
reason why I’m here for a third term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other thing I would just mention before closing in some 
of my final comments is the Rosemont MLA said now is not the 
time to change the donation. The member from Saskatoon 
Centre stands on his feet every day and talks about political 
donations and getting big money out of politics. But the MLA 
for Rosemont says, well now is not the time to change this. So I 
think there’s a bit of a split within their caucus, because I 
believe the member from Rosemont’s probably going to get a 
lot of big cheques from unions to make sure that the member 
from Meewasin doesn’t win. So I would like to know if the 
Saskatoon Centre member has consulted his colleague talking 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

about getting donations out of politics. It’d be interesting to see 
if what the question . . . It’d be interesting to see if the member 
from Rosemont agrees with that. But I digress, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s just a comment I was wondering when the member 
from Saskatoon brings all those issues up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about a few more things from 
the Throne Speech. Agriculture. Thanks for efforts of our 
farmers, ranchers, researchers, processers. Agriculture remains 
the pillar of our economy. In 2016 Saskatchewan shipped $14.4 
billion worth of agriculture products, more than half of all 
exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my government recognizes that climate change is 
a reality. We must do more to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, 
which is moving forward. We’re always trying to reach the 50 
per cent total generating capacity by 2030 for renewables. 
 
And I see that my time is running short here a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d just like to end with a bit of a summation that 
one of the reasons why I’m proud to support this Speech from 
the Throne is that it keeps our province moving forward. We’re 
focused on growing our economy. We’re focused on growing 
our province and getting stronger. And for my three kids, a 
stronger province is what our aim should be, a stronger 
province that allows for children, for youth to stay in our 
province, find a job, raise a family, and work in a field that they 
love is what we should all . . . be our goal for any government 
that’s in power. And that’s why I support our Speech from the 
Throne, because it moves our province forward. It makes our 
province stronger. And I won’t be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise and join in the debate on the Speech from 
the Throne. I have to apologize in advance, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
having some issues with my voice tonight. I’m a little bit 
croaky, so I’ll . . . Yes, as one of the members said, it seems 
everybody is sick right now. But I’ll certainly get through the 
speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before I start, I’d just like to acknowledge my seatmate, the 
Minister of — and of course you, Mr. Speaker — my seatmate, 
the Minister of Agriculture. You know, I hold him in very high 
esteem. He’s a good friend. And, Mr. Speaker, you can image 
my surprise today when I saw him walk in and he has an eye 
patch on. At first I assumed maybe he had another run-in with a 
carjacker, but he tells me that’s not the case. He tells me he was 
doing some work on the weekend on the farm and he got some 
dirt in his eye. But people weren’t aware of that, Mr. Speaker, 
so I had a number of texts today asking me why my seatmate 
was wearing an eye patch, and honestly they all assumed it was 
because it was Halloween. And the general consensus, Mr. 
Speaker, is if he wore your hat, he certainly would look like a 
pirate. So, Mr. Speaker, I think probably tomorrow being 
Halloween, we should give that a whirl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many of my colleagues have done, I want to 
acknowledge the Premier right now before I get into local 
issues and talk about my constituency, like most of us do at this 
point in the Throne Speech debate. The Premier has been a 
tremendous leader. He is going to be sorely missed. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I know history will be extremely kind to him because 
of his outstanding leadership, Mr. Speaker. And I just want it on 
record that I’m thanking him for that and for all he’s done and 
for all he’ll do in the time left to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that I wanted to talk about my 
constituency. As opposed to the general constituency, and so 
many people in it who in past speeches and budget debate 
speeches and Throne Speech debate speeches that I’ve thanked 
in the past, instead I want to talk about a specific event. 
 
A little over a week ago I was at an event in Rosetown, in the 
good community of Rosetown that has just treated me so 
incredibly well. It was a fundraiser put on by the Rosetown fire 
department to raise money for STARS [Shock Trauma Air 
Rescue Society], an outstanding thing to raise money for, Mr. 
Speaker. STARS does incredible work right across the province 
and has been just a godsend to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event was a gala that was put on to raise 
money. It was the sort of thing you’d expect. It was a 
tremendous banquet. There was live music. They had a silent 
auction. They raised a lot of money to help a great charitable 
cause. But I also want to mention that at that event, I was really 
privileged to play a role in it, to do some presentations to some 
outstanding fire people that work with the fire department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a number of awards were given out. 
Deputy Chief Ken Franklin was given an award for 25 years of 
service. Ken Booth was given a 20-year service award. Dave 
Wickett was also given a 20-year service award, and Duayne 
Leys was given a 20-year service award. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, the fire chief, Dennis Ogg, 
who’s been there obviously a long time, was given a 40-year 
service award. Just outstanding amount of service from an 
outstanding gentleman. I know Dennis very well. My time 
before politics, I was in municipal administration. He was the 
fire chief. Because of some joint fire agreements between the 
town of Rosetown and adjacent rural municipalities, he was our 
fire chief as well. And I just want to thank him for all the 
tremendous work that he’s done over the years, and I just want 
that down on record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge Duayne Leys and Kyla Diebert, 
who did a great deal of work putting on just a tremendous 
event. I want to say congratulations and thank you to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the items . . . There’s a number of health 
items in the Speech from the Throne and I’m going to touch on 
a few of them tonight. Mr. Speaker, one of them was 
individualized funding for children with autism spectrum 
disorder. Mr. Speaker, that’s a campaign promise that we had 
made. It’s very important, I believe. It’s for children who are 
under six years old, and the funding will be $4,000 annually for 
each child. That’ll start in the next budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We established a working group of stakeholders to review best 
practices across the country and other jurisdictions, and provide 
recommendations to the government on how best to deal with 
this funding, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank that committee 
for all the good work that they have done. 
 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

It should be noted also that the government of the province 
provides nearly $8 million in funding right now for autism 
spectrum disorder through the Ministry of Health. That includes 
5 million for professional medical support and consultants in 
health regions. And, Mr. Speaker, I should point out the 
dramatic increase in funding that that’s been since we were 
given the privilege of forming government. 
 
Funding for ASD [autism spectrum disorder] when we formed 
government in 2007 was at a half a million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s at $8 million now. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking 
forward to moving ahead with this new program. It was a 
campaign commitment that we made and, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
campaign commitment that’s kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also mentions the 
children’s hospital, the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon that’s 70 per cent complete right now. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to speak a little bit about . . . You know, it’s been well 
documented the need for that hospital, that service in the 
province, and how tremendous it’ll be for families who are 
already going through very difficult times with sick children 
that they can receive outstanding care for their child right in the 
heart of the province, Mr. Speaker, instead of adding to their 
difficulty and their stress and having to go outside of the 
province. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to touch on right now though is 
the incredible charitable donation from Jimmy Pattison. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the great privilege of travelling to Vancouver last 
winter with the Children’s Hospital Foundation with Brynn 
Boback-Lane, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
foundation; Shelley Brown who’s the board Chair; Greg Yuel 
who’s the past Chair; and Dr. Laurence Givelichian, and had an 
opportunity to play just a small role in the presentation that they 
gave to Jimmy Pattison and his board of directors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great experience for me. As everyone 
probably is well aware, Jimmy Pattison grew up in Luseland, 
Saskatchewan and I grew up in Tramping Lake which is 20 
miles away from Luseland — two small towns. Tramping Lake, 
when I grew up there, it had a K [kindergarten] through 12 
school and sadly that’s not there anymore. Through the ’80s and 
’90s that was closed. But, Mr. Speaker, it was a tremendous 
place to grow up. We didn’t have all the services and so I 
remember very well my parents driving me and my brother and 
sister to Luseland, the home of Jimmy Pattison, for swimming 
lessons when I was a small child. 
 
When we went to Vancouver to do the presentation, when I first 
met Jimmy Pattison, Greg Yuel and I were standing in his 
hallway, and he has an incredible number of pictures of 
dignitaries and celebrities from all over North America and 
around the world, pictures with them. And Greg and I were 
standing in the hallway looking and Mr. Pattison came down 
the hall and he saw us there and he stopped and chatted. And at 
one point I mentioned to him that I grew up very, very close to 
Luseland, and he didn’t say anything so I thought he wasn’t 
really that interested. 
 
The day went on. We went and had lunch with the board of 

directors and did the presentation after lunch. But in between 
when we had finished lunch, he had said to me . . . he asked if I 
was finished, and he said, come with me. So we went out in the 
hall, we walked down the hall and he said, so you’re from 
Tramping Lake? And I said, yes I am. And he said, well this 
won’t mean anything to anybody else in there but it might to 
you. 
 
And he took me to a small, private room he had and he called it 
his Luseland office. And he had pictures on the wall. He had 
pictures kind of being framed, maps laid out on desks in there. 
It was all about Luseland. There was pictures from when he was 
a young boy, black-and-white pictures of his dad’s business 
with his partner. There was pictures more recent when he had 
went back for visits, a certificate on the wall where they named 
him an honorary life citizen because of all the charitable work 
he’s done for that community. It was very moving to see, Mr. 
Speaker. As a small-town kid, it did my heart good. 
 
And for a gentleman who has become one of the richest people 
in the country, in fact I think North America . . . He’s a 
multi-billionaire. When you google it, his net worth, you get all 
kinds of different estimated dollar amounts but, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re all well into the billions. But what he hasn’t lost sight of 
is charity. He was incredibly generous with a $50 million 
donation to the Children’s Hospital Foundation, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know, he’s a generous man who hasn’t forgotten his 
roots, and I commend him for that. 
 
Another thing that’s very important in health care right now, 
Mr. Speaker, was mentioned in the Throne Speech, are the 
accountable care units. We invested $12 million in the last 
budget towards this. We’ve had some great success with them, 
with an accountable care unit. I had an opportunity to go on a 
tour with one in Regina, which is essentially a group with the 
doctor, the nurse, the pharmacist, the sort of entire team of 
health care professionals that tour through the wing and meet 
with the patient every day. The patient has all the advantages of 
knowing what their caregivers are thinking and planning to 
deliver, has an opportunity to ask questions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the most important part of that is the 
results. Already we are seeing some incredible results. The time 
waiting for an in-patient bed at Regina’s Pasqua Hospital from 
April 2017 to August 2017, just a very few short months, has 
been reduced by 35 per cent compared with the same period last 
year in 2016. And in the first three months of operation, the 
time waiting for an in-patient bed at the accountable care unit at 
Saskatoon’s St. Paul’s Hospital has been reduced by 19 per cent 
compared with the same time last year. So with that in mind, 
Mr. Speaker, this care model is now spreading to additional 
units in both Regina and Saskatoon. And we certainly have high 
hopes for that. 
 
Probably I’m going to focus primarily on health care tonight in 
my address, Mr. Speaker. And probably nothing is more 
front-of-mind in health care in Saskatchewan than the 
significant change we’re making in governance and 
management, and that’s amalgamating the 12 health regions 
into one. Mr. Speaker, it’s a very significant task in front of us 
that our staff have been working on diligently. And it’s going to 
be, to put this in perspective, Mr. Speaker, it’s far and away the 
biggest operation, or will be, in the province, private or 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

government. It’ll be over 40,000 employees, a budget in the 
billions of dollars. 
 
Now there are some potential savings with that, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s been well-documented in IT [information technology] 
and also in governance and management. We’re going to be 
going from 12 CEOs [chief executive officer] to one. We’re 
going to be going from about 62 or 63 vice-presidents down to 
less than 10. So while that will save some money — and again 
as I mentioned, IT will save some significant money — that 
isn’t the driving force behind this. 
 
The driving force behind this, as listed in the report from the 
three-person panel that was released last winter, is for better 
care and for continuity of care, Mr. Speaker. So instead of 
operating like 12 individual little units, we are going — well, in 
some cases, still large units — we’re going to provide health 
care with more consistency across the province, Mr. Speaker. I 
think all the citizens of this province believe that that’s the right 
thing to do is to have consistency of care, and that’s the main 
reason that we’re doing this. 
 
Another thing that was mentioned in the Throne Speech is 
organ and tissue donation. This is a matter of great importance 
to many people in this province. It’s a matter that’s near and 
dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be moving 
forward with some of the recommendations that the Standing 
Committee on Human Services spoke about. We’re going to be 
introducing donor physicians and nurse coordinators.  
 
We’re going to expand donations to after cardiocirculatory 
death, Mr. Speaker. That’s important; that’s going to expand the 
potential base of donors. And we’re also going to implement 
mandatory referral of in-hospital deaths to also increase the 
potential organ donors. And we’re also going to work on 
increased public awareness. Mr. Speaker, donor physicians will 
be responsible for championing and raising awareness of the 
whole program. I think that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a personal example I want to share with you. I’ve 
mentioned this is in this House before. I have a good friend of 
mine, Jim Angus from Harris, who 11 years ago now, in 2006, 
underwent a liver transplant in Edmonton. It was a matter of life 
and death for him. Because someone cared enough to be an 
organ donor, Mr. Speaker, he had a liver transplant. He is alive 
and well today. He is enjoying his children and his 
grandchildren. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one example. And there’s so many 
more like that, why organ donation is incredibly important. So 
I’m very pleased that we’re moving forward with this. We 
haven’t ruled out presumed consent. We’re going to evaluate 
how this works out and at some point, Mr. Speaker, down the 
road we’ll decide whether or not we need to move further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of items, as I said, pertaining 
to health care right across the board. I am going to deviate from 
that for just a minute though and go back to the discussion that 
happened in this Chamber earlier in the day. I’m going to go 
back to . . . As I mentioned earlier in my speech tonight, before 
politics I was in municipal work. And there was an issue raised 
on the floor of the House around municipalities and education 
property tax and municipal revenue sharing. 

Mr. Speaker, I spent my entire career in municipal work before 
politics, and I remember well what it was like under the NDP. 
Mr. Speaker, education property tax was a huge issue at every 
single SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention — always. There were tax revolts 
across the province. There was even a day when, in protest, 
hundreds of people showed up at the legislature. Mr. Speaker, 
that doesn’t happen anymore because education property tax . . . 
The matter has been dealt with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you’ll understand if I scoff a bit when the 
opposition raises that, you know, as if it was some catastrophe 
that this government made a small increase to education 
property tax. It’s still massively less than it was before we were 
given the privilege of forming government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue I wanted to raise on that is 
municipal revenue sharing. Mr. Speaker, it’s increased by over 
100 per cent since we were given the privilege of forming 
government. In those days, when I was in municipal work, at 
any given time we didn’t even know what we were going to get 
for revenue sharing. You might hear about it on budget day, you 
might hear about it sometime after. There was never a formula. 
It was willy-nilly. Mr. Speaker, that’s all changed and I find it a 
bit difficult to swallow because I was there, I lived through that. 
I find it a bit difficult to have the opposition somehow hold 
themselves up as the champions of the municipal sector in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Nobody’s buying that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up very soon. I see my time is 
just about up. Mr. Speaker, before I do though, I just want to 
thank my staff, my constituency assistant Kathie Parry in the 
MLA office; my staff in the Minister of Health’s office here, 
Christopher, David, Adam, and Selena. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
way we’re structured, we work very closely, the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health and I do, work much as a team but so 
do our staff. And, Mr. Speaker, the staff in that office, just as in 
mine, is also tremendous: Julie, Elias, Brett, and Jessica. I want 
to thank them for all the good work that they do every day 
helping the citizens of this province and helping the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health and myself. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think my time’s almost up and my 
throat’s almost ready to give out. So, Mr. Speaker, I would just 
say that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will be 
very proud to support the original motion. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. It is my privilege to be able to speak to the Speech 
from the Throne tonight and join this riveting debate. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a few people I’d like to thank. 
First and foremost, first and foremost is my wife, Fran. She’s 
the love of my life and my biggest supporter. Secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, my four kids: Trent, Angela, Colby, and Jillian. 
They’re all incredible kids who have grown into amazing adults 
and parents of their own. I’m so very proud of them, and I’m so 
very proud of the fact that they’ve all made this province home 
for themselves and their families. 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Next is my six grandchildren who range in age from six months 
to nine years old, three boys and three girls. Yes, we try to keep 
equality front and centre in our family. These grandkids are 
really why I do what I do because I care what this province will 
be like for them in the years to come. 
 
Some of the folks that I’d like to thank, Mr. Speaker is Joy 
Schewaga, my CA back in Prince Albert. She’s amazing. I’ve 
never seen anybody so positive and upbeat on a daily basis. She 
loves to deal with the people, and I couldn’t have found anyone 
else better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the constituents of Prince 
Albert Carlton. I want to thank them for the faith they’ve put in 
me not only to look after their interests in Prince Albert and 
Prince Albert Carlton but for the rest of the province as well. 
 
And finally I’d like to thank one of my colleagues, the member 
from Swift Current, our Premier. I want to thank him for not 
only what he has done for me personally but more importantly 
what he has done for this province. He has changed the attitude 
in this province through his strong leadership, the growth of the 
economy, and the growth in the population — growth like this 
province has never seen in decades. I firmly believe that he’ll 
go down in history as the best premier this province has ever 
had. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about a few people who I 
admire and who had a strong influence on my decision to do 
some of the things in my life and to become involved in 
politics. First and foremost is my father, Ivan Hargrave. He was 
born in 1920 on my grandparents’ homestead near Lucky Lake 
in the province. He was not born in a hospital, but he was born 
in a two-room soddie. For those who don’t know what a soddie 
is, a soddie is just that, a house built of sod. There was very 
little lumber available for construction, and so they just stacked 
sod up on top of one another for the walls and bought minimal 
amount of wood for the roof. 
 
There were no doctors, just the neighbour’s wife to help as a 
midwife, and they made it through that. He was very sick as a 
young child. In fact, he was two years old before he could even 
hold a cookie. And farming in that area was very tough. Crops 
were poor and you were a long ways away from town. When 
they needed coal for the fire or groceries, my grandfather would 
make a 20-mile trip by horse and wagon. This took three days. 
Finally in 1932 after many poor years of farming, they packed 
up and again by horse and wagon took the two-week journey to 
a new home in Pontrilas, Saskatchewan near Nipawin. 
 
[20:45] 
 
In 1941 he joined the army as a signalman and was shipped 
overseas. He served in Italy, Sicily, France, Germany, and 
Holland. He served a total of 1,373 days and his total pay for 
that entire period was $650.95. That works out to 47 cents a 
day. In all my years growing up, he would talk about how proud 
he was to serve his country and how proud he was of the men 
he served with. He never missed a Remembrance Day 
ceremony. One of the few stories that he told was of one night 
as they were being shelled, they all had to dig foxholes to sleep 
in. One of their vehicles got a direct hit by a shell. When the 
shelling was over, the guy on his left had been killed and the 

guy on his right had been killed. He thanked God that he had 
been spared, and he remained a devout religious man for the 
remainder of his life. He was discharged from the army in 
December of 1945 in time to be home for Christmas. 
 
I think today of the death and destruction that those men seen 
and the impact it had on their lives. We today talk about PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder], but it was not even recognized 
back then, and many of those men, when they came home, had 
mental issues, issues with alcohol and drugs, depression, so 
many different things. It’s such a shame that there was no help 
for the men. 
 
A year or so after getting back from overseas, he realized that 
the gal across the road was meant for him. So in 1947 he 
married my mother, and they would remain married for 63 
years. Not long before his death, I went to Prince George where 
I spent a few days with them. I would stay up later than they 
would and every night I would hear him say to my mother, 
good night sweetheart; I love you so much. A love like that 
comes along, if we are lucky, but once in a lifetime. 
 
In 1951 my father started working for the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool and was sent to manage an elevator in Chelan, 
Saskatchewan. He worked with many long hours and built up 
lifelong friendships. I never met a single farmer who ever had a 
bad thing to say about him. He believed in getting involved in 
the community to make it the best that it could be. He 
volunteered for boards and committees and truly believed that 
you have to give back to your community. 
 
I remember most days in the busy season heading straight to the 
elevator to help him every day after school. My brother had 
allergies to grain dust which was unfortunate for him that he 
couldn’t come down and help us — just me. So I was down 
there from coopering cars, which is getting the old rectangle 
cars ready to be loaded, to shovelling grain bins, cleaning grain 
dust out of the booth, to sweeping floors. 
 
I of course was not paid for that and never expected any. But on 
some exceptional busy days, my dad would flip me a couple of 
dimes and say, hop on your bike, son, and go get us a couple of 
Pepsi. 
 
In the winter, which was the slow time, I would often go down 
to the elevator as well, and he taught me how to play crib and 
dominoes down there. Dad would talk about what’s important 
in life, about what’s right and wrong, not that I did anything 
wrong. But I guess getting caught smoking in the church at 
about seven years old was probably a bad thing. But he’s kind 
of forgiven me for that. But what is important is that you treat 
all people fairly, you work hard, and you stay humble. In fact in 
my office I have a paperweight that says just that. I look at it 
every day. It says, work hard; stay humble. 
 
In 1973 he retired from the elevator due to poor health and 
moved to Prince George, BC [British Columbia] where he 
continued to work. But he was the head gardener at the Prince 
George hospital until his mandatory retirement in 1985. 
 
Not long after his retirement, he decided to take a trip to 
Edmonton to see me, one of the very few times he ever 
travelled without my mother. As the train was on the way to 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

Edmonton, near Hinton, Alberta, it collided head-on with a 
freight train. Twenty-three people were killed and many injured 
including my father. He had broken ribs. And was fortunate as 
he was on his way up to the front dining car to dine and it was 
full and so they sent him to the rear dining car. And shortly 
after that the accident happened and pretty much everybody in 
the front dining car was killed. VIA wanted to pay him for his 
injuries, but he said, I’m alive and others died; their families 
will need the help. That’s the kind of man that he was. Later he 
was forced to take a small settlement, and he did begrudgingly 
take only a couple hundred dollars. 
 
Shortly after that he and mother bought a motorhome and didn’t 
use it to go south like so many others, but only used it to visit 
their kids and grandkids. He stayed very active in his 
community and his church. He told me, in his last days, that he 
was happy with his 91 years. He had lived a good life with a 
loving family and a family that he was happy to go and be with 
his Lord. On March 8th, 2012, he passed away. He was, as I am 
sure most fathers are, the most influential man in my life, and I 
think of him every day. 
 
The second man that was an influence in my life was a man 
named Edward Arthur Knight. He lived right here in Regina. 
We met in 1986. He was a client of mine when I was with the 
Bank of Montreal. He was born in Winnipeg as the youngest in 
his family. His mother was 44 years old when he was born. His 
father passed away at a very young age, and Ted left school 
after grade 10 to help his mother pay the bills. One of the things 
that Ted would say many times later on in his life, there was 
only two things that kept me from medical school, and that was 
grade 11 and grade 12. 
 
He worked hard at a career in finance, back in those days when 
you never needed a degree to work in finance. Another thing he 
always said was that there’s a big difference between being 
smart and being educated, and I agree with that 100 per cent. He 
always desired to be in business and finally he got his 
opportunity and that’s when he purchased Crestview Chrysler 
here in Regina. He was a true entrepreneur. He co-owned an 
insurance company, clothing store, nightclub, and the Regina 
Pats. In fact he ended up co-owning 15 car dealerships. He was 
truly a self-made man that started with nothing, and through 
hard work had a very rewarding life. 
 
In the summer of 2000 he called me at my office in Saskatoon 
and said, Joe, I need a favour. You know lots of guys in the car 
business. And I said, yes, of course I do. Well I need a business 
partner for my dealership in Prince Albert. Do you know 
anyone? And I paused for a few seconds and I said yes, I do. He 
said, great, who? I said, me. He said don’t BS me, Joe, and I 
said, I’m not. He said, you got any money? I said I might be 
able to put a little bit together to make the deal. So to make a 
long story short, he drove up the next day; we went out for a 
drink; and on a cocktail napkin we wrote out our agreement. 
And we shook hands and our partnership lasted for many years. 
We got everything put together on October 1st, 2000, and I met 
him in Prince Albert at the airport and we headed to the 
dealership to announce that I would be the new managing 
partner.  
 
Ted was always full of advice, but several things just kind of 
stick in your head. He said on the trip to the dealership . . . He 

said Joe, just so you know, he said, I could lose every dime that 
I have invested in this dealership, he says, and it won’t change 
my lifestyle a little bit. You, on the other hand, it will. That was 
enough to keep me working hard for many, many years because 
I just didn’t want to go back to the other life. 
 
Later on the way back to the airport he gave me more advice, 
and it was advice very similar to what my father had given me. 
He said, Joe, if you want to be successful and you want to make 
a difference in your community, you have to get involved, and I 
live by that still today. I was involved in many organizations 
and service clubs in Prince Albert and eventually that led me to 
be in politics. 
 
Ted was diagnosed with stage IV cancer over four years ago 
and was given 30 days to live. He, as with everything, was very 
determined to battle cancer. I was fortunate to see him just over 
a month ago, over four years after he’d been given a month to 
live. He still had a great sense of humour, and his mind was still 
very sharp. He passed away October 17th. 
 
One last Ted-ism: time is the currency of life, not money. 
 
The next issue I’d like to talk about is more political. It really 
involves more than just one person. The first is really a person I 
never had the privilege of knowing. The reason for that is on 
October 10, 2014, she was killed by an impaired driver. This 
impaired driver drove over 40 kilometres on the wrong side of 
the divided Highway No. 11 between here and Saskatoon 
before he hit and killed Danille Kerpan. Her father Allan tells 
the story that no parent would ever want to hear. That is of 
getting that knock on the door in the middle of the night, that 
knock with the police officer at the door to tell you a loved one 
has died. I’ve met and talked with many families of victims of 
impaired driving and all of their stories will break your heart. 
 
I also have another story about impaired driving, a true story 
given to me by a retired RCMP officer. This officer retired 
early because he had been to so many accidents where the life 
of someone was tragically taken away that he suffers from post 
traumatic stress disorder as well. But back in the day when he 
was still with the RCMP, he was told to just suck it up because 
that’s what we do in the RCMP. I know this story is true and the 
impacts of the story are many because that retired RCMP 
officer is my brother. I’d like to read the story that he told to a 
class of young students: 
 

The following is the response to the many questions that I 
get daily.  
 
You may only know me as a cop who gave you a ticket last 
summer, but I am also the guy who lives down the street 
from you. I’m a parent and I share with the same hope, 
ambition and dreams that you have for your children. I’m 
faced with you the same problems you are, share the same 
moments of agony; I share with you the same feelings of 
shame, guilt and disappointment when my son or daughter 
gets into trouble. I’m often asked why I “harass” kids for 
speeding down the streets. Why do I make such a fuss 
about kids drinking a little beer? Why is it a big deal about 
smoking a little pot? These are only a few of your 
complaints but they all deserve an answer so I’ll try.  
 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

Each of these complaints, although might be minor, have 
something important in common. They’re all violations of 
the law, the real harm done in each case is the law has been 
violated and respect for the rules and the principles that 
regulate any society are disregarded. To show contempt for 
these minor laws may eventually lead to the disregard for 
all law. When that happens everyone is a loser. I’m in no 
position to teach respect for the law; that’s your job as a 
parent, you are morally responsible for teaching your 
children proper principles and failure to do so will 
inadvertently result in bitter disappointment, grief and a 
feeling of guilt. 
 
You say you are too busy, you don’t have any time because 
you are struggling to make ends meet in an inflated, 
runaway life, you are angry with me because I call you 
down to the station at 3:00 in the morning, and all he was 
doing was drinking a little beer. Sure he is a little drunk 
now, but he will be okay in the morning, besides that, 
everybody does it, so what’s the big deal? Well, I’m a little 
angry, a little sick inside when I’m called out to an 
accident scene involving liquor. Let me tell you about one 
such accident. 
 
If you can picture the scene — it is a long stretch of 
highway [near Penticton], a sharp curve at one end, it has 
been raining; the roads are [all] slippery, car travelling in 
excess of 80 miles an hour, missed the curve, and plowed 
into the embankment where it had become airborne and 
struck a tree. Two of the three young persons were hurled 
from the vehicle; one into the tree, the other onto the road 
where the car landed on him, snuffed out his life like a 
discarded cigarette on the asphalt. He was killed instantly 
and he’s the lucky one. The girl thrown into the tree had 
her neck broken, and although she was voted queen of her 
senior prom, and most likely to succeed, she will spend the 
rest of her life in a wheelchair unable to do anything else, 
she will live and relive that terrible moment over and over 
again, many times. The driver is conscious, but in shock 
and unable to free himself from under the bent, twisted 
steering column. 
 
[21:00] 
 
His face will be forever scarred, most scars will heal, but 
the ones inside will not. His breath comes in gasps as he 
tries desperately to suck air past the blood-filled airway. 
He is unable to speak and his eyes fixed on me pleadingly, 
showing that he is terrified and wants help. A feeling of 
guilt goes through me as I recognize him as the boy I’d let 
off with a warning the other night for having open liquor in 
his vehicle. Maybe if I had done things differently he 
wouldn’t be here now, who knows? I don’t. He died 
silently on the side of the road, his eyes staring as if trying 
to see into the future that he will never have. As I knelt 
beside this young man I’m filled with incredible grief at 
the waste of such a valuable resource, our youth. I’m sick 
with anger and frustration with parents and leaders who 
think a little bit of alcohol won’t hurt anything. I’m filled 
with contempt for lawmakers who propose lowering 
drinking age as they will get the booze anyway, so why not 
make it legal? I’m frustrated with the laws, court rulings 
and other legal manoeuvring that restrict my ability to do 

my job in preventing this kind of tragedy. The ambulance 
begins the job of scraping up and removing the dead and 
injured. I stand by watching as hot tears mingle with rain 
and drip off my cheeks. I would give anything to know 
who furnishes [these] young people with that legal portion 
of booze. As I clear the scene, I will spend several hours on 
reports and several months trying to erase from my 
memory the details of that night. 

 
I know that eventually the memory of this fatal accident 
will be diluted and mixed with similar accidents, that I’ll 
be called upon to cover. 
 
Yes, I’m angry and sick at heart, trying to do my job and 
being tagged the “bad guy.” I pray to God that I might 
never have to face another parent in the middle of the night 
and say “your son, Bill, or [your] daughter, Susan, has just 
been killed in a car accident.” 

 
You ask me why did this happen?. It happened because a 
young person stoned out of his mind thought he could 
handle two tons of hurtling death at 80 miles an hour. It 
happened because an adult trying to be a “good guy” 
bought for, or sold to, some minor a case of beer. It 
happened because you, as a parent, weren’t concerned 
enough about your child to know where he was or what he 
was doing and you were unconcerned about minors and 
alcohol abuse and would rather blame me for harassing 
them when I was only trying to prevent this kind of 
tragedy. It happened because, as people say, you believe 
this sort of thing only happens to someone else. For your 
sake, I hope it doesn’t happen to you, but if you continue to 
permit bad legislation, continue to regard alcohol abuse as 
part of growing up, then please keep your porch light on, 
because some cold rainy night you’ll find me at your 
doorstep, eyes downcast staring at my feet, with a message 
of death of a loved one for you. 

 
Mr. Speaker, impaired driving has to stop. One life lost to 
impaired driving is one life too many. When we instituted the 
impaired driving legislation on January 1st, 2017, I feel we 
made a big step towards making people understand. And the 
two awareness campaigns we had since then, with the 
disappearing person — of which several of the people that 
disappeared in that commercial I had a connection with — and 
the wingman campaign were very impactful. 
 
I did have one person that I’ve known for a very long time 
coming up to me after January 1st, after the legislation was 
passed and effective, and tell me that I had just lost his vote 
because of the new impaired driving legislation. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I told him then, that that is a vote that I’m more 
than prepared to lose. 
 
But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, SGI is not going to fix 
this problem. The government is not going to fix this problem. 
The news media is not going to fix this problem. It will be 
individual Saskatchewan people who decide that enough is 
enough and say, I’m not going to be a part of Saskatchewan’s 
impaired driving problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that ride share that was spoken about in the 
Speech from the Throne is another tool in the tool box for the 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

fight against impaired driving. And I would ask for everyone’s 
support from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the motion of the member from Estevan, supporting the Speech 
from the Throne, and I will not be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Mr. Speaker, may I have leave to introduce 
guests? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 
my friend, my constituent, Shahid Pervaiz. He is a good friend 
of mine working in SSR [Stewart Southern Railway]. It’s 
something railway, I believe, and hauling our grains. 
 
And he is a good friend of mine. We usually spend a lot of time 
when not in session, sitting and discussing about the 
Saskatchewan economy and all that’s Saskatchewan-related 
issues, and how can we improve, how can we improve the 
Saskatchewan economy and stuff like that. 
 
I want all my colleagues to welcome him in his own Legislative 
Assembly. Thanks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
thanks to my team for their great support and round of applause 
that they gave me in this. 
 
I want to start off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by thanking the 
Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] for his words. I think they touched everybody in 
this Chamber and I would encourage anybody that didn’t catch 
it to replay it on social media because it was very powerful and 
impactful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And I want to congratulate him on the work that he’s done in 
the short amount of time that he has been elected and as 
minister to help us get rid of this unfortunate statistic that we 
are in Saskatchewan. So I want to thank the minister for that 
and very much appreciate the work that he’s done on that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’d be amiss if I didn’t thank our 
Premier for his work that he has done as a legislator, as leader 
of the opposition; before that, critic for SaskEnergy; leader of 
the official opposition; and then as Premier for the last 10 years. 
He has the respect of not just his colleagues here in the 
Legislative Assembly, and we’ve heard that from members 
opposite, but across the country. And I think he’s done an 
absolute fabulous job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of elevating 
Saskatchewan’s status across our country, certainly below the 
49th down in the United States, and around the world, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I very much appreciate it. 
 
I met the Premier several years ago. I believe it was 2002, 2003, 
when I was only 18 years old, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and could 
see this energy in this man that I hadn’t seen before. I had the 
stereotypical view of a politician being stuffy, not personable, 
and I’ll leave it at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I met the Premier 
at literally a pizza place in Saskatoon and had a great 
conversation with him as well as my father, at the time who was 
an elected member of Saskatoon Northwest. And you couldn’t 
contain the energy that the Premier had and the passion that he 
had for Saskatchewan. And as a person that had moved from 
Toronto to Saskatchewan and chose to live here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was amazing that somebody could see the value of 
what they had in Saskatchewan because I didn’t know what 
they had in Saskatchewan till you experience Saskatchewan. 
And I think he’s been first and foremost to be able to take that 
energy and the drive that is Saskatchewan to the world. And 
we’re very proud of him and I want to thank him for his service. 
 
As we all know on this floor, it’s very hard to be away from 
family, especially when we get new responsibilities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but he’s done it with grace, with a lot of flair, 
and certainly with the passion of the Saskatchewan people. So I 
want to thank our Premier for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
While I’m doing my thank yous, I want to thank my wife 
Leane, who’s at home right now. I just happened to send her a 
little text to make sure she wasn’t watching her favourite 
Netflix show, that I was up and speaking about her; my 
mother-in-law, Sylvia Durand who is also at home, and they 
both turned off Netflix for probably four minutes of this speech. 
So I want to thank them for doing that. 
 
Obviously, I’ve got to thank my children. Again, and I’ve said 
this before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everybody on this Assembly, 
we give up time with our family to be here. I don’t think 
anybody is in this for the money. We are well compensated, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but we have to give up a lot at home. So I 
want to thank Courtney and Carter and Keely and Kassidy for 
understanding that I’m not at all of the events, that I can’t 
partake in everything. But when I do get back, I very much 
appreciate the joy that three teenagers and one 21-year-old 
bring into my life, because there’s never a dull moment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
In saying that, I also want to touch base with my minister’s 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

staff, Shannon Andrews, and the group that up there has been 
able to educate me in a very short amount of time, as well as the 
ministry staff, Greg Miller, and all the staff over at Social 
Services. I very much appreciate that. And I also want to thank 
my predecessor, the member from Regina University, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. She did an amazing job as Social Services 
minister. And I have big shoes to fill, although I think 
physically they’re a little bit smaller and a little bit higher than 
I’m used to, but . . . and less colourful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But I want to thank her for her dedication on this file and the 
work that she did, and I’ll try to carry that forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank my constituency assistants, Danielle, 
Michelle, and Debbs up in Saskatoon for their work in making 
sure that I sign everything properly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
make sure that my constituents are getting the representation 
that they deserve, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now just getting into the Speech from the Throne, I think this 
again is another great step forward. We’ve had some difficult 
fiscal times in this province, across Western Canada. We’ve had 
no help from the federal government on alleviating any of those 
pressures, just adding more pressures onto it. But I’m very 
proud that our government, certainly within the ministry I 
represent, that we were able to increase the budget. And again 
my predecessor from Regina University was able to advocate 
for the people that are in need. 
 
Now just touching on a couple of the programs within Social 
Services. Certainly the one that’s near and dear to my heart is 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program, the assured income for people with disabilities. This is 
something that hits very home to me, from my work with 
Special Olympics — I was four years on their provincial board 
— to working with people at Cosmo years ago in Saskatoon, as 
well as the SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres] store when it was up there. And I’ve had the honour of 
all getting reacquainted with people that I haven’t seen for quite 
a few years. And it’s amazing when I go through some of the 
homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I bump into people that worked 
with me at SaskEnergy from Cosmopolitan Industries out in the 
middle of places that I never would expect. I bump into people 
that I haven’t seen in years, and we catch up very quickly. 
 
And of course obviously this drives me on a personal level 
because of my daughter who has a learning disability and is 
mild to moderate developmental delayed. She graduated high 
school last year, I’ll inform the House. I haven’t been able to 
speak since her graduation. I’m very proud that she graduated. 
 
And now she’s into the functionally integrated program at Holy 
Cross School and doing extremely well, able to go over and 
work at St. Anne’s retirement home and helping out in the 
kitchen and learning some life skills. Because that’s what I want 
for my daughter, is for her — just like my son and my 
stepdaughters and anybody that I bump into — I want them to 
reach their potential. And everybody’s potential is different, and 
I want to make sure that my daughter has every opportunity that 
is allowed for her. It’s very important that she moves forward in 
life, just like my son and just like my stepdaughters, so I’m very 
proud of her accomplishments. 
 

But I don’t want to focus solely on her because the other three 
kids will be a little upset. So my stepdaughter, Keely, who has 
turned into a beautiful young girl, is attending university and 
also working two jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we 
believe, in our family . . . I was told a long time ago nobody 
rides for free. So she’s been out working for her education, and 
her mother and I have been able to help her out with her 
education and just support her in any way that she can. 
 
My oldest stepdaughter, Kassidy, is looking at a few different 
options right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She’s had some 
challenges in her life, and we’re very supportive of her. We’re 
hopeful that she will choose a more solid career path and move 
forward. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And of course there’s my son. Him and I are the only men in 
the house, so we have our own challenges amongst that. But my 
son is in hockey, played football this year for the first time, and 
seems to be enjoying life. He actually, at 15 years old, is just 
one-half per cent short of being on the honour roll, and he’s 
looking at improving that for the next little . . . grade 10, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I’m very proud of all of our children. 
 
And my wife, I want to just touch on her career. She had a 
14-year career of owning her own business that she decided to 
close in June of this year. A very successful business, but she 
wanted to be able to pursue some other things. She’s got the 
bug to be able to try something different, so right now she’s 
pursuing her options and cheering me from home and being 
able to support the family while I’m down here doing my duties 
as an MLA and as Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Speech from the Throne, the most 
important thing that I saw that came out of Social Services was 
that we were able to help out seniors age in home by putting in 
a tax abatement. If they’re under the income threshold of 
$70,000, we were able to put their property taxes into a deferral 
program against the estate. And this is something very 
important because what we’ve heard loud and clear is that 
seniors want to age in home. They don’t want to go somewhere 
into a retirement home unless it’s absolutely necessary. So as a 
government, we’ve done a lot for seniors. We’ve tripled the 
seniors’ income plan, from $90 up to $270. And we’re making 
sure that we’re looking out after all of the most vulnerable 
people within the Social Services file, but across the province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the other things that has been brought up recently in 
media that I just want to touch on, on my file, is the better use 
policy. This is something that was introduced back in 2003, 
while the opposition was in government, to be able to best 
utilize the assets of the government. Now a lot of these units 
were in disrepair when we inherited the government, had the 
opportunity to serve as government. And we’ve been putting a 
lot of money . . . I believe the total is in and around $770 
million that we’ve put in towards the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation to make sure that those houses are the best possible 
houses for our seniors and for people that need them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So again, I’m very proud of that. 
 
I wanted to touch on a couple of other things from the Speech 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

from the Throne. I think we kind of get complacent a little bit, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and realize how far we have come. When 
we’re talking about in 2007 that we had a nursing crisis in this 
province, we’re up over 1,000 nurses. And I think we forget 
about that once in a while because we forget how far we have 
come. We’ve had more doctors in the province, rural and 
remote doctors. We’ve enhanced the nurse practitioners 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that everybody in 
the province has the best possible health care. 
 
And I think the biggest step, as the Provincial Secretary has 
outlined, STARS is certainly huge. We have a mobile 
emergency room that can fly around the province. And I don’t 
want to specifically discuss how many missions they’ve flown 
because each one of those is a tragedy into itself, but we all 
know that STARS are there. When the red helicopter goes by, I 
make sure that we think about the people that are in that 
helicopter or they’re going to see. And I just . . . It’s a quick 
little prayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that they are 
fine . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Am I already at 18 minutes? 
Now I’m on to page two. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other things that I am very 
proud of as a father of four, is the investment that we’ve had in 
education. The joint-use schools, and I know the opposition 
doesn’t like the P3 model, but we absolutely had to do this, Mr. 
Speaker. If we had of done a traditional build, I think it would 
have been maybe 12 to 14 years until we got these schools built. 
I understand that ideologically they don’t get this but, Mr. 
Speaker, we had to meet the demands. 
 
And when I was at a couple of school openings the kids were 
just beaming. The schools are beautiful and we’re meeting the 
needs of the children across our province, specifically in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Martensville, and Warman where the 
growth has been huge, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I guess the 
opposition might struggle with this because, under their years as 
government, growth wasn’t an issue. So we wanted to make 
sure that we were able to meet the needs of the kids in their 
schools and in their communities, to make sure that they were 
getting the best possible education with support of the best 
teachers. 
 
And again, I want to thank the teachers. We just had a meeting 
with the teachers at my son and daughter’s school to make sure 
that they’re on the right track. The teachers are very dedicated 
to their students and to their classroom. And I want to thank 
them for the amazing work that they’ve done to be able to get 
two of my children through school — actually three, I guess, 
technically, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the third one, I hope he 
gets through in the next couple of years because I don’t know if 
I can survive a couple more years of high school, but it has 
always been interesting. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to touch on a couple of other 
things before I wrap up here. I’ve had the honour since being 
the Minister of Social Services to travel around the province — 
Swift Current, Humboldt, Regina, Saskatoon — and be able to 
talk to what is happening on the front line, and I think that’s 
important. I very much value information that the ministry is 
giving me and my staff is giving me, but I’m a people person, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I want to get out and talk to people. I 
want to sit down and hear it from them, what’s working and 

what’s not working. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve been very 
direct on the positive feedback, but also on some of the things 
that we need to work on. And I can guarantee you that we’re 
not going to sit on our laurels, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
work to do. There is always work to do in the Social Services 
file in making sure that people with disabilities have their needs 
met, people that are on our transitional employment have their 
needs met, people that are on our social assistance program, and 
within our Sask Housing file, to be able to meet those needs. 
Now that doesn’t always necessarily mean more money, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; it means making the money that we have in 
our file the most effective possible. 
 
And again I’m walking in big shoes filled by the previous 
ministers of Social Services. I think there’s been four since we 
formed government and I’m very honoured to hold this 
position, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When I first considered getting 
into politics, when I was working at the Saskatoon Food Bank 
& Learning Centre, I wanted to make a difference at that level, 
to help out people in our community and be able to help people 
move forward in life. And once I got the political bug or the 
bite of the political bug, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to take 
that up a level as an MLA and now Minister of Social Services. 
This is the file I wanted. I think that there’s some great 
successes here we can have with people and I think that there’s 
a lot that we can do to help people. And that always again it 
doesn’t mean more money; it means making sure that the 
money is working in the best way possible. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think my time is up, but again I just 
. . . I know everybody’s giving me a round of applause to sit 
down now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there are lots of laughs 
and shaking the head of, yes, we’ve heard enough of you. But I 
do want to thank my colleagues. I want to make sure that I 
thank my predecessors, my family, the staff that I get to work 
with who I’m not quite sure if they’re enjoying my music that I 
have when I’m sitting down in deep thought in the office, but it 
helps me relax and they seem to get a kick out of the wide 
spectrum of music that I enjoy. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make sure that absolutely 
before I sit down I want to get on the record that I do support 
the Speech from the Throne and I do not support the 
amendment that was brought forward by the opposition. So 
thank you for your time this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour and pleasure to present today with my remarks of the 
Speech from the Throne. Before I start with my remarks, I 
would like to take this opportunity to thank some important 
people in my life that help me with this role in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency assistant, Rose, does an amazing 
job helping individuals that reach out to our office. Rose is very 
busy managing many calls regarding the critic portfolios I 
oversee and she handles these calls with such professionalism, 
empathy, and respect. 
 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

I also want to thank my family for their constant support. My 
partner, Darren, has adjusted to managing the home front while 
I’m away and I appreciate everything he does to make sure the 
family’s taken care of. And although he acts like he doesn’t care 
too much for the dogs that we have, Roxy and Diesel, I am sure 
he’s giving them plenty of cuddles while I’m away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family is very important to me, and recently our 
family lost the matriarch of our family. My mother had a short 
battle with cancer, and losing her has been a huge loss for our 
family. I want to thank all the colleagues from both sides of the 
House that sent me best wishes to me and my family during this 
tough time. My mother was born in the dirty thirties. She lived 
a good life, but not always an easy one. She worked hard to 
raise eight children through many different life challenges and 
circumstances, and we always felt loved and cared for. At times 
we had less than others, but we always had what we needed, 
and appreciated that. 
 
My mother always believed in helping others. She made prayer 
blankets for people that were ill, blankets for the homeless, hats 
for newborn babies, and volunteered every chance she got, and 
did much more. Mr. Speaker, for many years my sister-in-law 
bought my mother brand new fluffy towels for Christmas, and 
we later found out that my mother would bring them to the 
homeless shelter. When asked why she gave her new towels to 
the neediest, she would quote, “Well they deserve nice new 
towels also.” That was my mom. Appreciate what you have, 
and give when you can. I will always appreciate the lessons 
from my mother and carry them on as best as I can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer our family has grown, and we 
welcomed a new addition. Levi is now our third grandson, and 
we are just delighted to have him join our family. The 
grandbabies are so much fun and I enjoy spending precious 
time with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so fortunate. I have everything I need. I have 
an education. I have the financial means to take care of myself 
and my family. I have wonderful support of friends and I have a 
loving family. I realize how fortunate I am, and I also realize 
that not everyone is this fortunate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that government plays a vital 
role in assuring everyone has the same opportunities. Everyone 
has a right to education. Everyone has the right to publicly 
funded medical treatment. Everyone has the right to safe and 
affordable public transportation. Everybody has the right to feel 
safe and live in a healthy community. And, Mr. Speaker, 
everyone has the right to supports and programs in their time of 
need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, health care is my 
background, and improving health care is one of the main 
motivating factors for me to be actively involved in provincial 
politics. Health care in this province is in the process of a lot of 
change. Moving into a single health authority is going to be a 
challenge, and individuals are very concerned that more and 
more services will be centralized, and workers are concerned 
that they will lose their jobs. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech nothing was 
mentioned about expanding and improving health care services 

in Prince Albert — no mention about addressing large wait 
times in Prince Albert, no mention about a new hospital to 
address the increased medical pressures in Prince Albert and 
area, and no mention of accountable care units for Prince 
Albert. But, Mr. Speaker, I was most disappointed that there 
was no mention in the Throne Speech about addressing and 
providing more mental health services for Prince Albert and the 
North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just recently the Children’s Advocate said, and I 
quote: 
 

The wait list here in SK to see a child psychiatrist is up to 
2 years! Our kids are literally dying as we continue to fail 
to meet their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is completely unacceptable. Children are 
dying. This is a crisis, but this issue is not even on the 
government’s radar and was not important enough for it to be 
addressed in the Throne Speech. Suicide is completely 
preventable, Mr. Speaker, and this government has been failing 
to work on measures of prevention by simply ensuring that 
mental health services are available when needed by every 
resident in this province. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, there was no mention about expanding and 
improving addiction services. This government contradicts 
itself with bragging about the privatization and expansion of 
liquor sales, and in the next breath talks about the embarrassing 
fact that Saskatchewan has the highest rates of impaired driving 
among the provinces. This is a government that has been cutting 
addiction services, and in Prince Albert area there was cuts to 
rural addiction services. Rural communities have some of the 
highest rates of drinking and driving and have little to no 
addiction services available. If you really want to address 
impaired driving, then invest in early education and public 
promotion, and make sure there are services available for those 
who need them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was proud that my colleagues from 
Regina Douglas Park and Saskatoon Centre brought forward a 
private member’s bill that would address barriers for victims of 
interpersonal violence. This government took a portion of this 
bill and implemented regulations that would help victims of 
interpersonal violence, and a fixed-term lease of residential 
premises without penalty if they are in danger. Now this is a 
good start, but there is much more work that needs to be done to 
address interpersonal violence in this province. Saskatchewan 
has double the national average rate of interpersonal violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk to law enforcement officers, they 
will tell you that alcohol is involved in most of the interpersonal 
violence calls they receive. Being proud of your legacy on 
promoting more alcohol use in a province that has high rates of 
addictions, high rates of impaired driving, high rates of crime, 
and high rates of interpersonal violence without a plan to 
address the consequences of alcohol use is irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was honoured to sit on the Human 
Services Committee along with my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, when we submitted recommendations for 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

the Minister of Health to help improve organ donation rates in 
the province. We listened to many stakeholders, from medical 
professionals to families that were impacted by the organ 
donation process. It was so nice to see that the 
recommendations that we submitted in a minority opinion are 
being considered by this government. 
 
I want to bring attention to the fact that the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has been working very hard for years to 
have organ donation rates improved in this province and has 
worked hard connecting with stakeholders so that she was 
informed on what processes have been proven to be effective in 
increasing organ donation rates. And she worked especially 
hard with ensuring the Human Services Committee had those 
recommendations in this report. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank her for her guidance and leadership with helping me 
through my first committee report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on our break from the duties in this House, I have 
been busy consulting with community leaders. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, municipal leaders have had a difficult challenge in 
managing with changes that this government has made. Cuts to 
grants, cuts to grants-in-lieu, and other downloading from the 
government has put municipalities in a tough situation with 
having to cut programs and raise taxes. Municipal leaders feel 
let down by this government and are concerned if more is yet to 
come. 
 
One big issue that communities were left struggling to deal with 
was the shutdown of STC. The closure of STC has created 
issues with municipalities trying to find other ways to address 
delivering materials in a timely fashion, in a cost-effective way. 
Municipal leaders also are worried about residents that now 
struggle to travel for medical appointments with no options. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government tries to justify their 
cold-hearted decision to cut our only public provincial 
transportation company by saying that there are private 
companies available. The reality is that these private companies 
have not been reliable. Some have said if they have enough 
passengers, they will make the trip. Some have cancelled their 
routes because they weren’t making enough money. Some have 
changed their pickup and drop-off spots regularly. And there 
have been many places that these companies won’t even 
consider going. 
 
Also there is no bathroom facilities on many of these private 
transportation companies, which is not practical for individuals 
that might need quick access to these facilities. Mr. Speaker, the 
impact of the shutdown of STC has very real consequences that 
are long term. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what kind of government leaves the most 
vulnerable with no provincial public transportation? What kind 
of government cuts funeral arrangements and payments for the 
poorest? What kind of government cuts social services benefits 
during tough economic times? And what kind of government 
raises the cost of children’s clothing for single mothers? 
 
And what kind of government cuts funding to education when 
times are tough? Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has 
increased education taxes and will generate 67 million more, 
but decreased education funding by $58 million. Where is this 

money going? Specialized services for kids are reduced and 
classroom sizes are larger. And in the end, kids are suffering. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 181 less teachers in this province 
and 4,500 more students. Let this sink in. This year there are 
4,500 more students in Saskatchewan and 181 fewer teachers 
due to provincial cuts to education. This is appalling. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, more than 3,200 people are unemployed 
in Saskatchewan, and Prince Albert has unemployment rates 
that are well over the provincial average. Individuals accessing 
the food bank has been increasing year after year, and around 
50 per cent of individuals receiving services from the food bank 
are children, which is also well above the national rate. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, after a decade of boom, food banks are busier 
than ever, and one in four children in this province live in 
poverty. Child poverty rates are above the national average. 
Saskatchewan has a child poverty rate of 24.6 per cent, which is 
six percentage points higher than the rest of the county. And 69 
per cent of indigenous children on reserve are living in poverty, 
but yet no mention of child poverty in the Throne Speech. 
 
A few weeks ago I had the pleasure to help with the 
Thanksgiving supper at the Prince Albert Friendship Centre. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Thanksgiving supper is open to 
everyone in the city, but many of the guests are the most 
vulnerable. The gym was full of young and old. Over 200 
people attended this free supper. One gentleman told me that 
this was the first meal he had in a long time. This is a true sign 
of need in our community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of children in care continues 
to climb. Indigenous children remain overrepresented in the 
child welfare system, and to this day, we still have an alarming 
number of children in care that sustain critical injuries and way 
too many have died. Our child welfare system needs to be 
completely revamped, but yet received no attention in the 
Throne Speech. 
 
There is no mention of the Truth and Reconciliation and 
implementing the calls of action, and no mention of acting on 
the apology of the Sixties Scoop. Mr. Deputy Speaker, until true 
reconciliation is acted on, we will unfortunately continue to see 
the overrepresentation of indigenous children in the child 
welfare system, high rates of poverty, high rates of addiction 
use, high rates of interpersonal violence, high rates of 
unemployment, and high rates of suicide. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this government again and again demonstrates that true 
reconciliation is not a priority for them, and it is very clear that 
this government has lost its moral compass. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do support the 
amendment submitted by my colleague, the member of 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always nice 
to talk to a captive audience. It is with great pleasure that I 
stand here tonight in this House to give my reply to the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
I would first like to start off by thanking a few very important 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

people in my life. First and foremost, my wife, Valerie. Thank 
you for continuing to stand by me and support me, making it 
possible for me to be here today. You keep our day-to-day 
operations running with such ease and grace. I could not have 
done this without you. 
 
I would also like to thank my two constituency assistants, 
Cheryl Hume who works full time and Maureen Paron who is 
part time. You ladies keep my office running smoothly and you 
are a great asset to the front line for my constituents. 
 
I would also like to thank the people of Cut Knife-Turtleford 
who have supported me and whom I’ve had the privilege to 
represent as a member of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But not least, I would like to thank my office staff here in the 
legislature. Shannon, Grant, Carla, Emma, and Tennille, you 
have all been such a great help to me settling into my new role 
as the Minister for Government Relations. Your knowledge and 
experience have made this an easy transition for me. 
 
I would also like to thank Premier Wall for this opportunity to 
serve in his cabinet. It is a great honour and I will do my utmost 
to serve with dedication and humility. I will work hard on this 
file that you have appointed me to and continue serving the 
constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford. It was because of you and 
the great potential I saw in your vision that helped me to make 
my decision to run in 2011. I wanted to be part of the future you 
saw for Saskatchewan. Just like you, I want to make a 
difference in our province. Your leadership has been a great 
example for all of us and you will truly be missed. I wish you 
the best of luck in your future endeavours. 
 
There are many areas of importance in the Throne Speech and I 
want to touch on a few that impact my constituency. Farmers 
are a major component of the growth and success we have 
experienced in our province over the last decade, and that is no 
different in my home constituency. Most of our farmers have 
gotten their crops off despite a challenging year. However it’s 
looking like another very successful harvest season in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the last decade, Saskatchewan’s total agricultural exports 
have increased from $6.4 billion to 14.4 billion. We saw record 
exports in 2015 of 15.3 billion. During the NDP’s last year in 
government, ag exports were only $6.4 billion. According to 
Stats Canada, in 2016 Saskatchewan farmers produced the 
second-largest crop ever at 35.6 million tonnes. That is 10 per 
cent above the 10-year average. 
 
Our government has also committed 4.2 million in industry 
grants to support programs such as 4-H, Ag in the Classroom, 
Agribition, and more. We will continue to provide strong 
support to our farmers, ranchers, and agribusinesses. 
 
Our producers are experiencing high cattle prices, which is a 
pleasant change because the industry is still dealing with the 
aftermath of BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] and 
years of below-normal prices. It is nice to finally see some 
prices get back to what we saw prior to 2003. 
 
As I continue to look back on the work we have done, it’s clear 
we’ve come a long way as a province in the last 10 years, but 

we still have work to do and we know that. However it’s 
important that we talk about the last decade because some of 
those members don’t seem to have been paying attention. 
 
Where did the money go, they ask. Well hopefully I can help 
them with that. Since forming government we have made 
record investments in important infrastructure projects like our 
highways, schools, and hospitals. Instead of investing in people 
and infrastructure, the NDP closed 52 hospitals, closed 176 
schools, and we are still trying to figure out where they spent 
their money. 
 
As part of my new portfolio, I would be remiss if I didn’t talk 
about municipal revenue-sharing program in our province. In 
2017-18 we invested 258 million in revenue-sharing funding. 
That is an increase of 130 million or 103 per cent since we took 
government in 2007. 
 
Municipal revenue sharing is unconditional, no-strings-attached 
funding for our municipalities. Since forming government we 
have provided municipalities an astounding 2 billion through 
revenue sharing. There has been an increase to revenue sharing 
in 2017 of 158 per cent to the cities, an increase of 54.5 per cent 
to RMs [rural municipality], and 99 per cent increase to the 
North. 
 
[21:45] 
 
In the past 10 years we have provided 712 million in revenue 
sharing to our rural municipalities while the NDP in their last 
10 years provided them with only 314 million. 
 
In the past 10 years we have provided over 1.4 billion to our 
urban municipalities while the NDP provided only 389 million 
in their last 10 years. That is a 278 per cent increase from our 
government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I know those members don’t like 
hearing this information but I’ve got some more for them. In the 
past 10 years we’ve provided northern municipalities with 175 
million in revenue sharing and the NDP in their last 10 years in 
government provided the North with only 63 million. That is a 
201 per cent increase from our government. 
 
In my constituency alone, there’s been over 1.7 million 
provided to municipalities in revenue sharing this year. 
 
Education has always been a very important focus for our 
government. In my constituency, the Northwest School 
Division has received a total of 51.1 million in operating 
funding with a preventative maintenance renewal, or PMR, 
allocation of 1.18 million, which is an increase of 15.1 per cent 
from the last budget. The Light of Christ school division has 
received a total of 19.7 million in operating funding, and 
394,000 allocation for PMR, which is an increase of 14.8 per 
cent from last year’s budget. 
 
Other capital investments for my area include 540,000 in 
funding for Lashburn’s J.H. Moore Elementary, 328,000 in 
funding for Turtleford School roof, and 93,000 for the roof at 
the Edam Hardcastle School. 
 
We know there is more work to be done, and I will continue to 



October 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

be a strong voice for my constituency. Let’s not forget the 
important part of education is properly funding it. Our 
government’s education budget for this year is 2.02 billion. 
Saskatchewan’s 28 school divisions will receive 1.86 billion in 
school operating funding, which includes revenue collected 
from the education property tax. 
 
Our government implemented the largest property tax cut in the 
province’s history, reducing the education property tax by 124 
million in 2009. As of 2016-17, our government has reduced 
the cumulative EPT [education property tax] burden on 
residents by over 1.3 billion since 2008-09. Our government’s 
commitment is to fund 40 per cent of the cost of education from 
property taxes and 60 per cent from the General Revenue Fund. 
 
I could go on and on about our record in government and the 
improvements we’ve made over the last 10 years, so I think I 
will. Under our government we have employed over 750 more 
doctors and over 3,400 nurses of all designations. We have 
among the shortest surgical wait times in Canada. We have 
doubled the investments in hospital projects, including a new 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon and new hospitals in North 
Battleford and Moose Jaw. 
 
Our Heartland Health Region has received 270,000 in capital 
equipment funding and 380,000 block funding for capital 
maintenance. The prairie health north region has received 
530,000 in capital equipment funding and an astonishing 1.45 
million in block funding for capital maintenance. 
 
There have been some monumental investments from our 
government. During the time when the NDP were in 
government, they eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds. They 
also attempted to raise monthly fees for seniors in long-term 
care facilities to 90 per cent of the senior’s income. Since we 
took government, 15 new long-term care facilities have been 
built or are in the process. And of course our government has 
also introduced a new personal care home benefit plan, which 
provides low-income seniors over $4,600 per year, on average, 
to assist with the cost of living in a care home. 
 
In my constituency, our government invested 460,000 to the 
Maidstone Headstart on a Home, or better known as McConnell 
Place, in 2015. That was after already investing 400,000 to 
improvements to the activity centre and group-living homes. In 
2010 there was 147,000 that was directly funded to the Wilkie 
rental development program. 
 
We have seen vast improvements in our highways across the 
province. After many years of neglect from the NDP, our 
government has set record investments into our highways. In 10 
years our government has invested 7.2 billion into repairing 
Saskatchewan highways, which is over 1 billion more than the 
NDP invested in 16 years. 
 
In 2017-18 our government will be investing 4.9 million for 
highways in my constituency. Part of this includes light-seal 
preservation on Highway No. 40, east of Cut Knife, and heavy 
preservation on Highway 14 near Unity.  
 
Total funding in 2015-16 by our government in my 
constituency was 9.4 million, which included repaving No. 16 
west of North Battleford and east of Bresaylor at a cost of 6.4 

million. There was also 1.1 million invested into bridge 
rehabilitation on Highway 17 over the Battle River. 
 
There is also planning under way for passing lanes on Highway 
4, north of North Battleford to Cochin. Our government has 
also been investing in the continued upgrades to Highway No. 
26, where all the SAGD [steam-assisted gravity drainage] 
projects are going on. 
 
As we travel around our beautiful province, we see many 
provincial parks. Our government has remained committed to 
investing in our parks. We’ve had an increase funding by 249 
per cent in our 10 years in government compared to the NDP 
last nine years. Unfortunately the NDP left many of our parks in 
disrepair, so we knew we had a large job ahead of us. Our 
government has made repairs and record investments into the 
parks by adding 2,100 new electrified sites; improvements to 
washroom facilities, boat launches, and visitor centres. There 
was 613,000 invested for the construction of the sportsplex in 
Lashburn. I must note that since our government came into 
power, the amount of visitors to our provincial parks has 
increased by nearly a million visits or 32 per cent higher. 
 
Infrastructure has always been of importance to our 
government. We were left with a massive infrastructure deficit 
from the NDP. They failed to invest in our highways, schools, 
and hospitals. We know with a growing province it’s vital not 
only to keep hospitals and schools open but to build new ones. 
Total investment in infrastructure by our government in the last 
10 years has been 11.2 billion, more than double what the NDP 
invested in its last 10 years. 
 
I’ve seen in my own constituency many investments in 
infrastructure. There was 480,000 in funding provided to Unity 
for a water system upgrade, 1.7 million for sewage lagoon 
expansion, and 400,000 in funding for the activity centre in 
Maidstone. Most recently, in 2017, there was funding of 
762,000 to the Wilkie wastewater main upgrade, ensuring a 
more reliable water and wastewater system. Also in 2017 
Manitou Beach Water Security Agency berm grant, an 
engineering project, received 887,000 for repairs and pumping.  
 
As we see the province growing year after year, we also see the 
need to continue investing in infrastructure. Since forming 
government we’ve been able to achieve the second-best job 
creation record in Canada. During the time that the NDP were 
in government, the province saw the worst job creation record 
in the country. It was half the national rate of job growth.  
 
Having a strong economy is a valuable part of driving this 
province forward. In my area currently there are five producing 
SAGD oil projects and four more being built. This has created 
150 to 200 new jobs during construction. It has also increased 
revenue to hotels and restaurants in my community. I would 
like to thank Husky Energy and Serafina oil for their investment 
into these projects. Husky Energy’s investment alone has been 
close to a billion dollars.  
 
In closing, I would like to touch briefly on our province’s 
growth. Our population is growing faster than it has since the 
earliest days of our province. Since electing a Saskatchewan 
Party government, we have seen a decade of growth. Our 
province has grown by 167 people, making us the 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2017 

second-fastest-growing province in Canada. It wasn’t that long 
ago we saw people leaving Saskatchewan for other 
opportunities, jobs, and a better quality of life. The NDP drove 
people out of Saskatchewan, and population dropped by 22,000 
people from 1996 to 2007.  
 
We will never go back to the dark days of the NDP, and that is 
why I will be supporting the Throne Speech from the member 
from Estevan and not supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake.  
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:56.]  
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2651 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2658 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2660 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2663 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2665 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2669 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2671 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2669 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


