






















































Hansard: November 07, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2819 
 November 7, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker is not 
present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I do again request leave of members for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure for me to be able to introduce to members of the 
Assembly, and to you as well, Ms. Galit Baram, the consul 
general of Israel for Toronto and Western Canada, who is in 
your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Baram is an experienced diplomat whose posts have 
included Washington, Cairo, and Moscow. This is her first 
official visit, though, to the province of Saskatchewan since 
being appointed in August of 2016. We’re very pleased that she 
is here, that she is visiting Saskatchewan. We want to welcome 
her warmly. Mother nature’s provided a bright, sunny day, 
maybe a little bit on the cool side for November.  
 
But we know that she has a busy day ahead, and has already 
had meetings this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She’s met 
with the Provincial Secretary and, during her visit to the 
province, the consul general will also meet with the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Minister of Advanced Education, the Minister 
of the Economy. She and I will meet later this day, Mr. 
Speaker, and there will be other meetings that she’ll have with 
representatives from the University of Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, and Sask 
Polytechnic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan and Israel have enjoyed a mutually beneficial 
trade relationship now for many years. Two decades ago, Israel 
was the first country outside the western hemisphere to 
negotiate a free trade agreement with Canada. That agreement, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, cut Israeli tariffs on agriculture and 
manufactured goods and cleared the path for Saskatchewan 
producers to partner with those in Israel in exporting lentils, 
canola seed, and flax seed among those exports to Israel. 
 
Saskatchewan and Israel are also in the forefront of using 
technology to boost crop production. And this is very 
interesting and compelling, I would suggest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Last year an international team of researchers, 

including scientists from the University of Saskatchewan and 
Tel Aviv University, used technology developed by an Israeli 
company to crack the wheat genome code. So, Mr. Speaker, 
clearly that work is crucial in enabling the development of more 
wheat varieties. It’s going to be crucial in terms of feeding the 
world. 
 
In addition to being trading partners, Canada and Israel, 
Saskatchewan and Israel are strong allies and good friends. 
Canada played a part, as we all know, in the creation of Israel, 
voted for Israel’s membership in the United Nations, 
contributed peacekeeping efforts in the Middle East that helped 
stabilize the region. And, Mr. Speaker, we know there are many 
Canadians that will be celebrating this year the centenary of the 
Balfour Declaration. That was Great Britain’s public pledge to 
create a national homeland for the Jewish people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no question about the importance of Israel, not just in 
terms of the relationship with Canada but in the world, and 
specifically in the region, the only democratic nation in that 
region, the only nation that is recognizing under democracy the 
rule of law. And so on that measure anyway, notwithstanding 
the controversies that exist in the region, on that count there is 
no equivalent, there is no moral equivalency, and Canada and 
Saskatchewan support and stand with Israel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome the consul general to the province of Saskatchewan 
and wish her well in her meetings and deliberations here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming Ms. Baram to this 
Legislative Assembly. I had the opportunity to meet with her 
this morning and welcome her to our great province. We spoke 
about many things, including the importance of trade in both of 
our respective economies as well as the importance of 
technology in agriculture as well as environmental 
sustainability. Ms. Baram, shalom aleichem, and I’d like to ask 
all members to join me in welcoming her to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I ask leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 
and through you and to all my fellow members, I’d like to 
introduce some very special guests to the Legislative Assembly 
today. Joining us today in the west gallery is Brigadier-General 
Trevor Cadieu, commander of the 3rd Canadian Division, 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

Edmonton. Accompanying the brigadier-general today are his 
aide, Captain Lee; Chief Warrant Officer Stevens, detachment 
commander, Saskatchewan, domestic operations — long title; 
Captain Wiltshire; and Lieutenant-Colonel Grubb, CO 
[commanding officer] of the Royal Regina Rifles. 
 
The brigadier-general has a long, distinguished military career 
that includes commanding an assault troop, a brigade 
reconnaissance troop, a regimental reconnaissance troop during 
his first tour of regimental duty back in 1995. In addition to 
deploying to Bosnia in ’97, the brigadier-general served in 
Kandahar, Afghanistan in ’02 and again in ’06-07. 
 
He has served alongside soldiers from every unit in one 
Canadian mechanized brigade group over the past two decades, 
both in training and in operations at home and abroad, and 
became commander of 3rd Canadian Division just this past 
summer. And if you remember two summers ago, he was 
deployed here in Saskatchewan fighting fires up north with a 
bunch of folks from around here. 
 
I was delighted and privileged to be able to meet with the 
brigadier-general and our other distinguished guests just prior to 
the House sitting this afternoon. And with our annual 
Remembrance Day observations coming up this Saturday, I 
would say that their presence here today is a special treat for all 
members of our House. 
 
I invite you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all my colleagues to join 
me not only welcoming them to the Chamber today, but in 
thanking them for their selfless service to our country and the 
people of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 
with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow in welcoming our 
esteemed guests today, Brigadier-General Cadieu, Captain Lee, 
Chief Warrant Officer Stevens, Captain Wiltshire, and 
Lieutenant-Colonel Grubb. I’m sorry I can’t look at you while 
I’m talking, but welcome. 
 
I would especially like to welcome them in light of Veterans’ 
Week this week and thank them for their service to our country. 
And I would like to ask all the other members of the Assembly 
to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to introduce two 
guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. The first one needs no 
introduction, but I’m going to introduce him anyway. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the former member for Canora-Pelly: the former 
minister of Education, the former minister of Finance, and of 
course the former deputy premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of reasons I’m introducing him 
today, and I’ll get to that in just a second. But since Ken 
Krawetz is in the gallery today and only members are allowed 
to speak on the floor, there’s a couple of things that he wanted 
me to inform the Legislative Assembly of. The first one, Mr. 

Speaker, is that he wanted everyone to be aware that he is no 
longer going to be a Toronto Maple Leafs fan, and he will be 
cheering for the Boston Bruins. Oh man, I’m going to pay for 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second one is more serious. He has a guest 
with him that I would like to introduce, who is a good friend of 
mine. Jeri Romaniuk from Edmonton, Alberta is in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. I got to know Jeri a number of years ago. 
She has an accomplished career in public service. At the time, 
she was the chief of staff to the minister of Transportation in 
Alberta. She has since moved on and has an accomplished 
career in the private sector, currently working with Colas 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, most important to Ken, she’s his 
cousin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome obviously Ken and also Jeri to 
our Legislative Assembly and wish them well. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, well I’d like to welcome Mr. 
Krawetz back to his Legislative Assembly of course, but I 
would also point to the Speaker’s gallery right behind him. 
Today we have Ms. Arden Fiala, and she’s been a strong 
advocate. She’s the president of SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan 
Families for Effective Autism Treatment] and advocates very 
strongly for families who have individuals living with autism 
spectrum disorder. She also sits on the national board. She’s 
been a strong voice for her own daughter Elene, but for all 
families across the province to make sure that they have access 
to evidence-based treatments and supports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with Arden today she has brought with her Dawnette and 
Bella Brett, who I had the opportunity to meet with a few weeks 
ago. Actually, we sat down for a couple hours and had a very 
good chat about their experiences. 
 
Dawnette is a teacher here in Saskatchewan and is the mother of 
three daughters, two of them living with autism spectrum 
disorder. But Bella here today, it was a real treat to sit down and 
chat with Bella. She is an advocate for those who have siblings 
with autism spectrum disorder. As everybody knows, a 
disability or a difficulty isn’t just experienced by the individual 
but by the whole family. So she’s been really great at, I think, 
sharing with legislators — particularly me in this case — her 
experience, but also advocating for her sisters as well and the 
things that she knows that they need. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Legislature to join with me today 
in welcoming these special guests to their Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to introduce you to 35 students from 
Campbell Collegiate who are sitting up in the west gallery with 
their teacher, Ms. Jill Labas and Mr. Holcolm. This is a school 
in my constituency I have some familiarity with. I’d like to 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

congratulate them while I have the opportunity on beating the 
Leboldus Suns football dynasty last Friday. They’re heading to 
the provincials coming up here soon. 
 
They have an incredible business club who we’ve had here 
visiting us as well. And we have many times appreciated the 
music of the choir also from Campbell Collegiate. I have the 
opportunity to meet with them later today. I assure you it will 
be the highlight of this day. I ask you all to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you in your gallery, I’d like to introduce a group of reeves and 
councillors from the Southwest. They are here for the mid-term 
convention and I’d like to welcome them to the Chamber. And 
we won’t tell Ray you’re here and not over there. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to join with all the members to welcome the folks who 
have joined us, especially the councillors from southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But while I was on my feet earlier, I should have acknowledged 
the presence in the west gallery of someone who’s no stranger 
to many members in the House and to many businesses around 
the province. His name is John Schmeiser. John is the CEO 
[chief executive officer] of the Western Equipment Dealers 
Association, agricultural equipment dealers association, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
He’s originally from Bruno, Saskatchewan. He still comes here 
for a lot of the summer but he and Leandra and Rachel live in 
Calgary right now. I can report to members of the House that he 
has been leading an expansion of that particular organization to 
include . . . well through mergers, many dealers across western 
North America, and has done a great job of representing 
agricultural equipment dealers here in our province, but really 
across the West and much of Western North America. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Additionally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll say — full disclosure — 
he’s a great friend. And it’s always good to see John when he’s 
back in the province though he’s typically asking for something 
on behalf of those for whom he works, which is his job and we 
appreciate that. But I would ask members to join me in 
welcoming John Schmeiser to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
join with the member across and also welcome the reeves and 
councillors that are here today. I had the opportunity to go to 
the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
mid-term this morning and listen to the speeches. And I was 
really impressed with the fact that your SARM delegates are 
really working hard building relationships with all leaders 

within this province. And the important work that you do is so 
important with building this strong province that we have here, 
and we appreciate everything you do. And I want to ask 
everybody here to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to rise in my place to present yet another page of a 
petition on behalf of the people of Balgonie. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes on 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but it would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after attending that very important public 
meeting in Balgonie, a petition was started, and many hundreds 
of people from the Balgonie area signed these petitions. We will 
stand in our place every single day to present these petitions. 
And the people that have signed this particular page, on this 
many, many-page document called a petition, are from Grenfell. 
They’re from Qu’Appelle. They’re from Grayson. They’re from 
Lemberg. They’re from Abernethy. They’re from Neudorf, 
Saskatchewan and all from throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this 
would bring in excess of 1,000 signatures just from my 
constituency with this petition here today, thousands more from 
across the province. And I think it’s incumbent, Mr. Speaker, 
on all members of this legislature, both in government and 
opposition, to remain relevant and represent Saskatchewan 
people to ensure that Saskatchewan families are not subject to 
this ill-advised federal government policy that has not been 
proven to work in any jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Holbein, 
from Shellbrook, from Saskatoon, from Canwood, from Big 
River, from Leask, from Spruce Home. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
the Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
Sask Party financial mismanagement; that Saskatchewan 
students already pay the second-highest tuition fees in Canada; 
that this budget cuts 36.8 million from post-secondary 
education; that this budget cuts 6.4 million from technical 
institutions; that funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid 
Fund and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that 
the Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Assiniboia, 
Outlook, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader and the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners, in 
addition to other things, call for the attention of the House to the 
fact that the closure of BNCC [Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre] took inmates far away from their families, making 
visitation difficult or non-existent at all. They point out that the 
closure of the correctional centre took away from the ability to 
get treatment and to obtain training tickets which of course, Mr. 
Speaker, is one of the main defences against reoffending. And 
they point out that the closure hurt families, elders, and the 
community in general in terms of the impact of this unheralded 
and unexpected decision. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows [Mr. Deputy Speaker], 
the petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for future generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you might expect, though the support is 
certainly not limited to this, this particular petition is signed by 
citizens from the good community of Buffalo Narrows. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Physician Recruitment and Retention in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
wasn’t too many years ago that the Leader-Post and many 
papers around the province read, “Doctor shortage on the rise.” 
In fact, doctor shortage even today in the House, I see again. 
Eighty-four vacancies in the province, Mr. Speaker, back in 
2007. The article went on to say, “The suspension of hospital 
services in the town of Spiritwood for nearly six months 
because of the inability to fill an opening for a doctor . . . ” 
 
Mr. Speaker, years ago it pitted community against community 
on bidding wars for the few doctors that there were in this 
province under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. Our 
government started a new program called the Saskatchewan 
international physician practice assessment program. Mr. 
Speaker, since SIPPA began in 2007, over 200 new family 
physicians have completed the assessment and are currently 
practising in the province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, they seem to be upset. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in communities all over Saskatchewan 
have better access to physician services because of this 
program. Today we have about 750 more doctors practising in 
this province than we did 10 years ago. Mr. Speaker, our first 
priority is to recruit medical graduates from the University of 
Saskatchewan, but we do depend on internationally educated 
doctors to help the needs of our health care system throughout 
the province. Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
welcoming these new physicians to Saskatchewan. They’re 
valuable partners, and we want to thank them for their 
commitment to high-quality and patient-centred care. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Poet and Photographer a Future 40 Winner 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to rise today to acknowledge the accomplishments of 
Tenille Campbell who is one of the 2017 CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] Future 40 winners. Tenille is the 
daughter of my very good friends Isidore and Ornella 
Campbell. 
 
Tenille was raised and born in Beauval, which is situated in my 
constituency, and she is a Dene/Métis woman from the English 
River First Nation. Tenille is a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 
student at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], focusing on 
indigenous literature. She is an accomplished author and 
photographer. She is the author of #IndianLovePoems, a 
collection of her poetry which was released this past summer. 
As well she operates a successful business called Sweetmoon 
Photography, through which her specialty is the photography of 
indigenous peoples. And, Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t enough, 
she’s the co-creator of the blog Tea and Bannock. The blog 
features photographs and stories of indigenous women 
photographers throughout all of Canada. 
 
This talented young woman is an accomplished speaker, 
speaking at events and on panels throughout Canada. She is 
well known for her sense of Dene humour, a trait she no doubt 
inherited from her father, Isidore. 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

I am extremely proud of this daughter of northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I ask that all members of the 
Assembly join with me in congratulating Tenille Campbell on 
being selected a 2017 Future 40 winner and to commend Isidore 
and Ornella Campbell on raising such an amazing young 
woman. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Donation Supports the Concentus Citizenship Education 
Foundation 

 
Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I stand here today to recognize and thank Elaine and 
Sherwood Sharfe. Each born in a different small Saskatchewan 
town, the Sharfes have made Saskatoon their home. They’ve 
raised a wonderful family, grew very many successful 
businesses, and committed themselves to a lifetime of 
community support as volunteers and benefactors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on October 30th, the Sharfes announced a 
cornerstone donation of $1 million to the Concentus Citizenship 
Education Foundation. This foundation began in 2010 with 
financial support from the ministries of Education and Justice, 
and the Law Foundation of Saskatchewan. Since that time, it’s 
developed learning resources for students in all levels of 
primary school to educate and empower citizenship. The 
foundation works to push the understanding of rights, 
responsibilities, and respect as part of a student’s learning 
career. They also preach participation and commitment to 
justice in our multicultural society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this area of education is obviously very important 
and cannot be overlooked. The generous donation of Elaine and 
Sherwood Sharfe allow the foundation to continue their mission 
to develop these resources and make them available to every 
teacher in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join with 
me in thanking Elaine and Sherwood Sharfe for their gracious 
donation, and in thanking the Concentus Citizenship Education 
Foundation for all the exceptional work they do. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Launch of Taxi Area Council 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, on October 24th, I was honoured 
to join with colleagues at the municipal and federal levels to 
attend a celebration in Saskatoon to commemorate the creation 
of the Taxi Area Council launched by District 3 of the United 
Steelworkers. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Mr. 
Malik Umar Draz, the new president of the Taxi Area Council 
for his leadership and advocacy for taxi drivers in Saskatoon 
and across this province. 
 
Malik is the president of USW [United Steelworkers] 2014, a 
United Steelworkers cab union that formed a few years ago 

under the guidance of steelworkers rep Mr. Mike Pulak. 
 
Malik has quickly emerged as a leader in the union as their first 
president. In that time, I have gotten to know him and his 
family and friends quite well, and I have seen how he is a 
tremendous asset to our community in Saskatoon Fairview and 
beyond. 
 
Malik puts in countless hours to represent taxi drivers in this 
province. He’s a voice for taxi drivers who have been victims of 
physical and verbal abuse, and he provides advocacy for them 
in a respectful and inspiring way. I can’t imagine going to work 
every night in a profession where I felt unsafe. As a cab driver 
himself, Malik has given voice to these issues and given support 
to drivers who have fell victim to violence in the workplace. 
 
I call on all members to join me in honouring the achievements 
of Malik Umar Draz and the United Steelworkers who are 
helping to make life better for working people in our province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

No Stone Left Alone Ceremony Held in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday 
I had the great honour of attending No Stone Left Alone 
remembrance ceremony at the Rosedale Cemetery in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
In attendance were students and staff from École St. Margaret, 
Lindale School, and St. Agnes School, as well as men and 
women from 15 Wing, the Legion, and the ANAVETs [Army, 
Navy & Air Force Veterans in Canada]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the memorial foundation works to honour our 
fallen military, and to educate students of the sacrifice our 
veterans made, by gathering together and placing poppies at 
their headstones every November. 
 
No Stone Left Alone was launched in 2011 in recognition of the 
sacrifice Canadian men and women who have lost their lives 
fighting for our peace and security, both at home and abroad. 
Yesterday the students were able to participate alongside men 
and women from 15 Wing, making it an unforgettable 
experience. 
 
In 2017, 7,787 students will participate in a hundred ceremonies 
honouring 51,827 Canadian Armed Forces members. It was a 
sombre day, and an opportunity to reflect on the brave young 
men and women who answered the call for their country. And I 
hope the valuable lessons that each student in attendance 
learned yesterday will continue to resonate with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, please join me in thanking the 
No Stone Left Alone Memorial Foundation, 15 Wing Moose 
Jaw for their fly-past, staff and students for attending this 
ceremony. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

Joint-Use School Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in the House 
today to celebrate the opening of Chief Whitecap School and St. 
Kateri Tekakwitha Catholic school in Saskatoon. They are two 
of the 18 new joint-use schools built with a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model, saving taxpayers $100 million. The 
co-operation and teamwork that went into building these 
schools is a historic achievement. They are a welcoming space 
for staff and students, providing them with the tools and 
resources they need to become the leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Chief Whitecap School serves an important role in the alliance 
between Saskatoon public schools and the Whitecap Dakota 
First Nation. Chief Whitecap School’s principal, Harold 
Robertson, said and I quote, “Our school is unlike any other in 
the province as we bring together the communities of 
Stonebridge and Whitecap Dakota First Nation in this 
innovative learning facility.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the school will share space with St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha Catholic school. Naming the school after St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha is an example of reconciliation and will serve as an 
inspiring learning space for the whole community. 
 
Under the NDP we watched a generation flee to opportunities 
outside our province. These schools are a generational 
investment inside our province in our education system and our 
students. We will not let history repeat itself. We will continue 
to build and keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 

Standing Up for Saskatchewan’s Interests 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
city of Burnaby, BC [British Columbia] demanded the Minister 
of Justice apologize for his comments regarding Trans 
Mountain pipeline expansion. I stand here today to follow the 
Premier’s lead. We will not apologize for standing up for the 
people of Saskatchewan and the voters of Cannington. We will 
not apologize for supporting a $7.4 billion project that will 
generate revenues for the quality of life in this province. No, we 
won’t apologize for applying for intervenor status. We won’t 
stand by while another project of national importance is killed 
by the vocal minority that continue to drive their cars, live in 
plastic-filled houses, and wearing oil-based clothing. 
 
Yesterday NDP Premier Rachel Notley said the new NDP 
federal leader’s opposition to the Trans Mountain pipeline was, 
and I quote, “dead wrong” and “irrelevant.” Mr. Speaker, I have 
to disagree. Anyone seeking to be Prime Minister of this 
country — no matter how small the chance — standing against 
a project of national importance, that’s very relevant. 
 
Did any of the members opposite tell him as much a couple of 
weeks ago when Mr. Singh was here? We know money and 
election resources have transferred between the members 
opposite and the BC NDP. Has anyone picked up the phone? 
 

Members on this side of the House will keep standing up for 
Saskatchewan’s interests. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday the Premier 
laughed and mocked at my questions, but he couldn’t find it in 
himself to actually answer them. So I’ll put it as simply for him 
as I can. First the Premier was caught using the partisan email 
with the server housed at the Sask Party office for government 
business. Specifically it was to discuss a trade visit to the 
United States. Then the Premier promised he would stop using 
that email for government business. Then in September he used 
it again, this time to try and kill a story that was coming out 
about the Sask Party GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. 
Then a senior staff member in the Premier’s office said he used 
the email because his government email was broken for two 
weeks. But Central Services has no records of the Premier’s 
email being down, and Executive Council has no records of the 
Premier’s email being down, no record at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier’s office say his email was 
down when it wasn’t? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have said 
I have undertaken to use the government email, Mr. Speaker, so 
long as it’s working. And sometimes inadvertently, if a thread 
has been occurring that is my non-government email, I respond 
on that account. The important part is that members have access 
to those in a freedom of information request that’s valid, and 
they have had access to those. They’ve made a freedom of 
information request. They know that sometimes I use this 
non-government email because they have a copy of one. We 
handed it over, and moreover we’re going to ensure they’re 
collected and handed over to the Archives. 
 
Again I’d point out there’s about eight former NDP ministers 
. . . Well, the Deputy Leader just wants to yell from his seat 
because he doesn’t like the answer. He doesn’t like the fact that 
eight of his former cabinet colleagues, Mr. Speaker, have yet to 
turn over their files from their basement to the Archives, to the 
people of Saskatchewan who own them in the first place. 
 
One of those ministers that is hiding his documents from the 
people of the province, keeping them in his basement, is Eldon 
Lautermilch. Now what was Eldon Lautermilch famous for? 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] for example, Mr. Speaker. There are documents 
from the former minister of Finance, for the former minister of 
Justice, that are being hidden in the basements, private 
basements of the NDP. They refuse to hand them over. Will she 
demand that they change their positions? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, let me clear something up that 
the Premier keeps getting wrong. We learned of his email not 
because it’s accessible through FOI [freedom of information]. 
We learned of his email from two ways: (1) a staff person who 
was accessible through FOI included it in an email thread, and 
(2) a senior staff person accidentally emailed it to a journalist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accidents happen, sure. From time to time you 
click the wrong button, whatever. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
question is about trust. It may seem less and less obvious to the 
government, but the people of Saskatchewan deserve a 
government that they can actually trust. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier said he would stop using the email on the Sask Party 
server for government business. He did not. A statement from 
his office said his government email was down. It was not.  
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier come clean about his use of the 
Sask Party email server or, like the Finance minister, is he 
hoping that his email will deteriorate before they’re ever made 
public? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend is factually 
incorrect. The reason that they’re aware of the non-government 
email that I’ve used from time to time, which is subject to FOI 
and will be turned over to the Archives, is because the former 
leader raised it in estimates this last spring, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s how the NDP found out that I used this 
non-government email. It’s because we gave them the 
non-government email as we would make it available in the 
FOI, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to champion the email issue for the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s interesting. I would probably choose a 
different tact. If I was the Leader of the Opposition, I might turn 
to the Energy critic, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who 
before question period was heckling the Attorney General for 
standing up for Saskatchewan in terms of the city of Burnaby’s 
efforts to stop the Trans Mountain railroad, which hurts the 
people of this province and hurts our energy sector. She was 
yelling from her chair at the Attorney General, that it was 
embarrassing that he would stand up for Saskatchewan people. 
 
This is why they are so disconnected from the people of the 
province. What the people of Saskatchewan expect is less talk 
about non-government emails or government emails, and more 
standing up for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the opposition members, 
we do hear the question, but we don’t hear all of the answers. I 
would ask the opposition members to respect the ministers 
when they have the floor. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 

Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago, that Premier was 
elected on a promise to be better and more transparent as a 
government. They seem to have forgotten that, though, because 
they have the ability to “I know you are, but what am I” and 
“Oh, my dog ate my homework.”  

These questions are about trust and transparency. His refusal to 
answer them is why all of those people running to replace him 
right now keep hearing questions about the GTH. The Premier 
says he was both there through the whole process — he knew 
what was intended, and what was not — and he had no 
involvement in any of the negotiations. Mr. Speaker, 
Schrödingers cat would be pretty impressed. All we’re asking is 
for the Premier to open the box, and shed some light on the 
situation. 
 
Will he admit that, just because he may not have been at the 
table for the deals, if he was there through the whole process, he 
was obviously involved in the negotiations in some way? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this question happens 
over and over again in the House. I’ve answered it every single 
time. Of course, the cabinet was involved in providing a 
mandate. That issue was canvassed by the Provincial Auditor, 
and in terms of, Mr. Speaker, the allegation that the government 
has somehow tried to avoid answering questions, we opened up 
the entire issue to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
For folks who are watching who don’t know the relationship 
between the auditor and the legislature, know that the 
Provincial Auditor is independent of all members of the 
Assembly. And that report was concluded, and she said publicly 
she saw no signs of conflict of interest, or breach of trust, Mr. 
Speaker, or fraud. Now, it’s with the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police], and everyone’s cooperating with that. We 
wait to see the results. 
 
I mean, the Leader of the Opposition is quite right to note that 
this is the 10th anniversary of the day that we had the great 
honour of serving the people of the province in government. We 
were elected for the first time. It’s also a day that people are 
remembering what it was like before that day, Mr. Speaker. 
Before that day, we said goodbye to a generation of young 
people. We gave them luggage for graduation presents. Now 
there are 160,000 more people living in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We used to have the dead-last, dead-worst job 
creation record in all of Canada under the NDP, and over the 
last 10 years, it’s been the second-best job creation record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I look forward to more questions about what it was like under 
the NDP in those dark days 11 years ago and beyond, as 
compared to what it’s been like over these last 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, he can rant. He can scoff. 
He can make all the noise he wants, but these are the questions 
that Saskatchewan people are asking of that Premier, a Premier 
who fails to answer these questions day after day after day. 
Even those that are running to be the next premier are hearing 
these very questions of this Premier in his handling of the GTH 
scandal. 
 
Take for example the member for Regina University who says 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

that this GTH scandal is dragging the Sask Party down, and 
she’s calling for a full public inquiry. So is the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest, who was also of course the Attorney 
General. And then there’s the member for Saskatoon 
Willowgrove who says, quote, that the GTH is so bad, I quote, 
that he “. . . would immediately begin action to sell the GTH.” 
And then of course there was that short cameo appearance by 
the member from Meadow Lake who said he would have fired 
Bill Boyd and Mr. Pushor, had he been the premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after looking at the auditor’s report, the RCMP 
found that it warranted a full investigation. So, Mr. Speaker, 
why won’t the Premier answer basic questions in this House? 
And will he at least tell us what he told the RCMP as part of the 
interview as sitting Premier of Saskatchewan into the GTH 
scandal? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment and Minister Responsible for the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
usual, so much wrong with the preamble of that member’s 
question. That’s typical that we expect though on this side of 
the House from the member from Regina Rosemont, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m frankly surprised that he asked the question and 
then doesn’t get up and retract the question because we’re never 
sure where he is on any given day, whether he’s in or whether 
he’s out, whether he’s going to ask the question, whether he’s 
not going to ask the question. 
 
With respect, Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question, Mr. 
Speaker, the government has fully co-operated with the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. The government provided the 
Provincial Auditor with full access to any cabinet documents, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike what happened with the members opposite, 
for example, with SPUDCO. I wonder if the . . . Well no, 
actually, the Provincial Auditor didn’t actually . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The opposition members will have an 
opportunity to ask another question. Currently the minister has 
the floor, and I would ask the opposition members to respect the 
minister’s right to reply to the question. I recognize the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, you know, we wonder 
whether or not the deputy minister to the premier, then Premier 
Lorne Calvert, had a chance to look at Eldon Lautermilch’s 
files. Well we’ll never know because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there wasn’t an open and transparent process that was followed 
by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do all that we can to work with the 
board and the management and the staff of the Global 
Transportation Hub to see that we don’t just stop at 860 
full-time jobs created at the Global Transportation Hub, we 
don’t just stop at $450 million in private investment. We’re 
going to go above and beyond that and see this be a successful 
project, a generational project for the people of this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course we have the 
Premier dodging the question again what he told the RCMP as 
part of this investigation as sitting Premier of Saskatchewan. 
But we also know that Bill Boyd, Laurie Pushor, and the 
Premier’s former chief of staff worked together on the deals at 
the centre of the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. In an email chain 
that included all of them, Mr. Pushor brought up the appraisal 
that the Premier used as his lifeline during the last election, his 
failed defence, Mr. Speaker. He said, “. . . it does mean that we 
have some information that makes a case for our position.” 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we already know that the appraisal didn’t affect 
the negotiations and that it was never intended for the buyer to 
see. But now, with this email released by the media, it’s further 
proof that it was a retroactive justification for a deal that they 
had already cooked up.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier now finally admit that the 
appraisal he clung to for so long as his failed defence was 
completely irrelevant? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, first and 
foremost the Provincial Auditor had access to that record, had 
access to all the records that were looked at by the government. 
And in fact I don’t believe she even referenced that in the very 
full report that she issued for the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, that members opposite have access to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite perhaps doesn’t know 
this, but should know this, that when a minister advances an 
item at cabinet, that is the position of the ministry. That is the 
position of that minister and, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that 
should be a surprise to anybody. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has fully co-operated with 
the Provincial Auditor, provided all that information — 
including what the member opposite references, including the 
email that the member opposite references — which is a stark 
contrast to how members opposite dealt with an issue that I 
think was a challenge for that government, in explaining the 
matters around SPUDCO where they didn’t open up cabinet 
documents to the Provincial Auditor, didn’t even invite the 
Provincial Auditor to look at the matter. They simply had the 
deputy minister to the premier of the time, Lorne Calvert, do a 
report. Eldon Lautermilch was moved to a different area, and 
they thought that was the end of the story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s not the way we operate on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will not be taking lessons from the NDP when 
it comes to being accountable to the people. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage and Federal Carbon Tax 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste matter because it’s the 
people of Saskatchewan that the Sask Party are forcing to pay 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

the price. Let’s look at CCS [carbon capture and storage] at 
BD3 [Boundary dam 3]. The Sask Party dumped $1.5 billion 
into building it and millions more into running it. And as people 
open their power bills, Saskatchewan people are seeing the true 
impact of the Sask Party’s $1.5 billion carbon capture tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while CCS gets shut down over and over again, 
and when the costs of it go up and up, and while SaskPower’s 
CEO says it’s time to admit that CCS should not be expanded, 
this minister stands in the House, arrogantly reads quotes from 
years gone by, and shows no concern — absolutely no concern 
— for the families, for the seniors, and for the most vulnerable 
in our province who are struggling to pay their bills. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when will the minister admit that their 
failures at BD3 are having a profound impact on the 
pocketbooks of Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment and the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I look forward to addressing the question that was asked by the 
member opposite. But I think the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana should perhaps clarify, on the record, what she was 
saying across the way before question period started. 
 
Does she believe it’s her position and the position of the NDP 
that the Government of Saskatchewan should not have 
intervened on the matter with the city of Burnaby with respect 
to the NEB [National Energy Board]? The member opposite 
heckled that across the way, chastising the Attorney General for 
intervening on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the people of this province. If that’s her position, I think she 
should put that on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the member’s 
question on Boundary dam 3, Mr. Speaker, we are going 
through a process and evaluating whether or not that is 
technology that would be applicable and be applied to the next 
phase of coal generation. BD4 and 5 are the next new . . . for 
decisions to be made. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would also remind the member of what her 
position was just a couple of days ago in the newspaper, when 
she said, well we can’t mothball it. We’d have to keep it 
running if the NDP were the government, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, she has seemingly a couple of different positions on 
this very issue. Would they keep BD3 going? Would they 
continue to capture carbon and sequester it for enhanced oil 
operations, or would they shut the whole thing down? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That arrogance is what is hurting Saskatchewan people. They 
laud their experiment, and they shake their fists against the 
federal carbon tax. But bragging about CCS doesn’t make it 
work any better, and shaking their fists doesn’t protect us from 
the federal carbon tax either.  
 
Yesterday the Manitoba environment minister said that we, 

along with every other province, have been saying all along: to 
truly protect ourselves from the federal carbon tax, we need a 
made-at-home solution. Now, Mr. Speaker, they may doubt 
that, but as the Conservative minister from Manitoba said 
yesterday, “If we say no, we get Trudeau.” If the Sask Party 
doesn’t change their tune, Saskatchewan will be the only 
province forced to pay the federal carbon tax. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what is their plan? Will they guarantee 
protections for families, small businesses, indigenous 
communities, and our trade-exposed industries? And will they 
at least consider their own greentech fund and make the biggest 
polluters pay for the pollution they cause? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable. This is 
unbelievable. The NDP Environment critic stands up 
demanding that the Government of Saskatchewan introduce and 
adopt a technology fund for businesses in this province to invest 
in technology. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite 
voted against that. When it was brought up, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of years ago and introduced and passed in this 
Assembly, the members opposite voted against it. This is 
unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would only refer the member opposite, 
when it comes to a made-in-Saskatchewan plan, when it comes 
to protecting our trade-exposed industries in this province for 
competitive matters, when it comes to ensuring that there is a 
flexible ability for companies and industries in this province to, 
yes, ensure that they are being responsible citizens, corporate 
citizens but also ensuring that their businesses survive in this 
province and continue to grow, we will have a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan. We referenced it in the Throne 
Speech. The members opposite voted against it. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m looking forward to the time when that plan 
is produced to see that member support it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Sask Party 
announced their budget, they included a $300 million 
contingency fund that was supposed to be used in case of 
emergency. But they’ve already spent half of it because they 
suddenly realized that no matter how hard they try, they can’t 
make collective agreements just go away, and they can’t just cut 
people’s pay at a whim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also included funding for the provincial 
disaster relief fund. The Agriculture minister has stated that the 
rules mean that this money isn’t available to producers who lost 
so much in recent wildfires. Mr. Speaker, at budget time the 
then minister of Finance said, and I quote, “Every now and then 
you’re going to have a . . . situation like we had in La Ronge a 
couple of years ago.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course he was speaking about fires. He said that 
this money was available for exactly this kind of circumstance. 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

So between PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] and 
the contingency fund, Mr. Speaker, why can’t the government 
find the money to help these producers out? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. She cites the PDAP program, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know, we’ve encouraged the use of the 
PDAP program in many cases where it applies, and the PDAP 
program unfortunately does not apply to the loss of insurable 
assets. For the most part, the losses experienced in the very 
unfortunate wildfires in southwestern Saskatchewan last month 
were . . . the bulk of the losses were insurable losses. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, last week alone the Education 
minister managed to publicly single out and question the 
methods of a specific teacher, denied the important role that 
classrooms can play in taking us towards reconciliation, and 
continued with her education funding shell game. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the people of 
Saskatchewan are not fooled. They know the facts when they 
see them. Will the minister finally come clean and recognize the 
simple math? Education property taxes went up by $67 million, 
but $54 million was cut from transfers to our kids’ classrooms. 
Will she finally let go of the witchcraft reasoning, drop the 
magical thinking, and just admit what the rest of us already 
know? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite likes to reference the fact that I show up at 
school openings. And I would just like to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you bet the P3 model I do. 
 
It was referenced today by the member for Wildwood. Can you 
believe that the NDP in its convention manifesto actually said 
it’s opposed to P3 schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Really, they 
would turn back the clock and not undertake the largest 
infrastructure project in Saskatchewan history; not build 18 
joint-use schools that opened on time, on budget, and saved 
taxpayers $100 million; not adopt a model that’s making 
headlines, Mr. Speaker, and catching fire across the country. 
Manitoba’s Minister of Education recently said, “If the 
Saskatchewan Premier . . . thinks the program works, it’s worth 
a look here,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite likes to talk about resources, but these 
schools are technologically completely equipped for 21st 
century education. They have reading nooks and presentation 
stairs and outdoor learning spaces and libraries without walls, 
Mr. Speaker. The member opposite called the newly renovated 
École Connaught School beautiful just a few short weeks ago 
and was full of thanks for it. She showed up at the opening. 

Where does she stand now, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An interesting 
diversion, but still no answer to the question. So I’ll try it again, 
and this isn’t a complicated math equation. Education property 
taxes went up by $67 million, and that means that the people of 
Saskatchewan chipped in an additional $67 million. But the 
total government transfer was $54 million less than the year 
before. So that’s actually $121 million less that the government 
made available from the GRF [General Revenue Fund] for our 
kids’ classrooms. 
 
Teachers, parents, EAs [educational assistants], even students 
see this cut every day. They’re the ones who are having to do 
more with less. Mr. Speaker, what message does she think she’s 
sending? What should our kids be learning from an Education 
minister who day after day sticks to her tired talking points 
instead of admitting these simple facts? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m not 
going to go there on the talking, the tired talking points, Mr. 
Speaker. Broken record doesn’t begin on this one. I know the 
member opposite wants to go back, back to the good old days of 
tax revolts on the steps of this legislature because of the 
through-the-roof education property tax, Mr. Speaker. We will 
never go back. 
 
It’s quite clear that when you have a $1.9 billion budget, every 
dollar of a $750 million education property tax goes back into 
education. In fact we’re actually spending two and a half times 
more than we are collecting. 
 
Under the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, property taxes paid for 60 
per cent of school divisions’ operating budgets. We committed 
in ’08-09 to funding education at a 60/40 split, with 60 per cent 
coming from government grants and 40 per cent coming from 
property tax. We actually went well beyond that, Mr. Speaker, 
and the split was for a number of years, 65 per cent GRF, 35 per 
cent EPT [education property tax]. In fact the EPT amount for 
both ’07 and ’17 was almost identical at 750 million. 
 
We have provided record investments in our education system 
and at the same time been committed to the taxpayers of this 
province. We know that. She knows it too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
the incredible support of my colleagues, I am pleased to move 
that Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next time, Mr. Speaker, next sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 
has moved that Bill No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read again? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Orders of the day. I recognize the Opposition Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on a point 
of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the member to make her point 
of order succinctly. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I refer to the 
Rules and Procedures of this Assembly. Rule 51(b) states that 

“. . . no Member shall reflect on the absence of another 
Member.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his member’s statement, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone did clearly and precisely 
do just that, and I call on that member to apologize and 
withdraw the statement. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would refer 
to that rule, and I think the member quoted the provision, 
“reflect on.” I think that’s the operative word, “reflect.” The 
member didn’t reflect on the absence of the member from 
Meewasin. The member didn’t even specifically refer to the 
member from Meewasin being away today, and yesterday, and 
last week — presumably to campaign, but we don’t know why 
the member has been away, Mr. Speaker. So the member didn’t 
actually reflect on the absence of that member and his repeated 
absences. So I would put it to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
operative provision, being “reflect,” was not met. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I find in this and the two points of 
order that we have a difference of interpretation, but I would 
also caution the member from Meadow Lake from being too 
descriptive in his position. What I will do is I’ll take it under 
advisement and bring a ruling back. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Income Tax (Business 
Income) Amendment Act, 2017. This legislation will implement 
business income tax initiatives that were announced in the 
October 24th, 2017 Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small business is so vital to the health of the 
economy that our government has decided to further enhance 
the Saskatchewan advantage. As a result, effective January 1st, 
2018 we will raise the provincial small business income 
threshold from 500,000 to 600,000 — the highest threshold in 
Canada. This is the amount of income up to which small 
businesses pay tax at a much lower 2 per cent small business 
tax rate. Increasing this threshold will provide Saskatchewan 
small businesses with an incentive to hire more workers, and 
invest in new capital right here in our province. 
 
Yesterday in the rotunda Marilyn Braun-Pollon, CFIB 
[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] vice-president, 
Prairie and agri-business said, and I quote: 
 

This decision is going to send the right signal to 
hard-working small business owners. They’re now going to 
have the most competitive small business tax structure in 
the country, the highest threshold, and I think that sends 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

the signal that will begin to restore small business 
confidence across the province. 

 
Our government couldn’t agree with her more. Meanwhile rates 
for personal income tax in Saskatchewan continue to be 
reduced, which also helps create jobs in small businesses. This 
legislation will also return Saskatchewan’s general corporate 
income tax rate to 12 per cent, the same as other Western 
provinces. Specifically, this legislation will increase 
Saskatchewan’s general corporate income tax rate by half a 
point, effective January 1st, 2018, from 11.5 to 12 per cent, and 
will repeal the legislated tax rate reduction, from 11.5 to 11 per 
cent, that was scheduled to take effect on July 1st, 2019. Once 
implemented, Saskatchewan’s 12 per cent general corporate 
income tax rate will continue to be competitive and among the 
lowest in the country, maintaining our province’s advantages 
when attracting new investments and jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the second reading of The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 84, the income tax business taxation amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously as the opposition, we want to look through the bill 
itself and begin to make the necessary network connection to 
talk to the small-business community and many other 
organizations like the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business to see the intended impact, Mr. Speaker, of this 
particular bill being proposed by the Minister of Finance. 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that it is with a bit of 
trepidation that the opposition listens and responds to some of 
the bills being proposed by the government, or the 
Saskatchewan Party government, because what we’ve seen over 
the last several months, Mr. Speaker, is really a bunch of 
surprises for our small businesses, and a bunch of tax increases. 
 
The level of debt that we now will be inheriting from the 
Saskatchewan Party is really a deterrent for many people to 
come to Saskatchewan and to invest in Saskatchewan. And for 
us to recognize the small and medium-sized businesses that play 
a crucial and critical role in not only forming the economy 
province-wide but more specific, providing services and job 
opportunities to the local people in many communities, small 
and large, throughout our province. 
 
I want to say at the outset that the small-business sector in our 
province of Saskatchewan have phenomenal benefits overall for 
the province. As the opposition, we always make an effort to 
recognize the small and medium-sized businesses as well as 
making sure that we recognize the large corporate players as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question from our perspective that 
when it comes to the economy, we are all partners in this 
economy and that it’s important for governments to be able to 
provide supports and to attract investment by way of consult. 
And certainly bringing forward incentives, and certainly 
bringing forward programs that would encourage more and 

more of these small businesses to continue to thrive and 
certainly continue to stay here, and to attract many others as 
well. So there’s no question we understand the importance of 
the role of government in trying to create a stable and certainly 
an encouraging, thriving environment for them to not only 
invest in other businesses, but to keep current businesses going. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the important thing that I want to share is 
that we certainly are encouraged by the words of the CFIB on 
some of the changes being proposed in Bill No. 84. I think as a 
lobby group, and certainly as a group that represents the 
independent small businesses of our province, that there’s 
certainly a lot of merit to some of the points that they raised. 
And obviously as an opposition, if those are some of the issues 
that they are encouraged by, we would certainly take their word 
over that of the Saskatchewan Party Finance minister any day 
of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here’s the reason why. We know that on some fronts it’s 
important to recognize the small-business community in the 
province, but when you have, Mr. Speaker, a billion-dollar tax 
hike in one given year because of mismanagement, that 
certainly acts as a deterrent and discourages small businesses 
from expanding, Mr. Speaker. And when you have the level of 
debt that Saskatchewan is currently under, 23 billion by 2020, 
Mr. Speaker, you begin to wonder how is the community going 
to sustain that kind of debt over the many years that we have to 
repay that debt. And those are some of the questions that the 
Sask Party have to answer for. 
 
And finally I would say this, Mr. Speaker. When you speak 
about the P3, the P3 models, whether it’s the Regina bypass, or 
whether it’s the schools that are being built, or the bridges, Mr. 
Speaker, I think, as a customer — the customer being the 
Saskatchewan people — that we ought to know what these P3 
deals are all about. We ought to know how much we’re 
expected to pay for these P3 deals. So while many companies 
look at the P3 deals as a means to create employment and 
certainly to provide opportunities for their business, Mr. 
Speaker, we as the taxpayers and we as a government should 
have the obligation and the duty to make sure we know what 
the true costs of the P3s are, not only in interest, Mr. Speaker, 
but over the duration of time. How much it will cost us, the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, for the term of that agreement? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what the NDP are obviously asking is 
accountability on the P3 front. Obviously when you hear the 
example that was shared with us as a result of the school 
opening, a lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan know 
that the P3 model is probably a more expensive model, but we 
should have the right to know what that expense is, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s also questions about whether there’s enough 
resources in those schools to actually provide good education 
and supports for our students. Those are the questions that we 
were asked today. 
 
So as you look at the final point, Mr. Speaker, which is really 
hitting home on some of these fronts when we talk about 
financial integrity is the fact that many of these P3 schools are 
assets owned by some company, most of them out of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if not all of them. And they are the 
ones that decide whether you hang a picture or whether you 
open a window or whether you make any alterations. And in 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the control of that particular school is totally 
within the P3 owner until we finish paying that off, in the sense 
that even community groups and organizations can’t hold 
events in that school unless and until they get express written 
permission by the owner who is the P3 proponent for that 
school. 
 
So the point that we’re trying to raise in the opposition, and 
certainly the point that we’re trying to raise as it pertains to the 
economy, is that in any business we have to know what the 
costs are over the long term for any particular product or any 
particular venture that the business community gets into. So, 
Mr. Speaker, if the Government of Saskatchewan operate their 
business the same manner in which our small-business 
community does, Mr. Speaker, we’d be in much better shape. 
Because how would it feel to a small business if the government 
comes along and says, we’re going to do this, but we’re not 
going tell you what the cost is, but you have to cover it? Well a 
lot of small-business owners would tell the government that 
that’s not how they do business. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions around the P3 
model. We have to know what it’s going to cost us, Mr. 
Speaker. We have to know that in getting the money upfront 
that we have to realize that we have to pay those bills down the 
road. What this government did was they punted that debt down 
the road — all for the headlines, Mr. Speaker — and what’s 
really making matters worse overall is the fact that, for 
generations, we’ll be paying for that debt. 
 
And this is exactly the reasons why the small-business 
community themselves need to ask the questions of the 
Saskatchewan Party government is, what other surprises do they 
have as a result of their mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
And this is the real, real crux of the situation, Mr. Speaker, is 
that they have a right to know exactly where our finances are 
heading because as a business community, they need a stable 
environment. They need a really good human resource supply. 
They need obviously access to markets and they need stability, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as a member of the caucus, the opposition caucus, we want 
to ensure we recognize the people of Saskatchewan, to ensure 
them that we recognize the success, the role, and the value of 
the small and medium-sized businesses throughout the 
province. We obviously want to do all we can to enhance them. 
And the message we have today, some of these changes in the 
bill have some positive comments from CFIB. Mr. Speaker, we 
look at those comments and we’re encouraged by that, but we 
obviously have the obligation, the duty to further look at this 
bill to see what other impacts that may come along that may be 
negative to the small and medium-sized business growth in our 
province. And that’s certainly something that we take seriously, 
Mr. Speaker, so obviously we have a bit of work ahead of us. 
 
What we do know is that the financial incompetence of the 
Saskatchewan Party government is costing this province dearly 
for years to come. And one of the sectors that’s also hurt by this 
and really surprised by this is the small-business sector, Mr. 
Speaker. They know the debt that they’re under. And I can tell 
you there’s a lot of business owners throughout our province 
that are really upset. And they had no idea that our debt was 
growing, skyrocketing this high under the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, and many of them are very, very 
angry. 
 
So we have a network of people that we can contact to ask for 
their opinions, Mr. Speaker. So on that note, I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business 
Income) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
[14:45] 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017. 
Members of the Assembly will be aware that distributing 
intimate images of a person without consent has become all too 
common in the digital world, and revenge porn or cyberbullying 
with intimate images is an ongoing problem. 
 
This bill will introduce an additional tool for victims of this 
tragic practice. It will amend The Privacy Act to create a new 
tort for the non-consensual distribution of an intimate image. 
An intimate image is a virtual image including photos or videos 
in which a person is nude, partially nude, or engaged in explicit 
sexual activity, and which was recorded in circumstances that 
give rise to a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
 
In 2015 amendments were made to the Criminal Code to create 
a new offence to address distribution of intimate images. Mr. 
Speaker, we think that more can be done outside the criminal 
sphere to help victims. To complement the federal initiative and 
to provide additional avenues for redress for victims, we are 
proposing additional steps to allow victims to pursue a civil 
action. The proposed provisions will create a tort for the 
distribution of an intimate image of someone without consent 
even if the person consents to the image itself being taken or 
took that image him- or herself. The proposed provisions also 
create a reverse onus requiring the distributer to prove that he or 
she had the consent to actually distribute the image. 
 
Finally the amendments will remove the requirement that an 
action of The Privacy Act proceed only in Court of Queen’s 
Bench. This will permit the plaintiff to choose to use the less 
expensive and quicker small claims process where the damages 
claimed are less than or capped at $30,000. We are working 
with victim services and with technical experts in the computer 
field to ensure that adequate supports can be provided to 
victims of this tort to remove these images and use the 
legislation in addition to criminal proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope and intent that these amendments 
will send a strong message in Saskatchewan that distributing or 
sharing intimate images without consent is never appropriate, 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

that it will have consequences, and that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will stand with the victims of such attacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m pleased to stand and offer our initial comments on Bill No. 
72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017. Now, Mr. Speaker, as 
the minister alluded to, these amendments deal with the sharing 
of intimate images, often referred to as revenge porn. The Act 
spells out what options are for someone who has intimate 
images of themselves shared unwillingly. 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that the Act talks about the 
definition of what constitutes an intimate image and a 
reasonable expectation of the setting of it being recorded. It also 
details that sharing such an image includes electronic 
transmission, selling, or advertising that image. It’s basically all 
spelled out in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And obviously someone who has an image of themselves 
shared and who wants to pursue action may do so and without 
proof of damage. These are some of the things that people 
ought be aware of that are contained in the bill. And it also 
explains that someone who distributed the image of themselves 
consensually does not lose their expectation of privacy, and 
that’s really an important point that I want to re-emphasize. 
That explains that someone who distributed the image of 
themselves consensually does not lose their expectation of 
privacy, meaning that if the image was shared that it should not 
result in the loss of the expectation of privacy. It’s so vitally 
important in this day and age of social media. 
 
Onus of proof. The legislation is unique in that it allows the 
victim to press charges or action without proof, Mr. Speaker. 
The accused must establish that they were given permission and 
consent to produce that image, and that in itself, Mr. Speaker, is 
certainly I think unique in the country of Canada in the sense 
that those that share images of people that they’re not allowed 
to share, they must be able to be held accountable for their 
actions. And the aggrieved party, usually in this case the 
victims, should not have to find the proof themselves, that the 
people that are doing this kind of illegal and unagreed-upon 
activity, that the expectation is that they should provide all the 
proof. And I think that’s certainly something that deserves some 
discussion and merit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other point that the bill also outlines is 
the actions against those who distribute non-consensual images, 
ranging from awarding damages to the victim, recovery of any 
profits made from distribution, and allows this process to occur 
in small claims court. The Act also allows the courts to 
prescribe a punishment that they find to be reasonable. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, we obviously want to know what the punishment 
is and we want to know what the ranges of damages could be 
for the victim. These are important figures to try and determine 
and to ascertain. 

So it’s quite clear that this is something that we ought not to 
tolerate in the province of Saskatchewan, in the sense of people 
distributing intimate pictures through the social media. That is 
something that many people do have concerns about. 
 
And at the first note, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, I’m so 
pleased that we have a number of lawyers on the opposition 
benches that are very familiar with a lot of the Criminal Code 
and some of the privacy challenges that we have in this modern 
day, Mr. Speaker. So it gives me great confidence that once 
they have the opportunity to participate in the bill itself, that 
they’ll certainly bring their great legal minds forward and in 
their comments, and that’s something that obviously as a 
non-lawyer I can’t give justice to the point. 
 
But at the outset I would say that this is a very interesting bill, 
that the opposition certainly has further comment on that. But if 
it’s meant to protect those that may be victims of revenge porn, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly something that we could look at 
favourably. But we do have questions and we do have 
comments to make, and those that have greater ability within 
my caucus will do so at a later time. So on that note, I move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation amends The Insurance Act to 
reflect changes to the law on medical assistance in dying, and to 
make a series of housekeeping and technical improvements to 
the Act in response to ongoing industry consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Insurance Act was passed in spring of 2015 
but has not yet been proclaimed into force. It will replace The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act and update Saskatchewan’s 
insurance legislation to modernize the regulation of the 
insurance industry. Ongoing consultations with industry 
stakeholders have identified some minor technical wording 
issues and concerns with this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since The Insurance Act was passed in 2015, the 
Supreme Court of Canada issued the Carter decision, and 
medical assistance in dying provisions were added to the 
Criminal Code. The amendments will incorporate the definition 
of “medical assistance in dying” in the Criminal Code into The 
Insurance Act and will confirm that the section in the Act 
respecting suicide does not apply with respect to a death 
resulting from medical assistance in dying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also make a series of 
housekeeping and other improvements to the Act that have been 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

identified as part of ongoing and extensive consultation with 
industry representatives. Making these amendments will now 
address several minor issues with respect to interpretation and 
application of the Act and will better facilitate the 
implementation of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill also adds two new sections to the current 
Act, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. The amendments will 
add a section to the current Act respecting medical assistance in 
dying so that this change can be made as soon as possible 
before the new Act is proclaimed into force. Similarly the 
amendments will add a section to the current Act respecting 
recovery by innocent persons so that those provisions can be 
used by victims of interpersonal violence, and others, as soon as 
possible before the new Act comes into force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will support the efficient 
implementation of The Insurance Act. The new Act will provide 
the superintendent with a full suite of governance powers to 
ensure compliance with the Act and will also provide the 
insurance sector with the flexibility to expand and evolve in a 
rapidly changing environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again it’s my honour to stand and give the initial comments on 
Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. And 
obviously for those that are watching, this bill does really have 
a lot of implications. Obviously the Supreme Court of Canada 
has had a number of cases before it. There’s all ranges of 
opinions on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also talks about, the bill itself talks about several 
housekeeping amendments but primarily it deals with two 
sections. And one of the sections that I want to talk about is the 
new section that addresses medical assistance in dying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously that the minister alluded to, if an 
insured person receives medical assistance in dying, they are 
assumed to have died from illness or disability for which they 
have received assistance. Now, Mr. Speaker, as I travel to all of 
my constituents, I can tell you that often we will find ourselves 
in a number of situations where we have not only older people 
that are on their deathbed, Mr. Speaker, but many younger 
children and middle-aged people that have struggled through 
whether it be a serious illness such as cancer or heart failure, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a very traumatic and trying time for the family 
and certainly for the person suffering from that particular 
illness. 
 
And we’ve had the opportunity as a family to speak to our own 
father who was struggling at the time, and at the age of 81 he 
had a very tough end of days, so to speak, when he struggled 
with his heart problem and his cancer problem. And we’d often 
sit down and chat with him about a number of things that we 
should take care of because he obviously knew he was dying. 

And it was a very difficult, emotional time. 
 
So I have a bit of understanding when families are going 
through this particular very challenging time for them. We’re 
all taught to really respect life and value life. That is something 
that is inherent in all of us. It is something taught to us by not 
only our grandparents but our parents as well, Mr. Speaker. And 
the value of life is something that we have to keep reminding us 
of, that it’s certainly something that is paramount to how we 
should think, that we should do all we can to value life and to 
protect life. 
 
And I look at many of the parents throughout my constituency 
that have had children that had some severe medical challenges, 
Mr. Speaker. It just didn’t happen 10 years ago; it happened 100 
years ago. And yet you see some of the love and the care and 
the compassion that parents have for their children. And there’s 
amazing stories of how parents and grandparents and aunts and 
uncles, brothers and sisters have really cared for a young child 
or an older person, to really take care of them in their critical 
and certainly in their dying days. 
 
So when you see a section within the Act itself that talks about 
medical assistance in dying, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 
emotion to it. There’s a lot of people that have diverging 
opinions on this particular matter. But I want to point out, in my 
experience, Mr. Speaker, that when you . . . I made reference to 
my father as well; he had made a decision on his own several 
days before he passed. And I was privy to sitting next to him 
and he called me up and basically said, you know, get a hold of 
all the family and, you know, I’m ready to go. And we were 
successful in getting a hold of all the family members, save one. 
And, Mr. Speaker, my father died peacefully on his own several 
days after he gave me that message. And it was a pretty tough 
day. 
 
[15:00] 
 
As everybody knows, losing a parent is not easy. It’s very 
difficult. But as he’d sat in the hospital for close to three years, 
as respectful as we should be towards him and how we were 
raised, our family spent a lot of time with him in the hospital. 
We were there for him. But we knew his struggles were going 
on each and every day, and it was only . . . We’d thought it was 
only a matter of weeks before he’d finally succumb to his 
illness. But, Mr. Speaker, he was a very strong and motivated 
man and he lasted for a long time, close to three years in the 
hospital. 
 
And I can point out that in our discussions I often asked him 
how he felt about things, wanting to connect with him a bit 
more, because when I was younger I was just too afraid of him 
to speak about a lot of things. But when the moment came, I 
wanted to ask him a bunch of questions and we had a lot of 
talks. And he explained to me that his quality of life was so 
poor, that he had a difficult time breathing, that he had a 
difficult time seeing. And you see a lot of elders going through 
that in our communities where, despite the incredible challenges 
they face, many of them are still very stoic about continuing on. 
 
And that’s an amazing thing to see, Mr. Speaker, because 
obviously some of the elders in our community were raised in 
tougher times, and perhaps I was. There’s no question that they 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

were very strong, emotionally and physically and spiritually — 
much more stronger than I was. And even despite all that 
strength, Mr. Speaker, in their last few days I think they spent a 
lot of time speaking about family, speaking about the quality of 
life and what to do upon their passing. 
 
So we had those discussions with our father. But, Mr. Speaker, 
it was very, very hard and difficult on the family to watch him 
waste away slowly each day. And I can tell you that there’s a 
lot of debate around our community or our supper table around 
the whole notion of the quality of life our father was suffering 
from. And certainly when you see bills of this sort come 
forward — I mean, it talks about medical assistance in dying — 
it certainly brings back a lot of memories for a lot of families, 
myself included. And it’s something that we need to certainly 
pay attention to and speak to different groups and organizations 
out there as to how best, you know, we determine a course of 
action. 
 
It is a very . . . Like I said, there’s a varying amount of opinions 
on this particular issue. But I can tell you from our experience, 
the quality of life of some of the people that are suffering from 
disease that are ravaging their bodies, and certainly as the older 
you get, the more challenges you have. And despite the people 
being stoic, there are times when my father would simply 
whisper to me that, I wish I could go; I wish can go now 
because the suffering is too much. So it’s something that’s 
important. 
 
And some believe that when you speak of those particular 
cases, it gives you time as a family to prepare. And the only 
lesson that I learned upon his death was turning to my siblings 
and my younger sisters, who were all basically very emotional, 
and I said, well if anything, if you love your father, you’ll let 
him go. Because why would you want a loved one to suffer so 
much each and every day, stuck in a hospital on a hospital bed 
and suffering? And that kind of ease of mind for myself 
certainly helped. And being there for your father in their time, 
or mother, in their time of illness is very, very important. It’s 
very special. But it also helps you move on. 
 
So when you look at some of these examples of families that 
have gone through this — there’s many, many families that 
have gone through this — it is something that has got a lot of 
emotion attached to it. And at least from the Supreme Court of 
Canada’s perspective they understood that there may be some 
discussions that warrant this whole notion of medical assistance 
in dying. And it’s nice to be able to see that in the insurance 
aspect of it, as one passes away, that this is recognized as 
something that they could not be denied insurance for if they 
have the type of insurance that would help their families upon 
their death. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of issues that could be attached to this 
particular bill. It’s got a lot of emotion attached to it as well. 
There’s a lot of debate to it. We, as legislators in the province of 
Saskatchewan, must take the time to learn about this. But at the 
very least, Mr. Speaker, what we should do in assisting the 
families is not allowing the insurance companies, who we pay 
insurance to, the option of walking away from their obligation 
to insure the family against the death of a loved one by saying 
that he was medically assisted in dying, so therefore he 
shouldn’t get any kind of benefits. We have to be cognizant of 

the fact that there’s many compelling cases and many 
arguments that are out there, but at the very least, from the legal 
perspective, from the insurance perspective, this particular bill 
addresses some of that. And we’ll obviously have much more 
discussions as we move forward. So this is something I think is 
really important. 
 
And the other section, as it talks about recovery option for 
interpersonal violence, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in 
this particular bill, that we need a treatment . . . There’s no 
question that as we look at the overall challenges in many of 
our communities, and coming from an Aboriginal community, 
we’re not immune to some of those challenges. But, Mr. 
Speaker, an example we would use is the drug trade in our 
communities that really create a lot of violence in some of our 
communities. That when the former president of the US [United 
States] spoke of the war on drugs, what he indicated, that we 
should have a war on services as well, to reclaim families. So 
some of the messages I get from some of the older people when 
they say, try and work with some of the young kids that may be 
addicted to drugs. We have to get services and programs and 
treatment for them so that we can reclaim them. We need to 
have that fight on that front as well. 
 
So as you look at some of the options available, I would say, 
yes it’s important to deal with the potential violence in our 
communities, but it’s also important to try and prevent harm to 
families and to young people by providing good services, 
whether it’s counselling services or to deal with the drug issue, 
Mr. Speaker, and also with the alcohol issue. As I mentioned 
before, I enjoy my beer now and then, so I’m not the person to 
become hypocritical in this Assembly. But that being said, that 
there are many services and programs that are required, that are 
required to strengthen our communities to reclaim the young 
people that may be caught up in the drug and alcohol trade, in 
the sense of becoming more and more violent, that we have to 
have those services to reduce that threat as well. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that bill doesn’t include this, but I would point out that 
that’s part of the process. 
 
I really enjoyed the comments by the former US president when 
he said, we need to provide services. We need to provide 
programs, and we must have a war on the lack of services to 
reclaim our young people by providing the proper programs, 
proper facilities, and fund them accordingly. So that’s 
something that obviously I think is a great point. Because you 
do want to reclaim lives. You don’t want to prejudge people, 
and you want to be able to make sure that if there’s someone 
that can be salvaged, we undertake as many of the efforts and 
options to do so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot more valued speakers from the 
opposition benches will be speaking to this bill as we move it 
through the introduction and committee stage. So on that note I 
move that we adjourn Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 
Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, The Evidence Act applies to all matters over which the 
province has jurisdiction including civil litigation, family law, 
and provincial offences. The Act includes requirements 
respecting the preparation of court recordings and transcripts. 
The Canada Evidence Act applies to all criminal proceedings 
and to other matters over which the Parliament of Canada has 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will improve court processes 
by streamlining the court recording and court transcription 
procedures. Mr. Speaker, the amendments will permit any court 
official to certify a court recording, and will remove the 
requirement to certify recordings for brief and routine court 
proceedings such as adjournments. Currently only the court 
official who’s present in court can certify a recording. For 
transcripts, the requirement for court transcribers to complete an 
affidavit for each transcript will be changed to a requirement to 
certify the transcript. Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also 
authorize electronic certification of recordings and transcripts 
which will facilitate distribution and increase efficiency. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill will make a series of 
housekeeping amendments to reflect modern drafting standards 
with respect to adults in vulnerable circumstances. Reference to 
“medical capacity” and “mental disability” will be changed to 
“capacity” and “intellectual disability” throughout the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will support this government’s 
ongoing commitment to improving court processes and 
increasing efficiency. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 74, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to point out that there’s been a number of changes to Bill 
74, and certainly from the opposition perspective, as we look at 
some of the bills being proposed, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s very 
important to distinguish what the government would like to 
refer to as modernizing or streamlining some of the Acts. 
Obviously the opposition is certainly familiar with and is very 
supportive of the notion of efficient use of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
But the worry we have at times, when the government uses that 
particular language, really it begins to denote the notion that 
there may be cuts coming along the way. And a perfect example 
of that, Mr. Speaker, is in northern Saskatchewan as they 
slashed the court worker program. And you’re seeing that that 
court worker program was highly valued in our northern 
communities. 
 
So when we talk about the difference between what the 

government may interpret as efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, we look 
at that as glaring cuts to services, Mr. Speaker, that really 
impede not only the justice system for the benefit of our people, 
but it also doesn’t really help in supporting those that may want 
to recover as a result of them being engaged with the criminal 
justice system. 
 
So it’s really important to point out that, from the opposition 
perspective, we do not for one minute sit back and assume that 
when the government talks about efficiency within the justice 
system, that that couldn’t mean . . . That could translate into 
cuts to services and obviously support mechanisms, such as the 
northern court worker program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular bill deals with a handful of language and 
wording changes, as was alluded to. It also takes some pieces of 
legislation and moves them into regulations. That’s another 
worry we have, Mr. Speaker. It is often concerning when things 
are taken from legislation and moved into regulations, because 
we all value the notion that when you have legislation we get to 
obviously see what is being proposed. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
devil in the detail of many of these bills is around the 
regulations themselves. And what happens is the regulations 
can change as a result of the minister himself making those 
changes. So we have to be very, very careful when you have 
some of the changes being proposed without scrutiny. 
 
So one of the important messages that we have on any bill when 
it comes to the Justice department is (a) is the efficiency, does 
that mean that you’re cutting services and programs? In our 
history when dealing with the Saskatchewan Party, that is often 
the catchphrases for a reduction of services and jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. And then when you have parts of the bill itself that 
changes from the legislative agenda when you want to make a 
rule change, they simply now have the option of doing so. 
 
So on both these fronts the bill itself has some worrying 
processes attached to it. It’s one thing to describe the wording 
as indicated, changing the language from “facility” to “mental 
health centre,” as an example; changing “mental capacity” to 
“capacity;” “mental disability” to “intellectual disability.” 
Those are obviously language and wording that need to be 
changed and modernized. 
 
And we’re always looking at more efficient ways to run our 
justice system. Nobody’s arguing that from our perspective. 
But, Mr. Speaker, given the Sask Party track record and history 
of slashing important programs such as the court worker 
program in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it does have a 
detrimental effect on the justice system overall because there 
are less people being supported and less people being reclaimed 
and less people being rehabilitated through the court worker 
system. And, Mr. Speaker, those are vital services that are 
needed and necessary overall to provide the efficient process 
called our justice system. So we have a number of concerns on 
this bill as it pertains to some of the language. 
 
[15:15] 
 
When it talks about moving pieces of the legislation into 
regulations, we need to know what those regulation changes are 
being proposed and being contemplated. We need to know who 
has the authority, and we also need to know when the supposed 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

changes are coming forward. 
 
So we have a lot of questions on this bill. And as I said in the 
past few bills, that we have an excellent understanding of the 
justice system, not only from advocates on the caucus side but 
from lawyers as well. So they’ll certainly have a greater view 
and greater input on this particular bill. So we will certainly 
undertake to have them study the bill, reach out and network 
with the impacted groups, and come back with further 
comments. So on that notion, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 74. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 74. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention 
Implementation Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention 

sur les communications électroniques 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
give second reading of Bill 75, The Electronic Communications 
Convention Implementation Act. This Act will implement in 
Saskatchewan the United Nations convention on electronic 
communications for international contracts once Canada 
accedes to the convention. 
 
The convention was adopted by — and the acronym is 
U-N-C-I-T-R-A-L or UNCITRAL — the United Nations 
committee on international trade law, in 2005. It clarifies rules 
respecting electronic formation of contracts for international 
parties if those parties desire to use it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the convention provides for the rules that apply to 
an international contract if the parties elect to use them, 
including, where are the parties to the contract? How does one 
deal with the legal requirement that a document be in writing or 
signed or in original form? What is the nature of an offer made 
to the world online? When are electronic messages sent and 
received? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada adopted a 
uniform implementation Act for jurisdictions to use in adopting 
this convention and recommends its enactment in Canadian 
jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, the legislation comes into effect on 
Royal Assent, but the convention will come into effect in 
Saskatchewan only when it is acceded to by Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 75. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
very interesting bill, Bill 75. Obviously the convention was 

prepared by the UN [United Nations] on international trade law 
and it was adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2005. So 
this whole premise around using electronic communications to 
actually form and perform a contract between parties has been 
something that has been worked on for the last 12 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of information that needs to be 
shifted through on this particular bill. And obviously when you 
look at the bill itself, it makes the United Nations convention on 
the use of electronic communication in international contract 
laws in Saskatchewan, which means the “Convention applies to 
the use of electronic communications in connection with the 
formation or performance of a contract between parties whose 
places of business are in different States.” 
 
So really, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about international trade 
law, that a lot of time electronic devices and communications 
can actually be a valuable tool, and according to some of the 
information presented in the bill, that now it’s being recognized 
here in Saskatchewan, that it is indeed a valuable tool in that 
clearly there’s been a lot of discussion on this particular bill. 
 
So overall I would say that the use of electronic, in this day and 
age, of electronic connections, Mr. Speaker, or electronic 
communications, if you will, that this is something that’s been 
going on for a number of years, and a lot of businesses are 
using their cellphones to an amazing amount in terms of 
capacity and what they’re able to download and what they’re 
able to communicate with. So social media is certainly here. 
And certainly when it comes to social media, we could certainly 
view the electronic communication ability in this modern day as 
an economic tool as well. 
 
So these are some of the things that are important. As you 
know, there are many people out there that use electronic means 
for a variety of purposes in the business community, as 
indicated by the UN. I think they would probably embrace this 
particular ability. 
 
But you have to be also careful, Mr. Speaker. You and I know 
there’s all kinds of firewalls in all kinds of businesses and that 
there is, in the banking industry in particular, that the possibility 
of being a victim of online messages, Mr. Speaker, those are 
some of the things that obviously people would worry about. So 
we have to make sure that the protocols are proper and that 
there is solid protection and there’s solid security around this 
notion of electronic communication. 
 
So those are some of the issues I think would come immediately 
to the foresight. Obviously we don’t want to do anything that’ll 
hurt business in Saskatchewan. As an opposition, we want 
business to not only just survive under the Sask Party but really 
thrive under the NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think these are some of the things that . . . 
These tools are helpful with the proper safeguards and certainly 
with the history of some of the people that have been victimized 
in the past. And with better firewalls and better protection 
methods when it comes to electronic devices, I’m sure that this 
could be a very valuable tool and opportunity for businesses to 
explore and use. 
 
So on that note, we have more discussion on this from a number 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

of sources that we want to undertake as the official opposition, 
and we will do so. And we will return to give more distinct and 
more direct advice as to how we think Bill 75 could do one 
thing, and that’s on the back of all of our minds, is to make 
Saskatchewan a very highly attractive place to invest and to 
raise your families, build your businesses, and bring your 
investment to our province. We think that’s a message that we 
want to share publicly, and we’ll continue doing so as the 
official opposition. 
 
So on that note, it could be a valuable tool, Bill 75. We need to 
see what the impacts are and certainly need to see the threats as 
well. So on that note, I will move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 75. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 75. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise and provide second reading for The Reclaimed Industrial 
Sites Amendment Act, 2017. This bill will amend The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Act currently in use. 
 
The current Act was approved in 2007 and, as part of its 
attendant regulations, implemented the institutional control 
program. The institutional control program, or ICP, manages 
the transfer of remediated sites back to the provincial custody 
and manages the long-term monitoring and maintenance of 
those sites. The ICP helps ensure the protection of the 
environment and public health and safety long into the future 
while also giving a mining company closure once they’ve 
fulfilled their obligation to remediate a site. 
 
The program has proven valuable and prudent in the time since 
it was put into force. It has provided Saskatchewan with a 
practical means of providing environmental stewardship as well 
as closure to the industry. In this manner it has proven to be an 
asset for industry and government and also for attracting 
investment. Saskatchewan remains one of the most preferred 
jurisdictions in the world for mining investment and we 
continue to build on this reputation among the global industry. 
 
The original Act requires a mandatory review of its provisions 
within five years of coming into force. In completing that 
review, Ministry of Energy and Resources has consulted with 
stakeholders and as a result is now introducing amendments to 
the Act to address issues that have been identified in the course 
of those stakeholder discussions. 
 
Amendments will address the following issues. First, 
clarification on the statutory authority of the minister to require 
financial assurances. This simply clarifies that the minister can 

ensure that the provincial government’s financial risk position 
is mitigated in the event of an unforeseen site failure. The ICP 
requires that a site holder post an assurance fund, commonly 
called a financial assurance, for a remediated site in an amount 
that reflects the cost of remediating a maximum failure event at 
that site. The financial assurance may be in the form of cash, 
cheque, or any other financial instrument or security. 
 
Creating tailing ponds are a common practice to help oil sands 
operators recycle 80 to 95 per cent of the fresh water used in 
mining operations, reducing the use of fresh water. Even after 
these sites are returned to the province from the site holder and 
enter into the ICP, if something were to happen to these tailing 
ponds, financial assurances would be used to fund the cost of 
remediating that failure. 
 
The second amendment is establishing a process for the transfer 
of rights and ownership for a closed site that has been accepted 
into the ICP. This means a process is put in place to allow a 
different company to take responsibility for the land and the 
liabilities from the province if that company is approved to do 
so. 
 
Third, contemplation of exemption of liability for the fund 
advisory committee. This is put in place to strengthen the 
protection of the committee in the event that the investment 
advice does not achieve expected results despite following strict 
rules that guaranteed no loss of that initial investment. 
 
And fourth, inclusion of an ongoing mandatory review process 
for The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act, which requires that 
legislation is regularly reviewed to ensure it is meeting its 
intended purposes. 
 
I’m pleased to say that this bill has the support of industry, 
industry organizations, and the federal and provincial regulators 
involved in our stakeholder consultations. They feel that it 
addresses concerns they have about the Act and the programs in 
their current forms. The alternative of maintaining the status 
quo would not only have a negative impact with these 
stakeholders; it would also arguably fail to meet our obligations 
under the existing Act. Such an outcome would not be in 
keeping with the kind of leadership, responsiveness, and 
opportunity that the global mining industry has come to expect 
from Saskatchewan. 
 
This is instead an example for other jurisdictions to follow in 
terms of clear policies and commitment to environmental 
stewardship and regulatory responsibility that we are known 
for. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 
2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Bill 
No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to make sure that as we move forward in this 
modern day that we do all we can, as I mentioned at the outset, 
to attract investment to our province of Saskatchewan. There is 
no question in our minds in the opposition caucus that we have 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

to do these things to make Saskatchewan exciting and to also 
make sure we have good mortgage-paying jobs for many of our 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan want to see an attractive 
investment climate for business to come and thrive in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s one of the primary focuses of 
many of the citizens across Saskatchewan and we share that 
belief as well. The second thing they obviously want to do is to 
derive as many benefits from that said investment, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it be good jobs or whether it be services to the province 
and whether it be, Mr. Speaker, investment into our 
communities. And I think that the third thing that people also 
look at when they assess some of these opportunities is what 
they would do to ensure that the environment and the 
environmental protection is maintained. 
 
Now that’s not the priority that people would priorize their 
beliefs, Mr. Speaker. It’s just pointing out those are some of the 
issues that I think people would want to ensure that any 
government of the province of Saskatchewan, that that would 
be their message. 
 
So from our perspective as the opposition, we certainly see that 
the attraction of investment is important respecting small 
business, medium-sized businesses, and the large corporate 
players that come to Saskatchewan; that yes, their investment 
and service and their presence is required and needed here. And 
of course we want to make sure that jobs are maintained and 
certainly that the environment is protected. These are all 
bundled in a great package, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is part of what we speak about when we talk about the 
financial assurance, as companies come into Saskatchewan and 
they invest in, say, an oil field. And then following their 
extraction of oil and gas, they hire a bunch of people. They pay 
taxes to the RM [rural municipality]. They pay royalty fees to 
the province of Saskatchewan. They stimulate local economies, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s all important things to recognize that the 
private sector does. 
 
But we also want to make sure, as this modern day, that this 
notion of polluter pays; that if somebody creates an 
environmental mess, then I think Saskatchewan people want 
them to clean it up. It is something that is important. And 
nowadays, right across the country, they have more of these 
Acts and more of these bills in place in the sense of saying that, 
look, if you create a mess on any particular site, that it’s 
important that you put money away to reclaim that site. It’s a 
very sensible approach, Mr. Speaker, and many more 
companies in the province and the country are now recognizing 
that they have to do this. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So it’s really a modern position to take of any government when 
they’re dealing with companies that want to extract resources. 
So the important point is that we must have neutrality on some 
of the decisions around when a site is reclaimed to the proper 
level. Is it the Saskatchewan Party level, where you see on 
many occasions where they have made many transgressions 
against environmental protection? And they have also on many 
occasions weakened things like labour law, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout the province that put a lot of people at risk. These 
are some of the things that we don’t really accept nor trust from 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So when they talk about allowing the minister to appoint a fund 
advisory committee, who would be in that fund, Mr. Speaker? 
Who would be in that fund? More than likely Sask Party 
supporters and people that may not have the province of 
Saskatchewan totally in the back of their minds. We’ve seen 
them do this on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, where they put 
their own people, their own people in some of these key 
positions. And then what happens is that the balance between 
the economy and the environment gets thrown out of whack. 
And this is the reason why many, many people in Saskatchewan 
would be disappointed in some of the actions of the 
Saskatchewan Party when it comes to fulfilling their duty and 
obligations to meet that balance between the environment and 
the economy. 
 
So it’s something that we need to address. And I would point 
out to the people that are listening that from our own experience 
. . . And I’ll go back a number of years ago. When you looked 
at the Uranium City cleanup, Mr. Speaker, obviously there was 
a federal Crown corporation called Eldorado Nuclear that was 
developing uranium mines around Uranium City in the early 
’50s and ’60s, Mr. Speaker. And there was other companies 
getting into it as well. 
 
What happens is as years pass and the uranium prices went 
down and as Uranium City properties become less buyable, 
some of these companies moved on, as the federal Crown 
corporation did. And they basically walked away from some of 
the old mines — whether it be Gunnar or Lorado, the two larger 
operations — and some of these mine sites were left alone. 
Some of them were not even paid attention to. And, Mr. 
Speaker, over time that practice was ended in the sense of 
telling companies, we now have to make sure you have money 
in place to be able to clean up some of the sites that you’d be 
operating on. That’s a new law nowadays. 
 
And unfortunately at the time, with the Uranium City issue, we 
had to go back to the federal government. When I say “we,” I 
acted as the minister of the Environment at the time and 
convinced the federal government, and with the luck and 
support of our local MP [Member of Parliament], Ralph 
Goodale, were able to get NR Canada, Natural Resources 
Canada, and the Government of Saskatchewan to embark on 
this journey of cleaning up those northern uranium mines. 
 
There was no owners that were held liable. Obviously the 
federal government through their Crown corporations were 
liable, but the other companies had basically gone defunct. But 
through a process of researching and tracking down some of the 
original owners of the properties, Mr. Speaker, we were also 
pleased to be able to get one company onside to help clean up 
that mess around Uranium City, and today the work is 
continuing and the mess is being cleaned up. 
 
But that’s one of the things that you need to avoid in the future, 
of simply telling mining or any companies that come and set up 
shop in the province that if there’s some environmental 
challenges to where you want to set up shop, that you should 
put a contingency fund or a savings fund in place to mitigate 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

and to reclaim the sites that you’re about to impact. 
 
So that’s the new norm today, Mr. Speaker, but lessons learned 
overall about how best to engage the companies, at the same 
time attract investors, at the same time develop our economy, 
and more importantly is balance that with the environmental 
integrity that many people of Saskatchewan demand of their 
government. And I think we’re on the right track to achieve 
that. 
 
So we have to continue being vigilant. And we also have to 
make sure that when it comes to environmental protection, that 
we have independence and that we have quality blue-ribbon 
people on these panels that can give expert advice. Because if 
they give you expert advice, neutral advice, it reduces the onus 
on future governments to be able to be held liable for some of 
the sites that may not be cleaned up by companies in this day 
and age. So we have to ensure that that balance is there. 
 
So there’s a lot of work to be done on this particular file. We all 
share the view that we want to attract investment but, as I 
mentioned, we also must incorporate environmental protection 
and maximize benefits for Saskatchewan people, for jobs, 
investment in communities, and royalties and taxes paid by the 
companies. 
 
So on that note, we have a lot of work to do on this file and I 
move that we adjourn Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial 
Sites Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 86, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read for the second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a phased approach to rewriting the 
child welfare program legislation, and the amendments in this 
bill demonstrate our continued progress. Our earlier work saw 
amended provisions regarding disclosure of information and 
strengthened provisions governing the ministry’s delegation 
agreements with First Nations Child and Family Services 
agencies. 
 
The amendments in Bill 86 are generally administrative in 
nature. They set the stage for us to move forward in a more 
substantive change in the future that we require additional 
policy development, stakeholder consultation, and financial 
analysis prior to introduction. 
 

The administrative amendments in this bill include minor word 
changing and modernized language that reflects current 
terminology; revised provisions to conform to current language 
drafting standards; new definitions: “dispute resolution” 
replaces “mediation,” and in the review panel process, “peace 
officer” is added to enhance understanding and interpretation of 
the legislation. 
 
Clarification that publication of any report or any part of a 
report of a child protection hearing is prohibited. Amendments 
that speak to the child being represented by a lawyer and the 
role of the minister for the child in care. Changes to section 52 
of the Act to confirm that the minister is not the parent but has 
the rights and responsibility of a parent, depending on the 
authority of the child in care. 
 
Repeal the provisions related to family review panels and the 
Family Services Board, which are not operationalized. Repeal 
of outdated amendments regarding the transfer of guardianship, 
transfer of custody, and provisions in the financial assistance 
that have never been proclaimed. 
 
Removal of references to The Child Welfare Act and The 
Family Services Act, as children taken into care under these 
Acts have now aged out of care. And the time period in which 
the consent of voluntary committal may be revoked, as it is 
increased from 14 to 21 days to align with the period of The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016, and clarify that written notice 
of revocation must be given to a director. 
 
The Act acknowledges the importance of First Nations 
participation in the decision making of matters relating to First 
Nations children in the delivery of services. Provisions for the 
family review panels, a family services board, and mediation 
services were introduced in 1989 in the proclamation of The 
Child and Family Services Act. It was intended that the 
implementation would be informed through the knowledge and 
experience gained by plotting these processes. 
 
While the establishment of this out-of-court mechanisms were 
well intended, they were never operationalized. The premise at 
the time were the review panel’s board would consist of 
volunteer community members. The plan lacked both 
infrastructure support and the mechanism to ensure consistent 
access and applications across the province. The ministry was 
also unable to support the First Nations community to 
operationalize these mechanisms. 
 
The 1984 legislative amendments were intended to address the 
shortcomings of this Act, specifically with regard to the transfer 
of custody, the transfer of guardianship, and the financial 
assistance and kinship-in-care arrangements. While accepted 
and supported by many stakeholders, First Nation leaders and 
organizations articulated that the provisions were counter to 
their culture and values. Instead, over time, the ministry has 
continued to strengthen extended family options through the 
enhancing of policy and the Person of Sufficient Interest 
program. This program has been prioritized by the 
transformational change being considered for the future phase 
of the ministry’s legislative renewal. 
 
The repeal of unused provisions and provisions that have never 
been proclaimed will demonstrate the government’s continued 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

commitment to work differently with First Nations and Métis 
authorities and will enable the collection development of a new 
extended family care framework moving forward. 
 
To bring the CFSA [The Child and Family Services Act] into 
alignment and The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 to be 
proclaimed in late 2017, section 4 is amended to include the 
spiritual heritage of a child as an important component of his or 
her upbringing. 
 
The time period in which consent and voluntary committal can 
be revoked will be increased from 14 to 21 days, and written 
notice of revocation will be delivered to the director — section 
50. Moving to a 21-day revocation period provides both parents 
additional time to consider the impacts of such a life-changing 
decision and aligns with Saskatchewan and the majority of 
Canadian provinces and territory. 
 
The proposed amendments outlined today are a demonstration 
of the government’s commitment to improve the lives of 
vulnerable families, children, and youth who receive child 
welfare services in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 
second reading on Bill No. 86. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to certainly first of all recommend to the minister that the 
particular act of the bill that he’s made reference to today as it 
pertains to the First Nations and to the Métis community of the 
province of Saskatchewan, that they are a vital partner. 
Obviously when we look at some of the statistics of some of the 
challenges as it pertains to child and family services across our 
province, a number of, a good number of the children in care 
are of Aboriginal ancestry, Mr. Speaker. And so it stands to 
reason that there’s also a great opportunity for a role for the 
First Nations and Métis people to play. 
 
And I go back to the earlier section made by Bill 86 when we 
talk about . . . Some of the updates section are referring to the 
child’s best interest. There are changes to the child’s physical, 
mental, and emotional level of development to, and I quote, 
“the mental, emotional, physical and educational needs of the 
child and the appropriate care or treatment, or both, to meet 
those needs.” And they also incorporated changes to the child’s 
emotional, cultural, physical, and psychological and spiritual 
needs to “the child’s cultural and spiritual heritage and 
upbringing.” 
 
These are some of the things that are highly valuable in the 
Aboriginal community because, as I mentioned before, when 
you reach out to some highly valuable partners such as First 
Nations and the Métis communities, that you must have 
corresponding capacity that the government currently enjoys. 
Being a former minister of this portfolio, it was always 
important to have the engagement of the ICFS, the Indian Child 
and Family Services, and the agreements we have across the 
province. 
 
But when you look at some of the resources afforded to the 
Aboriginal community and their agencies, that you often find a 
disparity amongst things such as training, salaries earned by 

those working in the ICFS system, and of course also full 
engagement. We needed to work on those particular aspects of 
the relationship we have with the First Nations and the Métis 
communities throughout the province, and it’s important that 
we do this well. It’s important that we do this very well 
because, Mr. Speaker, as legislators in this particular Assembly, 
we have to figure out how the best interests of the child is 
paramount in our thinking. But part of the process of what’s the 
best interests of that child is not only just spiritually and making 
sure that you have educational needs being met, and of course 
nutrition, safety, security, but there also must also incorporate 
values such as cultural connection. These are things that are 
important and have been said by many of the First Nations and 
Métis leaders over time. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really 
important that we keep the conduit of information between the 
province of Saskatchewan and our ICFS partners that are out 
there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that as we began to embark 
on this whole journey of how we can forge a new relationship, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously give and take in any 
relationship. But the paramount reason why we need to make 
sure that we stay on top of the relationship, to make sure that as 
the bill indicated, Mr. Speaker, the best interests of that child, 
what does that mean? From different perspectives, there may be 
different values placed on what the best interests of that child 
would mean, but obviously we need full engagement of not 
only psychologists, not only professional people within the 
Ministry of Social Services, but we also need elders of the 
Aboriginal community and leaders and parents and 
grandparents that play an incredible role, and the extended 
community that play an incredible role in bringing up children 
in many of our First Nations communities and Métis 
communities as well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So there is a lot of work to do on this particular file. I would 
certainly point out that as you look at many of the children in 
care . . . And I travelled to a lot of communities in my particular 
area. And I can tell you today, Mr. Speaker, as I go to the 
school in Ile-a-la-Crosse, as I visit the daycare in Beauval, and 
as I go to a Child First centre in Buffalo Narrows, over the past 
number of times and the number of years that I’ve been to 
different places, and I see the value of our children. They’re 
bright. They’re energetic. They’re confident. They’re well cared 
for. And it gives me great confidence of the future that when we 
have that kind of dedication at the community level, that there’s 
no question in my mind that if we were to have the same vision 
in a relationship between the Department of Social Services and 
the Indian Child and Family Services agreements we have 
throughout the provinces, that that’s what the ultimate objective 
is on both sides. 
 
We need to figure out how we achieve that quicker, better. And 
one of the first things I think we need to do is to ensure that we 
have the same resources allowed within our Ministry of Social 
Services and that that ability be transferred to the ICFS 
agreements. Because again, as I pointed out, the best interest of 
a child is to make sure that there are good systems of care in 
both the non-Aboriginal community and the Aboriginal 
community. 
 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

It only stands to reason that these are Saskatchewan children 
that we have to care for. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
from some of the programs like KidsFirst, some of the 
kindergarten programs in our schools, and some of the 
after-school activities in many of our youth centres, that there 
are some incredibly talented kids in our community. There are 
some beautiful human beings in our families and in our towns 
and in our First Nations communities, and when you see that 
kind of value and that type of children, it really gives you a lot 
of confidence. 
 
There’s no question, often through my travels I tell many 
people that I speak to that our children always need more 
heroes, and that’s really, really important to point out. And I 
think one of the things that we ought to do, and certainly from 
the opposition perspective, we embrace that notion that in order 
for us to have a robust and very inclusive and very effective 
child and family services thought and plan in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we must have full engagement with the 
people that we’re working with. And if there’s 50, 60 per cent 
of the children in care that are of Aboriginal ancestry, then we 
must have the corresponding supports afforded to those 
organizations that provide that service on behalf of First 
Nations and the Métis communities of our province. We must 
view them as equal partners, and we must view their input as 
valuable. 
 
And we must also ensure that the services and the programs we 
put in place are held in high standard, that they’re very effective 
in their delivery, and they’re also very, very focused in their 
approach, and very accountable. So there’s a lot of work to be 
done on both sides. Don’t forget — this is about children. This 
is not about politics. And the best interests of a child, from my 
perspective, is to see the value of every child and think how 
well that child could be or how strong they could become in the 
future if we be heroes to them when they’re small. 
 
Now obviously when you look at our own situation, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been privy to have three healthy, happy daughters. 
And an entire community, I think the constituency of 
Athabasca, are pretty happy they all look like their mother. But 
more so, I’m happy that their mother cared for them very well. 
Obviously as an absent father I was always very confident that 
my wife was looking after my children very well, so it allowed 
me to work and do what I need to do to be an MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly]. And if the roles were different, if 
she had to come and work here, I think I’d be able to do the job, 
well not as well as she has, but certainly I would support her in 
that capacity as well. But as a result of that, I see my children 
are confident. They’re fairly aggressive in what they want to do 
and they certainly owe that to their mom. So every child 
deserves that kind of supportive and conducive environment, 
and I credit my wife for that, and thank goodness that we didn’t 
have the intervention that some families have as a result of a 
variety of cases. 
 
So a child needs a hero, and I think the best way for us to be 
heroes in this particular Assembly is to approach the First 
Nations and Métis communities and really have a robust, 
comprehensive, respectful, effective relationship so that we can 
get as many children off to a great start in their early years so 
they can indeed become an important fabric of our province you 
call Saskatchewan, that we needn’t be at odds, we needn’t be at 

odds in this province, and that we can truly reflect what I’ve 
always said, “from many peoples, strength” — the province’s 
motto. 
 
And the First Nations and the Aboriginal people add a lot of 
value to our province. They’ll continue doing so and we could 
quadruple that value in many ways if we do the strategic 
investment in our children because, Mr. Speaker, the First 
Nations and Métis people of our province have proudly 
supported Saskatchewan in the past and they’ll continue doing 
so in the future. We just need to respect them more, engage 
them more, and build a Cadillac version of Indian Child and 
Family Services to get every child that’s in care — whether 
they’re First Nations, Métis, or not — to give them the 
opportunity to be strengthened, and an opportunity to be 
supported, and an opportunity to be recognized. And, Mr. 
Speaker, once you do that, I think every child will certainly 
have a great start in life. 
 
So on that note, I would point out that some of the changes to 
this bill alludes to the best interests of the child. We have a lot 
more people that have a lot more comments on this particular 
bill because there’s so many different angles one can take on 
any aspect of child and family services. It is a very difficult task 
that the officials within the Department of Social Services 
undertake. They’re professional people. They’ve been trained to 
deal with some of the circumstances, but the point is that we 
must make the system understand that there’s got to be a shift in 
how we think, and that there’s got to be a shift in how we deal 
with children, and there’s got to be much more resources put in 
play so that we’re able to have success, and that we don’t see 
the numbers of children in care increase each year as evidenced 
as we’ve seen under the Sask Party, that we need to see the 
number of children in care, youth in care, decrease over time. 
And we can do that strategically, intelligently, but the first thing 
we have to do is become good partners with all those impacted. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 86, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca’s moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill 86, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

pleasure indeed to rise and engage in this debate, the second 
reading debate of Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act. It’s a 
very important piece of legislation that we have before us today, 
and I want to join my colleague, the member from Athabasca, 
and his words earlier, but also in congratulating the new 
Minister of Parks and Culture in this work here and a very 
important portfolio he has of Parks and Culture. 
 
It’s one that some might view as small but it sure is mighty in 
the sense of how people view its importance here in 
Saskatchewan. He alluded to how many visitors we had in our 
parks over the past two years — some 4 million. Of course that 
only speaks a little bit to how people value the cultural 
activities, the parks activities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Like the member from Athabasca, I too was a member of parks 
and I can remember sometimes getting roasted from the other 
side about certain fees that we had in our parks. I might allude 
to that later, but somehow we all escaped okay from that. I find 
it interesting though, if I were to talk just a bit about the 
firewood fee that we had and how at a time when we were a 
have-not province, the last year of being a have-not province, 
this is one of the first things that the Sask Party got rid of. And I 
believe to date, while they have done many other things to raise 
taxes, taxes on children’s clothing, they have not — or they 
contemplated people on social services having to pay for their 
own funerals — they have not considered raising the fees on 
firewood in the parks. And I find that interesting that all the 
different things that we could do to help. 
 
In fact they have walked away from urban parks. You know as 
well as I do, Mr. Speaker, how important that is in Saskatoon 
with Meewasin. We know Wakamow park in Moose Jaw, there 
was concerns, people losing jobs. But still, that is one thing that 
they hold near and dear and no matter what. I think this might 
be a question for . . . It might be a bit of an acid test actually for 
the five contenders for the leadership of the Sask Party. I would 
throw that out there. Would they ever consider charging for 
firewood in our provincial parks? What would they charge 
before . . . What would they raise taxes? We know one would 
make people pay for funerals. Other people would, we know . . . 
Well they have talked about raising taxes on children’s 
clothing, all of that. So I do have some concerns. 
 
But I want to get back to what my colleague from Athabasca 
was talking about. And he said, he talked about new parks 
should be an opportunity to celebrate. Everyone in the province 
should feel really good about a new park. It’s a wonderful thing. 
It’s a wonderful thing. And one of the wonderful things I had, 
especially in the centennial year of 2005, I had a chance to visit 
some . . . I think there are some 25, 27 parks. I didn’t get to 
Clearwater but I got to most of our provincial parks. It’s a 
wonderful thing, and don’t forget about those other parks. 
 
But when you have a new park it’s a wonderful thing. But our 
member from Athabasca raised . . . And he was very sensitive 
to what some of the First Nations, the indigenous folks, were 
feeling in the area, about duty to consult and how that had not 
been really fully carried out in the spirit of the parks. And how 
important that is, especially how we want to see . . . And I think 
it really is. We need to really reflect on this idea. 
 
It’s an opportunity to celebrate what makes Saskatchewan so 

special and what makes that area of Saskatchewan so special as 
we invite people, local people, people from across the province, 
people from across Canada. People from around the world have 
often come and remarked on how beautiful this province is. 
And so it is a reason to celebrate and we do not want to leave 
anyone out of that celebration. We don’t want to make people 
feel like they are being forced along or if they don’t join along, 
if they don’t come along they’ll be left behind. And this is a real 
problem. 
 
So this is why we have some concerns and we’ll be raising this 
concern a lot about this particular park. We understand this 
happened, the last new park, the Great Blue Heron park. It was 
not fully supported. In fact we understand there were grave 
concerns raised by some of the local indigenous folks about 
being left out and not being truly heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, over the past few years since the 
release and the work of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, we’ve heard about opportunities, opportunities to 
build new relationships with indigenous folks, both the Métis 
and the First Nations in Canada. And isn’t this a wonderful 
opportunity? Isn’t this the best opportunity, actually, where we 
could come together and really celebrate truth and 
reconciliation by having a new park where everyone is fully, 
fully engaged? 
 
And I look back, and this is a history that we all share in 
Saskatchewan. We have a history here in Canada of not having 
the best records of consultation. And right away — and this 
goes back to my time, when we were in government — people 
right away reminded me about the National Resources Transfer 
Agreement of 1930. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you may not be aware of it — many 
members may not be aware of it — but that was part of the deal 
when we first became a province in 1905. Other provinces, 
when they came into Confederation, they became owners of the 
Crown land that was within their boundaries. We were not. That 
didn’t happen until 1930, when the federal government in its 
wisdom transferred the natural resources to Saskatchewan. This 
was basically a Crown land transfer, and of course all their 
mineral resources and all of that that came along with it. 
 
But this was a lost opportunity, and we’ve not really fully 
recovered from that transfer, because to many First Nations, we 
are all part of the treaties. We are all part of the treaties. And 
they viewed that transfer as a massive mistake in consultation. 
They look back at that and they look back at how they should 
have been included in the consultations around that transfer of 
Crown lands to Saskatchewan. 
 
And part of that, part of that history was the initial set-up of the 
parks in Saskatchewan. Now, I’m doing my math really 
quickly. The first parks were set up in the 1950s, and part of 
that was the utilization of Crown lands that we had here in the 
province. But of course the First Nations, they’re very wise 
people, as they keep track of the things that have happened. 
They know the missteps that we’ve done as brothers and sisters 
along the journey. And for them, the misstep that we did as a 
province in the 1930s, we’ve never really fully recovered from 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

that area of the NRTA [Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement]. 
 
And so I think of this, and I think and I urge the government 
over the side . . . They said they did a nine-step program of fully 
consulting with the local Métis, the First Nation bands in the 
area, the hunters, the trappers, the cottagers. And that’s a good 
thing, and it took them six years to get to this stage. But you 
know, I would urge those folks, make sure you do it right. Make 
sure you bring people completely along so that there is a 
celebration, that people do feel good. They don’t feel left out; 
they don’t feel forced to come along and if they don’t come 
along, they’re going to be left behind. I think this is a real 
opportunity to do the right thing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do have some concerns about the parks 
and this park that will be known . . . And I guess the minister 
has said that for the first six months it will be known as 
Porcupine Hills Area Provincial Park, but it’s only a temporary 
name until they get a further, a final name. But I would really 
encourage him . . . And what a wonderful thing in the spirit of 
truth and reconciliation if it could have an indigenous name, 
because it has such meaning for the local First Nations. This is 
very, very important that we get it right. 
 
Now often I reflect on what the minister says, and he talks 
about how they had consulted over the past six years to do the 
right thing. And he talks about how this park is some four hours 
from Regina and Saskatoon. And it’s good, you know. We live 
close to Pike Lake Park. It’s good to have close parks. 
Blackstrap is another one. It’s good to have the local parks that 
are close so you can get out really quickly. But it’s good to have 
ones that are a little further away. 
 
He talks about the mixture of open grasslands, mixed aspen, 
birch, white spruce forest cover in the McBride Lake block. 
This is very good. It has two campgrounds, three cottage 
subdivisions, so there’s already activity happening out there, 
very much. But I think this is really important that, as I say, we 
get it right. 
 
One of the things that I was disappointed in what the minister 
had failed to say . . . And I’m going to read from The Parks Act. 
This is The Parks Act that was passed in 1986 and then has been 
amended several times since then. But it talks about the 
establishment of park land, the dedication of park land. I’ll read 
this into the record because it’s very important to go back to the 
basics and understand, what are we trying to do here? What are 
we trying to do here? So dedication of park land, and I’m 
reading from page 4. It’s section 3(1): 
 

3(1) Park land is dedicated to the people of Saskatchewan 
and visitors to Saskatchewan for their enjoyment and 
education. 
 
(2) The natural, prehistoric and historic resources of park 
land are to be maintained for the benefit of future 
generations. 

 
So two simple statements, but I think they speak volumes. The 
first talks about enjoyment and education. The minister did go 
on at length talking about enjoyment. He talked to how 
important it was that the people had a place that they could go 

and enjoy the natural beauty of the area — they could hunt; 
they could do various activities — and how important that was. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things he didn’t talk about . . . And 
I reread his speech a couple of times, and if I’m wrong I’d be 
happy to be corrected. But he did not talk about the educational 
component of this park. This is something that we’re seeing 
more and more lacking. Parks are more than just a place to go 
camping, more than a place to go hunting. It’s a place to learn 
about nature. And I think we see more and more in our 
education system those lost opportunities. More and more 
people are living in urban environments and really . . . And 
people have talked about an environmental deficit. They aren’t 
learning the environmental hands-on experiences that many of 
us would have had. 
 
You know, I remember as a teacher in the ’80s teaching up by 
Loon Lake and being able to take my kids over to Loon Lake 
Provincial Park, and how that was a protected area and they 
could learn so much dipping in the water, going on nature trails, 
that type of thing. 
 
And I’m going to come back to this part about jobs, but this is a 
critical, critical piece and I think that we need to go back and 
talk to the minister and say, so in your speech — now maybe it 
was an oversight, maybe it was just something forgotten — but 
you didn’t mention education. This is a big investment and it’s 
a big investment for the people today, the kids today, the 
parents taking their kids out, but it’s also for future generations. 
 
And I think the second part where we talked about the “natural, 
prehistoric and historic resources are to be maintained for the 
benefit of future generations,” and of course that is so true. And 
of course this is the part where the local indigenous people have 
identified burial grounds, areas for collecting natural medicinal 
herbs, that type of thing, and that this may be lost. And as my 
colleague from Athabasca has said, that when you create a park, 
is it viewed to be welcoming or is it viewed to be a no-trespass 
zone? 
 
Now what will be happening to those sacred sites? Have they 
been fully identified? Will they be protected? This is a 
commitment that I think needs to made up front and needs to be 
made in a way that is respectful of tradition and is respectful. 
And it actually can be done in a very, very positive way if it’s 
done in the matter of truth and reconciliation. And this would 
be a wonderful, wonderful gesture and I think that this could be 
something that would speak volumes and speak to the concern 
my member had — from Athabasca — around celebration and 
making sure that we are all there together. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to make sure that the minister 
— and I know these folks read these speeches the odd time — 
but be prepared to talk about education around the parks 
because if you’re creating a park solely as an amusement or a 
park, that’s a problem. That’s a problem. 
 
We saw them walk away from the urban parks saying we have 
no responsibility here, particularly when they have 
responsibility, particularly when we have the opportunity for 
education and learning so close to people in the urban areas. 
But the government has chosen to walk away from that, and I 
hope they’re not choosing to walk away from the educational 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

component of their mandate for parks. That would be really, 
really unfortunate. 
 
I want to also raise a concern. This was a concern that was 
raised on CBC just after the announcement was made and the 
minister had spoken on November 1st. And it quotes Vern 
Friday, the lands manager at Key Lake First Nation. And he 
said he acknowledges that they were part of the discussion since 
the beginning. And he notes that people had historically met in 
the area for traditional ceremonies and other activities. He noted 
that some people may not be happy because of the influx of 
tourists but that they came along and he felt it was going to 
happen anyways. 
 
And I would quote, he says, “It’s always been there for them for 
healing and spiritual help in hunting.” But he talks about . . . 
And if I could put this . . . I think this is important. Vern Friday, 
and I quote from the CBC article: 
 

Vern Friday said he wants to see jobs within the park for 
First Nations people. 
 
Parks Minister Gene Makowsky [and I’m quoting here] 
said jobs aren’t likely. 
 
He said the campsites will be “rustic,” with no electrified 
sites, no extensive paving, and no major changes to 
recreational areas. 

 
So he said jobs aren’t likely. That’s unfortunate. It’s truly 
unfortunate, you know, and I think . . .  
 
I had the good fortune of seeing the American historic site 
down in Montana where the Battle of the Little Bighorn was, 
and it’s very interesting to see how many of the employees are 
First Nations descent. And we need to do more of that and 
speak of the beauty. And I think it’s a wonderful thing when 
you have local people being able to speak of the beauty of the 
place, but of the meaning of the place. It’s more than just 
beauty. It’s not just . . . You know, we all can appreciate a 
wonderful fall scene or a beautiful spring scene, but it’s more 
than that. And these places in Saskatchewan have much more 
deeper meaning. 
 
So I have some real concerns about this, Mr. Speaker. You 
know as I said, and I really want to reiterate this because I think 
that we have an opportunity to get it right. We think obviously 
the concept of a new park is a good concept. It protects the land 
and it provides an opportunity, as I said, for enjoyment but also 
for education. This is more than just an amusement park. It has 
to be much more than that. 
 
So let’s hope that the minister as he goes through the next six 
months — and of course we’re going to be talking about this; I 
know many members on this side will want to talk at length 
about this — but take the opportunity to fully implement the 
duty to consult. Make sure people feel that there is an 
opportunity to celebrate, that everybody is included, nobody is 
left out, and that they don’t have to wonder about should I come 
on, is there no trespassing here, but it is a welcoming place. 
And as I said, this should be a wonderful opportunity, a 
wonderful opportunity for truth and reconciliation here in 
Saskatchewan and in the Porcupine area. We have a lot of bad 

history around how we consult. Let’s make this an example of 
doing it right. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I know many . . . We want to 
talk about other bills today, but there will be other people who 
want to speak to this issue, but I just want to wrap up my 
comments here again saying, make sure this is an opportunity to 
celebrate. Make sure we get it right, that no one is left out, and 
we don’t fall back into those old ways that we have seen, that 
this park is fully . . . has a strong history. And we think about 
jobs. We think about good jobs, meaningful jobs for people. 
 
And to that effect, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment on 
Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment 
Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:15] 
 

Bill No. 77 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join 
in on a few comments on Bill No. 77, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
When you look at the overall and some of the notes and some of 
the information that’s been provided, some of the comments 
from the minister into this, it is now going to change the way it 
was. It used to be a three-person, I guess, commission that was 
appointed to sit on a superannuation board, which are Liquor 
Board employees. And I think if you look at the numbers, there 
was three appointed; one of them had to be from the employees. 
But there’s been some changes and these amendments are going 
to change. 
 
And being that there was no new members since 1977, there are 
no new members, it’s been closed for that, to be in that plan. 
Currently I believe there are two actually active members that 
are within that plan and there’s about 177 that are using the plan 
right now, are retired. And the plan’s continuing to operate to 
provide them with their pension which they’ve worked the 
years. And as we know, pensions are . . . You put in the good 
years and you have a pension that’s supposed to provide you an 
income. There’s different ways that you can do it. Some will 
give you so many years. Some will, you know, to your life. And 
then there’s a spouse. But we’ll get a little bit into that. 
 
But this is kind of just taking it from where you have, like I 
said, going from a three-person, I guess, commission to look 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

after the fund to now the minister will have the sole powers, and 
that’s fine. But we also had raised concerns when any time you 
move out . . . And I don’t know who exactly, you know, they 
consult with, they talk with, and it might make good sense to 
move it the way they’re going. And I know sometimes we want 
to, through committee and through the House when you talk to 
individuals, sometimes they are housekeeping items where we 
get it cleaned up. 
 
But having said that, like I said, there is two active members 
that are still working. There’s 170 that are retired. So we look at 
this and now the minister will have, I guess he will be the sole 
member of this commission to look after the plan. Now how 
that all will lay out, we’ll have to ask some questions in 
committee and get right to the point. I think we’ll have an 
opportunity to talk to those that are maybe impacted and see. 
And there might be reasons why and good reasons why this has 
been asked to come forward to make the changes. 
 
We’re talking about a retirement plan that didn’t have a new 
member, like I said, since 1977, but any time you give the sole 
power to the minister on that side of the House and I think for 
anyone, you want to make sure why that’s happening and to 
make sure we do our due diligence on this side of the House to 
ask those questions to make sure that, you know, certain powers 
. . . And some will say, sometimes you give too many powers to 
one individual taken from, you know, order in council or from a 
committee that’s struck to do the good work that they’ve been 
asked to do. 
 
So having said that, like the other part of this process, each year 
since 1995 this agreement had expired, so every year they’d 
have to go to order in council to have those in the early 
retirement option . . . So if there was an option in your plan to 
take early retirement, that ended in 1995 is my understanding. If 
I have the facts straight, in 1995 that ended. So each year they 
would have to go to order in council and ask for it to be 
extended each year. It was almost like a yearly, I guess, 
approval. Now from what I get from this, that won’t have to 
happen anymore. That will not have to happen. I think the 
minister will have the powers to do that, to just go ahead and 
sign that. If I’m clear on this, Mr. Speaker, he will have that 
power. 
 
Now I know my colleagues and I will have more questions 
about this and we’ll have more comments that we’ll make for 
the record, but also in committee we will ask some questions. 
So I don’t have a lot more to say about this. Like I said, 
sometimes they’re changes that have been requested and it 
makes sense, you work together to pass legislation. But here are 
some of the points I just wanted to put into the record to say 
that, you know, we have asked. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I 
am prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 77. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 

Bill No. 78 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to join in and 
make a few comments on Bill No. 78, the municipal 
employees’ pension amendments, 2017. 
 
There’s some of the language that’s been changed in this, and I 
think with times and as we move forward, they’re just doing 
some important changes that need to reflect on the legislation. 
And on one of these, it’s just referring to gender neutral and 
modern language that we use today, and that’s kind of the part 
on this Act. This Act is just going to change some of that. So it 
provides for those provisions. And maybe back in the day, you 
know, we referred to “him” maybe in the Act. And I think 
they’re just trying to say it’s time that we modernize and change 
the language in the legislation that’s in there so that exists. 
 
The legislation in existence required that, for an example, you 
had a CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] rep, an 
employee of the municipal services. Some of those guides that 
are on there and actually as a guiding to give some direction 
and guidance. 
 
Part of the provision in there, like I said, is housekeeping. It’s 
just going to allow that to make sure that they have the 
legislated existing board requirements, who they appoint. And 
like I said, one employee would have been appointed to serve as 
a guiding, I guess, a guiding board — give some, whether it be 
some direction, I guess. I’m not sure. And that’s where 
sometimes we’ll have to ask exactly why is this change coming 
in here. But what it looks like is the guiding, to give some 
guidance, some ways to look at different things on how this 
operates. But again it’s more of housekeeping, some of this. 
 
There’s also a provision in there, the transfers. If you have a 
pension plan that you belong to and you now are going from 
one pension plan to a municipal pension, you can actually have 
that transferred. So if you’ve got new employment, you’re 
leaving one organization from employment and you’re going to 
another one, this allows you to transfer that into the municipal 
pension, just to make sure that your pension . . . You’re not 
having two. If it meets the requirements, you can move it into. 
You’d have to check with the agencies. 
 
And I know we’ll have some questions about that again in 
committee on some of these as to exactly how that happens and 
who. And we’ve kind of asked some of these questions, and as I 
talked to earlier, they are simple housekeeping cleaning that 
need to be done, and sometimes that happens. 
 
But sometimes you have to be careful too, that we have to do 
our due diligence. And the government consults with who they 
need to see. Are there going to be any impacts on somebody? 
And I think you want to make sure that that happens. So at this 
point I know I have no further comments on Bill No. 78, and 
I’m prepared to adjourn and let my colleagues continue on it. 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

And we’ll work, more work on this in the committee. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 78. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 79, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2017. Bill number . . . It deals with the public employees 
pension plan. Again I say, and it’s in here, it’s just mainly 
housekeeping. The bill updates the membership of the 
commission, noting that back in the day CEP [Communications, 
Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada] were a part of that 
union, were a part of this committee. 
 
And what’s happened is there’s been a change some time ago 
that they’ve actually taken the opportunity here to change some 
of this in the Act, and those members that are appointed to the 
commission and that, now that there’s no longer the need to 
have the CEP members sitting on there because now all CEP 
members are covered under a union called Unifor. And Unifor 
now looks after that, so there’s no requirement to the . . . So 
again, as I said, it’s mainly housekeeping. 
 
The other changes that will be allowed is the board to include 
members who live out of Saskatchewan, from my 
understanding, to sit, should they be appointed, to sit on the 
commission. Let’s just to say, if they retire, they moved out of 
province, my understanding . . . And I know we need to ask this 
in committee to make sure we’re clear on this, it’s clear, that if 
they are resident and they move, they still can sit on there. And 
that’s what we’re . . . We’ll have to get clarification on it 
because we’re not sure. I don’t think it’s specified in there, and 
it’s not clear. So if it’s not, I know that we’ll do the work and 
we’ll work on it. 
 
The other change in here, Mr. Speaker, should a spouse . . . I 
guess my understanding, if it’s a deceased person that was in 
the plan, they happen to, like I say, pass away, and their spouse 
is getting the pension, that they wouldn’t have to leave the 
pension. They could opt to stay in. 
 
Or I guess in another side of it, we have heard some of the 
minister’s comments. And I believe that it was some of my 
colleagues might have made the comment. Later on if it’s in a 
separation and they choose to, two people who, you know, 
choose to no longer be together and they separate, I believe, my 
understanding, the spouse then, if I’m clear, has the opportunity 
to say, you know, half of the pension or the portion that that 

spouse is entitled to, they can say, I want that portion, even 
though if the spouse that’s in the pension decides to pull theirs 
out and leave. Should the spouse of the individual in that 
pension, that person can choose, my understanding, to stay in 
the plan. And when it’s time to collect a pension or a benefit 
from the plan, they can do that. 
 
And that’s again, I think it was more housekeeping and to 
making sure that some of these changes help out clarifying 
exactly how that’s to be and how that will be played out. So it 
changes that legislation and makes those changes in this 
amendment to that Act. 
 
So at this point I have no further comments on it. I will wait for 
committee and my colleagues to have some. So I’m prepared to 
adjourn debate on 79. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 79. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
Actually there’s not a lot in this actually, this Act. But I want to 
talk a little bit about the good work that municipalities out there 
do. When we talk about infrastructure and the good work, you 
know, I know my own mayor and council, they collect our 
property taxes, which have been going up, school taxes. And 
you know, there’s been more pressure put on municipalities 
because the government’s downloading some of their problems 
and some of the problems this government has created, you 
know, with the scandals, the waste, and you know, some of 
those issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So more of that pressure and burden has been put on our 
taxpayers and our municipal leaders to figure it out and fix 
some of those challenges. And I give them credit. Some of them 
are doing a great job in light of the pressure that’s been put on 
them. And sometimes some of the increases, whether it’s school 
taxes, property taxes for sure, you know, it’s almost that 
pressure of, you know, we’re expecting citizens . . . Well that 
government on the other side is expecting citizens to pay more 
and get less services. 
 
And I’m glad our municipalities and the leaders that are there 
are fighting hard to make sure they’re doing what they can do. 
They’re limited, you know, with the resources and with the 
challenges that this government has been putting on them for, 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

you know, a number of years, claiming on one hand, you know, 
they’re getting record revenue and all this from them, but in 
other areas when we see . . . when you think about it, so you see 
challenges. 
 
But I just wanted to talk, you know, a little bit about the 
municipalities and the good work that they have done for many 
of us, and I thank them for their great work. And I think back 
home in the North and I think in the rural areas and the urban 
centres, and many of the elected officials do the great work. 
And sometimes they’re asked to do a lot when their, you know, 
their budgets are being cut, and they’re expected to provide the 
service to Saskatchewan residents when you have a government 
who’s putting that pressure on them. And that needs to sit in the 
government’s lap for that because that’s clear. It’s their 
responsibility. And they are putting the challenges out there to 
many of our municipalities. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But having said that, I just wanted to get into a little bit about 
the actual, this bill, and what this is asking for. It’s an increase. 
Our municipal finances corporation provides loans for 
infrastructure for municipalities to continue to do when they 
make a good plan, and some of our municipalities do a great 
plan when it comes to infrastructure. They see the needs and 
they are creative and they find different ways. 
 
But here’s a plan where they can apply for some of the dollars 
to help them do the infrastructure that they need to do. And 
there used to be a cap, and I believe it was 350 million. And the 
government is asking for a change for it to go up to $500 
million so that this fund is there for municipalities to continue 
to do the good work to . . . And I don’t know the details of it, 
but they can access those dollars whether it’s on a loan or if it’s 
a . . . And I’m not sure of the details. And I know we’ll ask 
those. And some of my colleagues probably will have the 
answers on that. But it’ll be an opportunity to ask the minister 
and his officials exactly how this will impact the municipalities 
and we can find out exactly. 
 
But there isn’t a lot more into this bill. So at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 80. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

wade into the debate on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. I’m no longer the SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] critic and haven’t been 
for several years, but for me drinking and driving, or not just 
drinking and driving, impaired driving, and doing better here in 
Saskatchewan, that is still near and dear to my heart, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So in terms of Bill No. 81 . . . And it’s interesting. We’ve had 
many, many versions of this bill before us in the last few years. 
It’s come back to us in 2014. It was again before us last year. 
So there’s been incremental positive changes made, Mr. 
Speaker, and there’s some good things in this bill, but I will get 
to that in a moment. 
 
So this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, will ensure that experienced 
drivers with a blood alcohol content between .04 and .08 or who 
fail a field sobriety test will face a seven-day administrative 
driving suspension if they have a child under the age of 16 in 
the car with them. So instead of getting a three-day licence 
suspension on the first offence, that would be a seven-day 
suspension. Instead of a 21-day suspension on a second offence, 
it’ll change to 30 days. And for a third offence, it increases 
from 90 to 120 days. So that’s the licence suspension part. 
 
The length of time a vehicle will be seized is also increasing, 
Mr. Speaker. Both new and experienced drivers will have their 
vehicles seized if they have a child under 16, Mr. Speaker, for 
seven days on the first offence, up from three days. It increases 
from seven to 30 days on a second offence. On a third offence it 
increases from 60 days, up from seven days for new drivers, or 
14 days for experienced drivers, Mr. Speaker. The Traffic Safety 
Act, this is an Act that also sets out the administrative penalties 
for drivers charged with impaired driving-related offences 
under the Criminal Code, Mr. Speaker. And the minister points 
out that: 
 

Currently if a driver is charged with exceeding the legal 
limit for alcohol or refusing to comply with the demand by 
law enforcement, they are subject to an indefinite 
administrative suspension of their driver’s licence pending 
the court’s outcome of the criminal charge. As well their 
vehicle . . . [gets] seized. The proposed . . . [changes here] 
will allow law enforcement to issue an indefinite 
administrative suspension when a driver is charged with 
impaired driving under the Criminal Code. 

 
It also changes, Mr. Speaker, the look-back period when it 
comes to looking back at offences and counting towards the 
one, two, or three offences, Mr. Speaker. It will be extended 
from five years to 10 years which will allow for tougher 
penalties for repeat offenders. 
 
It does a few other things, Mr. Speaker. It requires slowing to 
60 kilometres. It’s now required when snowplows are stopped 
on the side of the road and when passing other vehicles 
providing assistance if the prescribed lights are in operation. 
 
So around the piece that I’d like to talk a little bit more about is 
impaired driving, where we’re at here in Saskatchewan. So just 
a news article from October 29th, 2017, a CBC article points 
out: “A total of 57 people were killed in Saskatchewan in 2016 
in collisions involving alcohol . . .” according to SGI, Mr. 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

Speaker. That number is up from 54 in 2015. So those are our 
most recent stats. 
 
I just want to cast your mind back to 2016. We had some really 
horrific high-profile . . . Well any death on the road, Mr. 
Speaker, is unacceptable, but there were some pretty horrific 
and well-publicized fatalities connected to impaired driving. 
There was an entire family in January who was killed, Mr. 
Speaker. And we continued to see throughout the year some 
really, really horrible incidents. There was a man walking on 
the side of the road here, just outside of Regina. I believe he 
was walking his dog and he was killed by an impaired driver. 
As we know, according to these numbers, they’re up. 
 
I was very glad to see last fall, the government finally decided 
to move on the three-day vehicle impoundment and the warning 
range. So for anybody who isn’t sure, so there’s the Criminal 
Code which kicks in at .08. If you have blood alcohol 
concentration of over .08, that’s a criminal conviction. But in 
the warning range, .04 to .08, you’re still considered to be 
impaired but not at a criminal rate. So it’s recognized that your 
functions, that your ability to react, your judgement are all 
skewed in that. 
 
And back in 2013 we had seen a spike in death rates, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was the time that I was the SGI critic. And the 
government moved on putting in place a Traffic Safety 
Committee of which my colleague from Cumberland and I had 
the privilege of serving as the members on the opposition from 
that. And one of the pieces of information we had heard from 
experts was around the vehicle impoundment in the warning 
range — three-day suspension — so before you get to that .08 
but losing your car, not just your licence. Because statistically 
we know many people still drive while their licence is 
suspended, but it’s much harder to hide a vehicle missing from 
your family home. If you happen to be impaired on a Friday 
night and have your mom or dad’s car or your spouse’s car and 
you lose the vehicle for the weekend, it’s a little harder to 
explain and a little harder to hide. 
 
So BC and Alberta had both moved to this model, BC prior to 
Alberta, and had some really positive results. And the 
government just wasn’t willing to go there in 2013 despite all 
the evidence showing that this was a positive move. And my 
colleague and I from Cumberland had suggested that that’s 
where we were going. So we were very happy last fall, at the 
end of the very tragic year of increased impaired driving deaths, 
Mr. Speaker, to go there and see the government make tougher 
penalties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s all very positive, but I think the one thing that still stands 
out for me around that committee in 2013, and now as the 
Health critic and someone who’s very passionate about mental 
health and addiction services, when you look at the numbers, 
Mr. Speaker, on who dies and who gets into more fatalities, it’s 
generally people with higher blood alcohol concentrations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So if you look at the blood alcohol concentration of dead 
drinking drivers, Mr. Speaker, in Canada . . . This was back in 
2010. I’m just looking at my notes from that committee in 2013. 
And in Canada the number of dead drinkers with positive blood 
alcohol concentrations at .01 to .15 were 30 per cent. They were 

at 53 per cent of those at . . . or .151, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to cast your mind back to some of the things that we 
heard in that committee. I’d like to read into the record actually, 
Doug Beirness. My point here, Mr. Speaker, is that I think that 
there’s a correlation between drinking and driving or impaired 
driving, Mr. Speaker, and addictions, and not treating those 
addictions, Mr. Speaker. So Doug Beirness represented the 
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse which is a 
non-government organization whose mandate requires the 
organization to advise parliaments or legislatures on matters of 
substance abuse. So he told us on June 3rd, 2013 when we were 
talking about blood alcohol concentration . . . I’d like to read his 
comments into the record: 
 

If you look at it by blood alcohol concentration — let me 
just step you through this — the pie [as we were looking at 
a chart, Mr. Speaker], the circle on the left part there, we’re 
looking at 15,000 cases in total that were tested over that 
period of time with 61 per cent negative for alcohol and 38 
per cent were positive for alcohol. And when you break 
those out according to the blood alcohol concentration, the 
thing that stands out most of all is that bottom red bar 
there. These are drivers who had a blood alcohol 
concentration of 160 milligrams and over, and they 
represent over half of all fatally injured drivers. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

These are not people who’ve had a couple of drinks after 
work and died in a crash on the way home. These are 
people who have had a substantial amount of alcohol. And 
I would defy any person in this room to reach a BAC of 
160 and not either pass out or throw up or both. That’s a 
very high level of alcohol. There is no question about it. If 
you look at the database and look at the actual blood 
alcohol levels, you will often see drivers in there who are 
over 300, over 400 milligrams, which for most people is a 
level associated with death. These people are not your 
average social drinker who’ve had a couple of drinks at a 
party. 

 
And he points out: 
 

I was able to look at the data for Saskatchewan. I did the 
same thing, looked at the alcohol-positive and the 
alcohol-negative group, looked at the positive group by 
blood alcohol concentration. I’m just going to do a quick 
flip back to the previous one. You’ll notice there’s 56 per 
cent over 160 in Canada as a whole and 64 per cent over 
160 in Saskatchewan. Those numbers are a little bit smaller 
overall, but the proportion over 160 is pretty substantial. 
We’re dealing with a population of people who really do 
have an alcohol . . . [program]. You don’t get to 160 
without having practised numerous times. That in and of 
itself is an indicator of an alcohol problem. So that’s . . . 
the background, the context. 

 
During that same committee, Mr. Speaker, on June 4th, Fay 
Rorke, who is with . . . at the time she was with the driving 
without impairment program, which is a program where drivers 
get referred to, Mr. Speaker, pointed out that . . . So her 
program: 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

Its content and structure provides each course participant 
with the opportunity to examine his or her own attitudes 
and practices as they relate to drinking, in a . . . 
[non-life-threatening], positive, and supportive 
environment. The driving without impairment program is 
an educational experience. It is not a treatment or a 
punitive rehabilitation program. 

 
She went on to say that many . . . They were very excited. This 
was years ago, that people from her program . . . There were 
some changes made prior to this current government that would 
see people referred to . . . getting an addictions assessment. But 
she points out that those addictions assessments at the health 
region level were breaking down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She goes on to say: 
 

Again as an example, in our community I know of two 
individuals who were streamed to driving without 
impairment who, because I knew them in the community, I 
knew that they had serious alcohol addiction problems. 
And they both died as a result of their drinking, not in a 
drinking-driving offence, but their alcoholism killed them. 
They should . . . [have not] been in driving without 
impairment. 

 
So right now, Mr. Speaker, we have three different levels that 
people get referred to. They get referred to driving without 
impairment, and then . . . driving without impairment, alcohol 
and drug education, and the third level is screening for 
addictions assessment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would argue the way we’re doing things here 
in Saskatchewan, perhaps we need to look a little bit more 
closely at . . . When people have a .08, maybe we should be 
assessing them at that point for addictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the challenges here in Saskatchewan around mental 
health and addictions, you might come to the place where you 
know you need help, and you might go through social detox and 
recognize that you need help and want to go through a rehab 
program. But the wait, Mr. Speaker, is months now. So from 
the time you go from recognizing you have a problem to 
actually being in a 30-day program can be months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a huge . . . I would argue that these are some positive 
changes. I’m not sure. I’d like to look at what other jurisdictions 
are doing. It’s always good to look at best practices and what 
the evidence is telling us about changes and where we should be 
going, Mr. Speaker. Not to say you shouldn’t break ground 
elsewhere, but there’s many places around the world who are 
doing a much better job than us. But I think we need to look a 
little bit more closely at our impaired driving rate, Mr. Speaker, 
and tie it to mental health and addictions and the services that 
we provide here in our community and how much better we 
could do. 
 
I just want to point out and give a shout-out to the Lac La 
Ronge Indian Band, actually, which is looking at creating a 
wellness centre. And this would not just be for on-reserve folks, 
but they’re looking at supporting Métis people and anyone else 
in their community who could benefit from some of their 
services. And they’re looking for partners, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re looking to the province for a partnership. And that 
might be a very good place for us to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know the government has thought that Uber and Lyft might be 
the answer to impaired driving, and I’m not saying that there 
couldn’t be positive things with Uber and Lyft, but obviously 
when you look at the numbers, we can look at where deaths 
happen. This last year 29 deaths occurred on provincial 
highways, 15 on rural roads, and six on First Nations roads. 
Seven were only . . . not only seven, but seven were on urban 
streets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I’m excited about the idea of finding new ways to ensure people 
get a safe ride home, but I’d like to get us to the core of the 
problem, Mr. Speaker, and talk and think a little bit more about 
addictions, mental health and addictions services. But I know 
that my time is short here and I have colleagues who will enter 
into the debate and there will be more questions when we get to 
committee on this bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things that I didn’t mention that are 
in this bill. I concentrated mostly on impaired driving, but I 
know that I have colleagues who will cover that and the critic 
responsible will ask many questions in committee. But with that 
I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into this debate on Bill 
No. 82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017. And of course 
this is one of our major, major Crowns who provide such an 
important service to the people of Saskatchewan when it comes 
. . . And we can particularly relate to it on a day like today when 
it’s kind of chilly out there, and we can think about how 
important it is that we get our natural gas to our homes and to 
our workplaces, to make sure that we can do what we need to 
have done and be at home in a comfortable place. 
 
So this is a very important bill that we have before us. In one 
way it’s sort of a bit of a dry bill, and we may not get too 
excited about it. I mean, one part talks about outlining that the 
corporation has a liability in tort but not liability in nuisance 
actions because of issues around insurance, and when we get 
into that kind of thing. 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2017 

But I do want to talk a little bit about distribution of gas, and I 
want to raise some concerns, you know, from our experience 
how important TransGas plays a role in all of this. And I do 
have to say, sometimes, particularly with this minister, it’s not 
what he says; it’s about what he doesn’t say. And this speech 
didn’t really talk about the role of TransGas and how important 
it is. And we are aware of that, and we know that it plays an 
incredible role. So when he talks about making amendments on 
sections 23 and 60, the exclusive rights for distribution and 
transportation of natural gas and how we’ve seen changes, but 
we don’t know what impact that will have in the marketplace, 
particularly around a very important Crown, TransGas, a utility 
or a subsidiary of SaskEnergy, and what will be the future for 
that. 
 
We’ve seen a minister who, through Bill 40 and what we’ve 
seen with STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] and 
particularly some of the stories we’re hearing now that concern 
us deeply about the impact and how we haven’t really done the 
true audit, a value-for-dollars audit on the study of how 
important that was . . . And this minister was driven solely in 
the search of a dollar. And then to that extent, he was even 
willing to be led or fed some curious numbers about how much 
the problems were in terms of subsidies with STC. And so 
again here, we have maybe a pattern here with SaskEnergy. 
 
So we’ll have some questions about this one for sure. It’s a 
technical piece of legislation, and so those who are in the know 
will probably have lots of questions around this, various 
sections of this bill. But we know right away. Some of our 
senses go up. Has there been full consultation? Has there been a 
full study of the impact of some of these things? We always 
wonder. It’s a bit of a Trojan Horse when the minister comes 
into the Chamber and says, it’s just housekeeping, trust me, it 
has nothing. 
 
We’ve seen a reversal around Bill 40 or somewhat of a reversal. 
We don’t know yet what the true impact of this will be, but we 
have lots of questions. And so when we start monkeying 
around, tinkering around with such a major Crown that’s so 
important to the people of Saskatchewan, SaskEnergy, that you 
can bet that we will have lots and lots of questions. And we 
won’t let this one just go quietly, because we know the impact it 
will have on consumers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of Bill No. 
82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d caution the members on how he 
paraphrased the hon. minister. With that, though, I will move 
that . . . The member from Saskatoon Centre has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 

2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today to 
enter into the adjourned debate on Bill 83, The Environmental 
Management and Protection Amendment Act. 
 
First I’m concerned that this bill, as it’s written, allows the 
minister to appoint new members to the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code advisory committee instead of having 
them appointed by order in council. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
when the minister was delivering second reading of this bill, he 
provided rationale for this change by stating that, and I directly 
quote: 
 

. . . members of the Saskatchewan Environmental Code 
advisory committee change frequently due to changes 
within organizations and associations. The amendments 
will transfer powers from the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to the minister, allowing for more timely 
appointments of new and replacement members of the 
committee. 

 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the minister was talking about section 4 
of the existing environmental management and protection Act, 
which this bill proposes to repeal and replace. We know that an 
order in council appointment is made by the Lieutenant 
Governor on the advice of the cabinet, and as such that 
appointment lies inherently beyond the scope of just one 
minister. 
 
I understand that the minister might find it easier to simply be 
directly responsible for the appointments to this committee, but 
we should think carefully about this. Do we want to make it 
easier for the government, any government, to make 
appointments at will to this committee? 
 
There are a number of key subsections of section 4 that are 
being removed and replaced. Mr. Speaker, this revision not only 
removes the order in council appointment of committee 
members, but it removes other governing regulations related to 
that committee such as the length of term of committee 
members, their eligibility for reappointment, what to do in the 
case of vacancies, and the requirement for the minister to 
provide any clerical assistance that the committee requires, 
which is curious. It turns these committee appointments into the 
wild west, Mr. Speaker. It transfers all the power to the 
minister, not the Lieutenant Governor, which radically 
decreases accountability and transparency. 
 
It might seem like a small change, Mr. Speaker, but this is an 
advisory body of high importance to this province. We face a 
number of significant environmental challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
We rely heavily on coal, natural gas, and other fossil fuels, and 
Saskatchewan has a high greenhouse gas emissions rate. We 
face some hard times ahead, Mr. Speaker, and we only have one 
earth to live on. We need to protect our environment, and folks 
on this committee are entrusted with an important advisory role 
in this province. If, heaven forbid, this were to turn into a group 
of yes-men or yes-women, a group of partisan folks who were 
aligned with the government, that could certainly alter the 



November 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

course of environmental protection in this province. 
 
To seek ultimate oversight of a committee composition when 
the minister already chairs this committee raises a number of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. The role of the committee is to advise 
the minister on all matters that relate to the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code. The Saskatchewan Environmental Code 
dictates all procedures, criteria, and practices that must be 
followed. These provisions relate to our water management and 
protection, including drinking and waste water, natural resource 
management and environmental protection, forestry, 
environmentally impacted sites, and air quality. We’re talking 
about how we treat our environment. Why is it that we would 
want to remove the order in council appointments for this 
crucially important committee? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue this is a critical time for 
environmental protection, not a time where we should be 
affording the Sask Party government more power to make 
unilateral decisions about the future of this province. We see the 
Sask Party burying their heads in the sand, in the face of a 
federal carbon tax that is coming in just a few short months. 
And rather than coming up with a plan to stand up to the 
Trudeau Liberals, they are instead proposing to lessen the 
transparency of a crucial environmental advisory committee in 
our province. 
 
It is a sad indication of the direction of the government and 
where their priorities lie. We need to do what’s in the best 
interests of the people of this province, and to protect the air we 
breathe and the water we drink for future generations. Mr. 
Speaker, I know that my fellow colleagues will have more to 
say about Bill 83, but with that I would move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 83, The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 83. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of this Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned till 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2819, 2821 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2819 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2819 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2820 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2821 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2821 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Physician Recruitment and Retention in Saskatchewan 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2822 
 Poet and Photographer a Future 40 Winner 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 
 Donation Supports the Concentus Citizenship Education Foundation 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2823 
 Launch of Taxi Area Council 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2823 
 No Stone Left Alone Ceremony Held in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2823 
 Joint-Use School Opens in Saskatoon 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 
 Standing Up for Saskatchewan’s Interests 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 
 Carbon Capture and Storage and Federal Carbon Tax 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2827 
 Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2827 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2828 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2828 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2828 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2828 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2829 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2829 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2829 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 2829 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2829 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2830 



 

 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2831 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2832 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2832 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2833 
 Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 
 Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act 
 Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les communications électroniques 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2837 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2837 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2839 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2840 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2841 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2844 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2845 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2846 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2846 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2847 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2849 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2850 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


