






















































Hansard: April 25, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 77A  TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2289 
 April 25, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to section 39 of The Advocate for 
Children and Youth Act, I’m submitting one copy of the 2016 
annual report to be tabled in the Legislative Assembly on 
Tuesday, April 25th, 2017. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to introduce some special guests that have joined us in 
your gallery today. They’re representing Canadian National, 
Mr. Speaker, CN Rail. These individuals have had meetings 
with ministers on this side of the House, and I hope that they 
were productive meetings, Mr. Speaker. I know they’ve been 
meeting with the Deputy Premier, the Minister of the Economy. 
I think the minister of Highways and Transportation was able to 
briefly say hello, and the Minister of the Environment. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, who is also a farmer 
met with them and had good things to say. And so when a 
farmer has good things to say about a rail company, it must 
have been a very good meeting and it must have canvassed a 
number of positive developments, especially with this Minister 
of Agriculture because he’s pretty tough to impress actually, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in no particular order I want to introduce 
these gentlemen to the members of the House today. Joining us, 
Ambassador Gordon Giffin — he is the former ambassador of 
the United States to Canada — board of directors of CN. If you 
could give the House a wave. Jim O’Connor, director of the 
board; Robert Pace, director and Chair of the board; Denis 
Losier, director of the board and former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] and cabinet minister in the Frank 
McKenna government, I believe, in New Brunswick, a 
government that at one point had no opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
something we’d like to try out here maybe someday, although I 
don’t expect it will be happening any time soon. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of chatting with the ministers 
who met with these individuals. And again on behalf of 
members on this side of the House and the government, we 
want to thank CN for their presence in the province, for their 
investment in the province, Mr. Speaker, and for their 
commitment to moving the goods that we have here, that we 
grow here and that we mine here and that we produce here, all 
around the world. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this House to 
welcome these representatives of CN Rail today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome these 
representatives of CN to the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly, thank them for their presence, thank them for taking 
the time with the meetings with cabinet. 
 
Of course it’s incredibly important that we all work together on 
all fronts to continue to improve our transportation system, and 
CN is an important partner of that system. And so I join with 
the Premier to welcome CN here today. 
 
In a way it’s . . . I guess I hear that the Agriculture minister’s, 
his meeting went all right. That, on some days, could be a bit of 
a surprise because on some days the rail company might be as 
popular as about the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. But we do appreciate the partnership in a system 
that is very, very important to us as an exporting province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to introduce 
some representatives in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services. Just ask you to give a wave when I introduce 
you. We have Nairn Gillies, the executive director; Eugene 
Paquin; Michelle Carver; and Anne Websdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning the House Leader and I had 
an opportunity to meet with them. We had what I think was a 
very productive meeting. We look forward to some follow-up 
discussions, and we thank them for being in attendance today, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to please join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming our guests today. 
We have Nairn Gillies, Michelle Carver, Eugene Paquin, and 
Anne Websdale. I know that they had a very productive 
meeting with the minister, and one of the things that they’ve 
been advocating for is a universal screening program for infants 
here in this province. So I look forward to asking the minister in 
estimates on Thursday some follow-up questions. But I know 
that the point is not lost on them that you need audiologists and 
capacity, Mr. Speaker, to be able to support children who are 
screened, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what our hearing aid plan in 
Saskatchewan has done so very well. 
 
I also just want to give a special shout-out to Eugene who has a 
unique connection to, a connection to Holiday Park, which is 
the community in which I live and have called home for much 
of my life. His mother-in-law, actually, used to live in Holiday 
Park. 
 
And as well, Anne Websdale and I graduated from E.D. Feehan 
High School together. And I’m not so sure she recognized me, 
but she hasn’t aged a day since 1988, Mr. Speaker. But with 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

that, I’d like to welcome all these guests and have my 
colleagues join with me in welcoming these guests to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to make an 
extended introduction, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 
Shawn Weimer, race director of the Queen City Marathon. The 
Queen City Marathon was introduced in Regina since 2001 and 
has grown significantly with over 6,000 participants from 
across the province and from around the world. 
 
I met with Shawn, who has awarded me bib number 150 for 
Canada’s birthday this year. I will be participating in the full 
marathon. The member from North Battleford is going to be 
with me. I’m going to race with him as well. I would like to ask 
colleagues to join me in participating in this Queen City 
Marathon, supporting local charities and community groups. 
 
The race will be taking place September 8, 9, and 10 in 2017, 
with an event-for-all-ages group and a race for every pace. I 
would like all the members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming Shawn Weimer in his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to see 
a friend, nice to see Shawn here today, and somebody that 
really does provide incredible leadership to the Queen City 
Marathon and all the life and vibrancy and health that it brings 
to our community. 
 
And it’s always an exciting race weekend in September. I know 
I’ll get registered once again this year, Mr. Speaker. It’s a really 
great weekend to get out there, pounding the pavement with 
thousands of people from across our province, but also from 
really across North America. 
 
I know that not only will I be out there, I know that the member 
for Douglas Park has run in the past and now, since I’m on the 
floor of the Assembly, she’ll be committing to run again this 
year as well. And I know the member from Lakeview also has 
run the QCM [Queen City Marathon] in the past, and I suspect 
she will this year as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on the topic of running, Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s an 
important time to maybe make the point that this weekend is the 
Regina Police Half Marathon. And there’s a friendly little 
battle, Mr. Speaker, that’s waged on the floor of this Assembly 
that pits myself and the member for Douglas Park and the 
member from Lakeview up against a few members on that side 
of the Assembly this weekend, and we’re looking forward to the 
friendly contest, Mr. Speaker. 

I welcome Shawn to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
my pleasure to introduce another great school group from 
Yorkton, the grade 7 class from Yorkdale school, 51 students in 
the west gallery with their teachers: Mr. Noel Budz, Mr. Grant 
Edgar, and Mr. Evan Neibrandt. 
 
With them, Mr. Speaker, is two individuals I will introduce 
specifically. One is Jeremy Walker. His sister actually 
messaged me on Twitter this morning to give her homeboy a 
shout-out, so that’s for Jeremy. As well, Jayd Girling, a young 
lady that I’ve known since birth and just an amazing young lady 
that comes from that school and our community. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Estevan, 
Bienfait, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like us all 
to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
provides vital services to many seniors, workers, and families 
throughout the province; and by scrapping STC out of the blue 
and without asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan 
people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little 
they care about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that 
STC helps drive the economy with the parcel service that serves 
farms and other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and the sell-off of Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners believe that this 
government neither understood the role of spiritual care in our 
health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, nor did they realize the 
impact that this cut would have on people’s health and 
well-being, Mr. Speaker. They point out that this government 
unilaterally eliminates spiritual care within our health region 
facilities. The petitioners point out that spiritual care helps 
patients and residents and their families towards achieving 
holistic wellness, and that Saskatchewan will be the only 
province, Mr. Speaker, within Canada to not fund this support 
for its citizens. 
 
They point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party did not tell 
people prior to the last election just a year ago about their plan 
to scrap funding to spiritual care within health region facilities. 
They point out, the petitioners point out that spiritual care 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis 
and the ability to respond to the spiritual and emotional needs of 
patients and residents. They point out that spiritual care 
supports families and patients and residents in making difficult 
decisions, and in fact, staff as well, Mr. Speaker, in their 
capacity as health care providers. 
 
They point out that spiritual care meets the needs of traditional 
First Nation, Inuit, and Métis people. And that professional 
non-denominational, non-faith-specific spiritual care 
practitioners facilitate patients and residents in obtaining 
comfort and support from within their own faith traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately stop the cuts to the spiritual care programs in 
this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Regina 
and Lumsden. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of this 
province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
We know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today in my place to present a petition to increase the funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, due to having funding 
cuts, Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its doors 
during the daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to 
people in distress. Mr. Speaker, we do know that crisis 
situations happen regardless of the time of day, and having the 
closure of the mobile crisis during the weekday times really is a 
disservice for the people of Prince Albert. And when people are 
in a crisis situation they need those services immediately. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Service and Victoria Hospital staff and 
other agencies who are not specifically trained or qualified to 
provide the counselling and intervention services that clients 
need. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the communities of Prince Albert and Melfort. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those who 
sign this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently, and many of our licensed non-profit child 
care centres pay commercial property tax. This is not something 
that’s done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. And this issue threatens both the 
number of child care spaces as well as the quality of care. 
Quality child care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

future outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. Child 
care centres are institutions of early learning and childhood 
development. It is appropriate that they have the same tax 
treatment as schools. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centre programs provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people around the 
province. The particular page I submit today is signed by people 
in Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, today I’m rising to present a 
petition opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 49 per cent Crown 
corporation sell-off. The people who have signed this petition 
today want to bring to our attention the following: that the Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 
per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned around $300 million in dividends to pay 
for schools, roads, and hospitals. We know those dividends 
should go to the people who own these Crown corporations, the 
people of Saskatchewan, rather than private investors. And of 
course our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of 
Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income 
tax provided that not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held 
by a government or province. The Sask Party’s proposal is 
allowing 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without being 
considered privatized. And so, Mr. Speaker, this short-sighted 
legislation risks sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa 
rather than the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the citizens who have signed this petition today 
are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
direction of the member from Prince Albert Northcote, I am 
proud to stand up and present a petition from the city of bridge 
— Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And the need for a second 

bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and the 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. 
 
So the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do day after day, Mr. Speaker, week after week, 
month after month, year after year, we stand and present this 
petition that has been signed from people all throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reversal to cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the 
petitioners respectfully request: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan immediately 
reverse their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon; and to revisit their 
imposition of a strict and narrow definition of 
homelessness in November of 2015 which forced the 
Lighthouse to cut back its hours of essential service in 
February of 2016; and [Mr. Speaker] to take immediate 
steps to ensure that homeless people in Saskatchewan have 
emergency shelter, clothing, and food available to them 
before more lives are lost. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by good citizens 
from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having 
the highest rate of domestic violence amongst all Canadian 
provinces. Citizens of Saskatchewan are very concerned about 
the lack of support that exists right now for victims of domestic 
abuse. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 
work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct 
and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation, and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Swift Current. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I rise to present a petition calling on the 
government to restore funding to post-secondary education. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen a precipitous drop in this province in the 
number of low-income people accessing higher education. In 
the context of that drop, we have a budget that introduces $36.8 
million in cuts from post-secondary education, 6.4 million cut 
from technical institutions, and 8.2 million reduction in 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships. Mr. Speaker, 
this creates a situation where higher education is more costly 
and fewer people from lower income families are going to be 
able to access the education they need to advance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Regina and 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Moosomin and District Regional Park Named 
Park of the Year 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to stand in this 
Assembly today and inform my colleagues that Moosomin and 
District Regional Park has been chosen as Saskatchewan’s 
regional Park of the Year. 
 
This regional park, located in Moosomin constituency, is an 
amazing location and attracts visitors from across the province 
and beyond. The large beach, beautiful lake, fantastic facilities, 
great family-centred recreational amenities, and is located in a 
great community that is 100 per cent behind the park. I know 
this park is close to my family as my wife spent part of her 
childhood in Moosomin where she spent countless days at the 
park, and our family today still enjoys what the park has to 
offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is an amazing place to experience 
the outdoors and every year we see more and more people 
coming from around the world to see what our province has to 
offer. From the rural communities’ rec centres to large 
entertainment facilities in cities as well as national, provincial, 
and regional parks, there is something for everyone. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Moosomin and 
District Regional Park on winning the Saskatchewan Park of the 
Year and thank the staff, board, volunteers, and community 
who make this a great place to visit each and every year. 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members of this 
House to come and enjoy the great facilities for themselves. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipient 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to congratulate Mr. 
Peter Zakreski, a constituent of Saskatoon Meewasin and one of 
the recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal for 2016. 
 
Peter Zakreski is a lifelong volunteer, community leader, and 
business executive in Saskatchewan. He’s held the role of 
founder, president, and member of countless community 
associations and volunteer initiatives. He also played a pivotal 
role in coordinating sporting events across the country, 
including the 1979 Canada Summer Games, the 1989 Jeux du 
Canada Games, and the 1991 World Junior Hockey 
Championship.  
 
I first met Peter and his wife, Elaine, to discuss our shared 
interest in East Africa, as their most recent initiative is the Hope 
For Malawi charitable foundation, where the two of them work 
to bring urgently needed medical, educational, agricultural, and 
community support to the Domasi region of southeastern 
Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of winning the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal, Mr. Zakreski has received several prominent awards for 
his community service and volunteering efforts, including the 
Canada 125 medal, the University of Saskatchewan Alumni 
Humanitarian Award, and the Order of Canada in 2002. He’s 
truly an inspiration and a role model. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Mr. Peter Zakreski on his Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal and in thanking him for the many ways that 
his dedication to volunteering has helped his community, our 
province, and the world. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Care of Older Adults Conference 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, I 
had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the Minister 
of Health and the Minister of Rural Health to the Transforming 
the Care of Older Adults Through Interprofessional Teams 
conference held in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood has a higher 
number of seniors per capita than any constituency in 
Saskatchewan, so this conference theme was of particular 
interest to me. The conference was a wonderful learning 
experience for all, giving health care providers a chance to be 
educated on understanding the interprofessional management of 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

the needs of older adults throughout the continuum of care in 
urban, rural, northern, and remote locations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, expanding the accountable care model for 
in-patient care in the 2017-18 budget was very well received at 
the conference, displaying our government’s commitment to 
older adults and health care programs. Collaboration and 
improved communication at the Regina Pasqua Hospital has led 
to patients being released 15 per cent sooner after proper and 
adequate care, and I am looking forward to this approach being 
implemented in Saskatoon. 
 
I highlighted other initiatives for older adults in health care 
delivery, specifically the Alzheimer Society’s First Link 
program and the dementia advisory networks, which are also 
supported in our budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
organizers of this conference for their hard work and dedication 
to health care and seniors across Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Optimist International Oratorical Contest 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 8th, I was 
honoured to serve as a judge for the Saskatchewan regional 
division of the Optimist International Oratorical Contest. The 
contest hosted competitors from grades 7 to 9 and represented 
three of the four Optimist clubs in Regina. The theme of this 
year’s competition was What the World Gains from Optimism. 
 
This year’s competitors included Jennifer Vu, Fatima Shahbaz, 
Xander Vendramin, Cole MacLeod, and Grady Fiske. Although 
all of the competitors did a fantastic job, this year’s two winners 
are Grady and Jennifer. They will go on to represent 
Saskatchewan at the next level of the competition in Edmonton 
on April 29th. There they will compete against other young 
Optimists from Montana, northern Wyoming, and Alberta for a 
chance to win a $5,000 university scholarship. These winners 
will go on to St. Louis, Missouri for the Optimist International 
World Championship. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Optimist oratorical contest gives young people 
the chance to speak to the world. More than $150,000 in college 
and university scholarships, funded by the Optimist 
International Foundation, are awarded annually. Further, Mr. 
Speaker, more than 2,000 clubs across the globe participate in 
this program, and it is one of the most popular of Optimist 
International. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
participants and the Regina Optimist clubs for being part of 
such an important international program and in wishing Grady 
and Jennifer the best of luck competing in Edmonton later this 
month. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Provincial Skills Competition Engages Youth 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am proud to 
stand and highlight my constituents from the Melville 
Comprehensive School who were part of 650 students who took 
part in the Provincial Skills Competition held in Saskatoon at 
the beginning of April.  
 
The mission of the Provincial Skills Competition is to promote 
and engage Saskatchewan youth in skilled trade technologies. 
The categories of competition, Mr. Speaker, included essential 
skills that can be used in nearly every job, with varying levels 
of complexity. The expertise these students showed and their 
advanced levels of understanding make me proud and hopeful 
for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of the 10 students who competed from 
Melville, three students took home gold. Tyler Kraushaar won 
gold in welding. Blake Coleman won gold in IT [information 
technology] software. Darrian Desjarlais and Morgan Fleury 
took gold for television and video production. Other students 
taking home medals at the competition included Kevin 
Campbell, who was awarded silver in outdoor power equipment 
focusing in small engines; Brett Friesen, winning bronze in 
photography; and Spencer Schick, taking the bronze in 
cabinetry. 
 
I would like to thank their teachers and supervisors for their 
guidance and support of these students: Stuart Wilson, Don 
Coleman, Michael Wilk, and Dennis Muzyka, who all served as 
either a judge or adviser for the competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the students and teachers from the Melville 
Comprehensive School on their success at the 2017 Provincial 
Skills Competition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Paddling Club Wins Medals at Club Crew 
Championships 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that the Prairie Dragons 
Paddling Club won multiple medals at the Pan American Club 
Crew Championships. 
 
The Prairie Dragons high performance crew, named Pond 
Scum, which has members from Calgary, Edmonton, Winnipeg, 
and Regina, journeyed to Ponce, Puerto Rico to compete in the 
championships which were held March 17, 18, and 19. 
Thirty-six clubs and approximately 140 crews competed at the 
championship to determine which crews were the fastest in the 
Americas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pond Scum raced three days in 24 different race 
categories for the 200 metre, 500 metre, and 2000 metre, and 
I’m proud to say that they medalled in all 22 of them — five 
gold, ten silver, and seven bronze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the average age of the crew members is about 60, 
but that did not slow them down. They had some of the fastest 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

times on the water and won the prestigious 2000-metre open 
race against very strong competition. The crew had the largest 
contingent of paddlers of any club in the Americas and won the 
most medals of any club in the championship. 
 
The next Pan American Club Crew Championships will be held 
in 2019 in Trinidad and Tobago, and based on the crew’s medal 
sweep, significant interest has been expressed in having them 
compete at the next championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in congratulating 
the prairie dogs paddling club, Pond Scum, for their outstanding 
performance at the 2017 Pan American Crew Championships. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Wholesale Trade Numbers Strong 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot of talk from the 
members opposite. They talk about spending more money and 
supporting policies that would cripple our economy. It simply 
doesn’t make sense. 
 
However, on this side of the House we have common sense 
policies to help grow our economy and the numbers show it. 
Wholesale trade numbers for February were released yesterday 
and once again it shows Saskatchewan is on the right track. 
Saskatchewan’s wholesale growth rate leads Canada, with 
month-over-month growth being 3.1 per cent, and 
year-over-year growth, 18.3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that 
translates into wholesale trade in the province being worth $2.2 
billion dollars, seasonally adjusted in February, although the 
members opposite seem to think that numbers like this have 
nothing to do with the policies of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in 
government, they seemed to think decline was the only choice 
for Saskatchewan. And today, the old NDP supported job- and 
industry-killing carbon tax and even support the principles of 
the Leap Manifesto, principles that would literally shut down 
many of the businesses in this province related to wholesale 
trade. The contrast is clear. While our policies promote growth, 
the members opposite only see declines. 
 
Our government is meeting the challenge to keep Saskatchewan 
strong, and the February wholesale trade numbers show that we 
are on the right track. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party 
government gave away 300 acres of land for free to CP 
[Canadian Pacific] rail, a company that’s gotten more than their 
share, Mr. Speaker, and a company, a company that’s part of a 
duopoly that frankly hasn’t performed for producers and 
exporters in our province all too often. 
 

Just in case that wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also 
committed to all the improvements that corporation needed. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s their cabinet who voted on the deal. They’re the 
ones who signed it. They were in office at the time for more 
than two years at that time. They’ve been in power for nearly a 
decade. Their GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal has 
been debated for two years. We’ve asked questions on the floor 
of this Assembly every question period since June of last year. 
 
Even after this corporate giveaway was exposed, the minister 
responsible still says, “I still can’t speak to the specifics of the 
contract.” Mr. Speaker, that might be defensible while you’re 
negotiating, but not now. What are they hiding, and who else 
got perks or free land in this growing GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition needs to turn to his seatmate, his seatmate, the 
Deputy Leader of the NDP. This was his plan, Mr. Speaker. He 
was the minister of Highways that oversaw the putting together 
of this plan to transfer . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Leader of the Opposition needs to 
turn to his seatmate and ask him for the details because this was 
his plan, Mr. Speaker. And I give him credit. I give him credit. I 
know he’s nodding over there. I give him credit. It was a good 
plan. It was a good plan. 
 
It was supported by the city of Regina. It was supported by 
municipal governments outside of Regina, and it was supported 
by the province. And it was supported, and it was supported by 
the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, to relocate the CP 
yards outside of the city, to move them to the Global 
Transportation Hub, of which it would be a very important part, 
the pivotal part, of having the GTH initiate and start up. 
 
The members opposite approved $33 million for the move and 
the initiation of the GTH. This was the plan of the Deputy 
Leader of the NDP. I have briefing notes, which we’ve tabled, 
which we’ve provided to media, that were prepared for the 
Deputy Leader of the NDP. This was his plan. We think it was a 
good plan. We agree with the plan, and we move forward with 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s past time for the Sask 
Party to display a basic level of accountability to Saskatchewan 
people. It’s no secret that the previous government was working 
on, at the time, the Regina region gateway and corridor project. 
No secret that that included the potential of CP rail moving out 
of downtown. 
 
But it’s the Sask Party that turned that concept into a scandal, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s the Sask Party that gave away 300 acres of 
land for free. And it’s the Sask Party that made SaskPower — 
that is to say, Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan ratepayers, 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

Saskatchewan businesses — pay $25 million for half of the 
land. And it’s the Sask Party who made sure that two of their 
party supporters made $11 million while nuns, local 
landowners, and taxpayers got ripped off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new GTH minister says, “SaskPower made a business 
decision. They chose the Global Transportation Hub.” Mr. 
Speaker, we all know at the time the GTH minister was also the 
SaskPower minister, and we know his relationship to one of 
those sellers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So will the Premier drop the act? Will the Deputy Premier drop 
the act, quit hiding behind weak excuses, and start to come 
clean on the Sask Party’s GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Leader of the Opposition needs to 
turn to the Deputy Leader of the NDP and ask him to come 
clean. This was his plan, and he knows it, Mr. Speaker. He 
knows that this was their plan to have CP relocate outside of the 
city of Regina to the GTH as the conditional precedent for the 
GTH being initiated. 
 
The Deputy Leader of the NDP knows that that cabinet 
approved $33 million for CP to relocate to the GTH and for the 
GTH to start. The Leader of the Opposition needs to turn in his 
seat and have the Deputy Leader . . . I know he’s nodding his 
head, Mr. Speaker. We saw him nodding his head. Perhaps the 
Deputy Leader would be interested in confirming that right 
now, standing up in his place and confirming to the House that 
that indeed was his plan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t need a puppet of 
the Premier. We need some answers and some accountability on 
the floor of this Assembly. Instead of coming clean, they’re 
misrepresenting . . . misinterpreting, sorry, a decade-old cabinet 
document, I guess just like that minister does with the auditor’s 
report day in day out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when asked how they decided to just give away 
300 acres to CP rail, the minister said, “I can just say, we would 
have made sure the number would’ve been arrived at based on 
the advice of professionals.” Mr. Speaker, since when? If 
anything is absolutely clear about the Sask Party’s growing 
GTH scandal, it’s that they did everything they could to ignore 
the advice of professionals and overrode Highways officials. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it seems big money talks over there and 
loudly in this Sask Party’s GTH scandal. Between 2010 and 
2015, CP gave the Sask Party over $10,000 and it leaves 
taxpayers asking questions. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Sask 
Party finally do the right thing and support our bill to get big 
money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — More nonsense from the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker. This was a plan that was initiated by 

the members opposite, by his seatmate personally, Mr. Speaker, 
who came up with the relocation of the CP rail yards to the 
GTH. This was his plan. We think it was a good plan. We 
adopted that plan going forward, Mr. Speaker. We worked with 
CP. We work with the city of Regina. We work with other 
municipalities. We work with the Government of Canada. 
 
But the genesis of this plan was the Deputy Leader of the NDP. 
It’s in black and white. We have the documents. We’ve given 
them to the media. We’ve tabled them in the House. The 
Deputy Leader of the NDP initiated this move. We agreed with 
it. Why won’t he take ownership for it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

International Trade and Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what a joke. What a joke, 
Mr. Speaker. Not a single answer from a government that’s 
wasted and given away millions and millions of dollars.  
 
You know the Sask Party cabinet are the only ones responsible 
for the GTH scandal. They’re the ones, they’re the ones 
refusing to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics, so it’s 
understandable why people are wondering who the Sask Party’s 
really working for. And they’re wondering what that Premier’s 
priority has been during his last two trade trips in just the last 
month to the US [United States]. 
 
The Globe and Mail has called the Premier “Trudeau’s Trump 
whisperer.” But it’s not clear what the Premier’s been 
whispering because the President has set Canada and 
Saskatchewan in his sights. The Trump administration’s new 20 
per cent border tariff on softwood lumber is a direct attack on 
Saskatchewan jobs. Saskatchewan’s forest product sales are 
worth nearly a billion dollars. They support 13,000 jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, over the last decade, the Sask Party has doubled the 
number of people looking for work to 40,000 people. The 
Premier pretends that he’s the only one who can talk to the 
Trump team. So while he’s hobnobbing in the US, why wasn’t 
the Premier standing up for Saskatchewan jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we of course have 
been engaged with officials in the United States on this file. 
We’ve been engaged with the Government of Canada as well. 
Of course, international trade’s a national responsibility. We’ve 
been very engaged. There’s been a federal-provincial working 
group that has met a number of times — myself along with 
Minister Carr and ministers from across the country. As a 
matter fact, right this moment, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is on a 
call with Prime Minister Trudeau and other premiers with 
regard to the softwood lumber issue. 
 
This has been a long-running dispute. Members opposite are — 
should be, anyway — well aware of the fact that this has been a 
long-running point of contention between Canada and the 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

United States. We believe the United States is wrong. We 
believe that our industry will ultimately be successful in terms 
of appealing the countervail and the anti-dumping that we’re 
expecting to come as well. We have been in the past. 
 
That being said, there is a process in the United States that’s 
worked through. And I don’t think, you know, President Trump 
is . . . obviously makes decisions on the basis of what he sees 
fit. We think they’re wrong. We’re going to continue to engage, 
though. We’re going to continue to work with the Government 
of Canada who have been engaged on this file as well, and 
we’re going to continue to work with our softwood lumber 
producers here in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Children in Provincial Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, while the Sask Party are 
prioritizing big corporations, they are leaving our province’s 
vulnerable kids behind. The new Advocate for Children and 
Youth presented his report today. His report makes it tragically 
clear that despite all of their promises and rhetoric, there are 
still kids in hotel rooms, too few foster families, and this year 
there were 38 critical injuries and 21 deaths in care, 15 of whom 
were less than 6 years old. 
 
In 2013 the Premier pointed to then-declining rates of children 
in care and said they were solving these tragedies. Sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, that was a small and temporary dip. There are over 
450 more children in care today. Mr. Speaker, their rhetoric and 
promises aren’t making our kids safer. So will the minister 
commit to starting real action today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I commend the 
work of the Children’s Advocate and I am very positive about 
our relationship going forward. It has been good to date and I 
expect that to continue. I appreciate the work of that office in 
making sure that children are cared for in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the issue of hotels, we have increased the 
number of emergency placements in Regina over the past year. 
We have increased those spaces 118 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
primarily to keep children out of hotel rooms. We have had . . . 
I believe it’s only been one case in January for a brief period of 
time. Unfortunately we cannot always dictate when children are 
going to be coming into care, Mr. Speaker. Often and 
sometimes, and increasingly in fact, they will come into care in 
the middle of the night in the middle of a criminal 
circumstance, which will warrant the use, which will negate . . . 
or pardon me, require the use of a hotel for a short period of 
time. That is precisely why we have increased the number of 
emergency receiving spaces. 
 
With respect to children-in-care deaths, of course this is 
something that we take seriously and we’ll continue to work 
with the Children’s Advocate on those issues and make them 
aware of critical incidents as they arise. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about children 
here. These are difficult systematic issues, but instead of 
working to improve things the Sask Party is ignoring their own 
reports. The poverty reduction strategy, the mental health action 
plan, the early years plan, the child welfare review panel — all 
have outstanding recommendations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the day after the last child advocate 
presented his last report saying the Sask Party needed to do 
more, they did the opposite. They actually scrapped the 
committee responsible for doing more. Mr. Speaker, the day 
after the last report, they scrapped the committee responsible for 
helping kids and families. 
 
Too many lives are at risk for more rhetoric, political games, or 
to wait for the price of oil to go up. Will the minister commit to 
meaningful action to transform the child and youth supports in 
this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
the member opposite for the question. Of course this is an issue 
of importance for us. We have increased the budget in the 
Ministry of Social Services to its largest ever, Mr. Speaker, and 
that includes a 5.5 increase to child and family services 
programs, Mr. Speaker. We have increased, as I said before, the 
amount, the number of emergency receiving spaces. We have 
also been very, very aggressively targeting the increase in 
number of foster families across the province as a way of 
encouraging family-based care in this province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are issues which we do take very, very seriously. We’ll 
continue to do so. It is a priority issue for me, and it is a priority 
for members of my ministry, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Vulnerable Children and Youth 
in the North 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Year 
after year, the former advocate reported on the lack of action 
and warned of the consequences. Now, instead of working to 
get better, the Saskatchewan Party government dismantled the 
child and youth agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report shows that indigenous children are 
overrepresented among critical injuries and tragic deaths. It 
showed the lack of mental health services for northern 
communities and to address the suicide crisis. The report also 
tells the story of a northern girl who had multiple suicide 
attempts and was airlifted for treatment. Six months later, she 
had still not been provided any counselling services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every child who died between the ages of 11 and 
15 years of age, this year alone, took their own life. They died 
by their own hands. Why is that government walking away 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

from this crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, any loss of life before 
its natural time is indeed a tragedy and of course these cases are 
as well, Mr. Speaker. Speaking to the Children’s Advocate 
report, I don’t know if there’s anybody that knows the advocate 
personally or professionally more than I do, and I totally respect 
his work. And we’re going to take his whole report very 
seriously and we’ll act where appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can say with the action of this government, although we’ll 
always admit there’s more work to do . . . And I think, you 
know, not to point fingers specifically, but that’s one place 
where I think the opposition, when they were in government, 
fell short. They would make some great accomplishments and 
then maybe not continue. 
 
We’re going to continue to work with our northern partners, not 
to them but with them, working alongside them to find solutions 
to some of these very, very complicated issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, I plan on meeting with the Children’s Advocate very 
shortly in the coming few days or weeks. We’ve met regularly 
and will continue to meet with the New North executive, 
implementing whatever plans that they deem fit to work 
alongside them. We’ve worked with and met with . . . The 
Premier and the Government Relations ministers and myself 
has met with leaders in the North, looking at some of the mental 
health issues and where we can address those as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I continue to be on constant communication with the 
leaders in the North as often as possible, especially when these 
situations arise. And we’ll continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Intent of The Interpretation Amendment Act 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to it, they 
simply don’t have a plan — the same story in every ministry 
and with every bill. Yesterday the Minister of Education 
admitted they had no plan and were wrong to scrap libraries, so 
they backed down. 
 
The Minister of Justice has done the same once before. It’s time 
for him to do it again. Every time we’ve raised concerns about 
what it will mean when more than 10 per cent of a Crown is 
sold and federal income tax is charged, time and time again the 
Sask Party laugh it off. 
 
So through freedom of information, we asked the Ministry of 
Justice for the research they had done on this. But, Mr. Speaker, 
they had nothing, no documentation at all. How can they keep 
forcing a bill through the House when they haven’t even looked 
into one of its consequences that will cost Saskatchewan people 
hundreds of millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve stood time and time again in this House, and I’ve 
explained to the opposition the reason that we’re bringing this 
bill forward. One of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
when they were government on this side of the House, they 
neglected to define the word “privatization.” And, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s precisely what we’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
can chirp from their seats, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve never given 
an explanation as to why they didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that no one will know 
what the consequences or what the ramifications are of any 
particular transaction until you see the transaction, Mr. Speaker. 
And obviously when one comes forward, it will be fully 
analyzed. If one comes forward, it will be fully analyzed and 
the full consequences of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to use the resources of the Ministry of Justice or 
the Ministry of Finance or any other ministry, Mr. Speaker, to 
analyze every single possibility with respect to any transaction 
that may or may not arise as the result of this legislation is 
laughable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the same old lines from the 
minister. Bill 40 always felt like it was written on the back of a 
napkin, but it turns out there wasn’t even a napkin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will cost Saskatchewan people hundreds of 
millions of dollars and the Sask Party haven’t even researched 
it. They’re pushing through the back door what the Sask Party 
knows they can’t get through the front. 
 
This is about privatizing our Crowns, period. They’re already 
scrapping and selling off STC. They tried to close down our 
libraries. What’s next? Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party 
start listening to Saskatchewan people and scrap Bill 40? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of 
withdrawing this legislation. I can tell you this: I don’t think 
I’ve ever looked forward to going into committee as much as 
I’m looking forward to going into committee this afternoon on 
Bill 40, Mr. Speaker. The opposition has questions to answer, 
Mr. Speaker. Why they didn’t define them . . . All we’re doing, 
Mr. Speaker, is bringing forward a definition for the word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is going to provide opportunities. I hear 
from the opposition on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, about 
building partnerships, working on the balance sheet of our 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is about, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s about strengthening our Crowns. It’s about 
strengthening our Crowns for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the sooner the opposition 
understands that, Mr. Speaker, the sooner we can move 
forward. 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

The Education Amendment Act and 
Operation of School Boards 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it appears they have no plan for any 
of their cuts. Yesterday, after having spent weeks defending the 
indefensible slashing of funding for our libraries, and after 
weeks of saying that small communities didn’t deserve libraries, 
and after weeks of threatening librarians for dealing with the 
budget cuts in ways that he didn’t agree with, that Sask Party 
Deputy Premier finally admitted that he was wrong. Still he 
stood up in his place and found the gall to condescend upon the 
trustees that are elected across the province to run their local 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how, after finally being forced to admit that he 
and the Sask Party cabinet colleagues made devastating cuts 
without any concern for the consequences, how does he still 
stand there and defend Bill 63, a bill that will put total control 
of our kids’ education across this province in his hands? Why 
won’t he learn from his own mistakes and scrap this bill and 
work with the people who work with our kids to improve 
education across the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with 
everything that the member opposite talks about. But I do agree 
that we need to put resources in classrooms, not in boardrooms, 
not in courtrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, I would ask her to take a 
specific position. Mr. Speaker, she was co-founder and former 
spokesman of a group called RealRenewal, a Regina-based 
education advocacy group. Now, Mr. Speaker, that group is 
referenced on a web page called “Draft Carla Beck for leader.” 
Just saying. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the things that they’re talking about 
on their information is calling for a “transition to a single, fully 
public education system.” Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give the 
opposition member yet another opportunity to clarify what her 
position is with regard to this, whether she wants to have one 
school division or multiple school divisions, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to give her the chance to put her position forward today. 
The people of Saskatchewan are waiting for that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it amazes me the length that that 
minister will go to avoid taking responsibility. And it honestly 
amazes me. I don’t know how that minister can stand up and 
look down his nose at the growing crowd of people who 
disagree with him. 
 
Despite growing opposition and all evidence, he still defends a 
bill that is the peak, the absolute peak of arrogance, Mr. 
Speaker. It tells the people of the province that the Sask Party 
doesn’t trust them to elect trustees to run their schools. It’s 
father knows best, Mr. Speaker. As that minister is slashing 

funding, breaking contracts with teachers, and failing at all 
other legislation, what makes him think that he should be the 
only person in charge of our children’s schools? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Bill 63 
allows us to do this: it allows us to stop taxpayers from suing 
taxpayers, and allows us to keep that money in the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the “Draft Carla Beck for Sask NDP 
leader” website, and Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s people making 
mischief; I don’t know. But on that web page, when it talks 
about RealRenewal, these are some of the things that that 
member stands for: “The current system is not perfect.” They 
go on to say, and I quote, “. . . there should be a provincial 
education ombudsman to turn to when boards make decisions 
that negatively impact our children and communities, or when 
they act without due process or transparency.” So Mr. Speaker, 
does she support one board? Does she support two boards? 
Does she support an ombudsman? What’s her position, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll hear your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 
of the Opposition used the term that I found unparliamentary. 
He said, instead of the Premier answering the question, a puppet 
of the Premier, which happens to be a minister of the Crown. I 
don’t think that’s appropriate for this Chamber, and I would ask 
the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw and apologize to the 
minister. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I would withdraw and apologize for that 
characterization. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip, the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 334. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Whip has ordered the response to 
question 334. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 68 — The Fuel 
Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
honour to be able to rise in the Assembly this afternoon to be 
able to enter into the debate on these bills as they’re being 
introduced. 
 
The Fuel Tax Amendment Act is amending an Act from 2000. 
That was the previous date of The Fuel Tax Act. It hasn’t really 
been amended very much at all since it came into being, and of 
course that particular bill, The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 repealed The 
Fuel Tax Act, 1987. So it looks like these bills are pretty stable 
as they go and don’t require a lot of amendment. 
 
But in this case, we see a couple of significant changes in The 
Fuel Tax Act, 2000 and in particular some changes to the tax 
exemptions, Mr. Speaker, for various types of fuel. We know in 
many cases that propane had been tax exempt for quite some 
time, as has marked diesel fuel. So a couple of changes being 
made here. And I guess I don’t have a lot of comments to be 
made at this point. This is a fairly technical bill, but we’ll want 
to raise a couple of questions here for the record today. 
 
This is a question I’ve been trying to ask of the various 
ministers as we go through the estimates process and the budget 
examination process because one of the things we heard last 
year from the Minister of Finance was how important it was to 
do a very close examination of everything. Everything needs to 
be on the table and the notion that there would be a 
transformational change in the way this government does 
business. 
 
Now I often wonder when you’ve been in government for eight 
or nine years why you would choose that as your particular time 
to examine things. Typically I think a functioning government 
would be examining their programs on a regular basis and 
looking for those transformational changes as they come up. 
But we had this announcement last June when the budget came 
down that there would be transformational change. There 
wasn’t a lot of details on that at the time, Mr. Speaker, and of 
course there was a lot of promises being made at the time that 
everything would be looked at and everything would be on the 
table. 
 
The trouble is when we look at these types of decisions that are 
coming down now to put more money in the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund], Mr. Speaker, it’s really difficult to find out 
from this government exactly what thinking there was behind 
these changes, or was it simply, as was pointed out in question 
period, this whole approach of ready, shoot, and then aim, Mr. 
Speaker, where we’re looking at line items in the budget 
planning process. Is that where this comes from? And oh, 
libraries, what the heck, let’s just stroke that one off. Or you 
know, let’s just run through a random list of programs and look 

at the ones that we don’t like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s alarming when we see a government that 
refuses to do the hard examination and looks at it more on a 
popularity contest, or not at all, just on a whim of the 
conversation that may have been had in the airport somewhere 
with a random person that they encounter. So I think the rigour 
and the sort of honesty in approaching policy seems to be a 
little lacking in the approach that we see right now. 
 
So when we look at the changes that are being made in The 
Fuel Tax Amendment Act, you have to ask those questions. One 
of the changes that’s being added now is the use of marked 
diesel fuel for heating is now an authorized purpose. So my 
question will be, well how is that part of transformational 
change? How does that apply to your desire to ensure that all of 
your activities and everything you fund is part of the core 
function of government? Because we see that as a justification 
for getting rid of programs like perhaps the community pasture 
program, which has served a very important function in our 
cattle industry for decades, Mr. Speaker. Same thing with the 
Grain Car Corporation, again serving a very important function 
in the transportation of grain in this province, and yet all of a 
sudden it’s not core, with no reasoning, no logic, just sort of a 
feeling or something that they don’t like about it. And then all 
of a sudden it’s gone. 
 
So I want to know and would want to know, why exactly are we 
changing the use of marked diesel fuel for heating? What was 
the policy analysis that was used? What was the rubric? What 
was the checklist? What was the thorough vetting of The Fuel 
Tax Amendment Act? And how is that compared against other 
programs like perhaps podiatry for seniors or funerals for 
people on social assistance? What was the core value? What is 
the core value checklist? What are the core values of this 
government, Mr. Speaker? This is something that’s really hard 
to pin down, and it makes us wonder what’s coming next in 
budgets to come. 
 
So we see this change. The marked diesel fuel is now being 
exempted, and we’re going to have to get some information in 
terms of what kind of financial impact that will have, what kind 
of financial analysis was done at the time. And of course the 
other change that received more attention, more attention in the 
news was the one where a previous exemption of 100 per cent 
has now been reduced to 80 per cent, and that is for marked 
diesel fuel for farmers who are primary producers of renewable 
resources. 
 
And so again we’re going to have the same questions there for 
the minister in terms of what analysis was done. Was there a 
higher percentage that was on the table? Was there a lower 
percentage that was on the table? How did 20 per cent, under 
the policy analysis that was done, come to be the final figure? 
Were there presentations? Were there consultations? What sort 
of policy rubric is being looked at? Is there a framework? Is 
there a checklist? What are the cores values that are being 
applied here, because you know what, Mr. Speaker? I’m quite 
afraid that there’s nothing, that there’s just sort of, again this 
group of people looking at line items and saying, oh geez, 
maybe we could get another 10 million there or four million 
there or a couple of hundred thousand here. 
 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

And when we see what’s happened with the libraries now 
where, I believe it was around $4 million that was going to be 
cut. And then all of a sudden, oh well, I guess we can change 
that, and it’s gone. We saw that with the venture-sponsored 
funds where the minister announced it in the budget and then a 
few days later had a consultation meeting with some people that 
were impacted and then changed it, went to cabinet and 
changed it after the budget was introduced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the list is long of the mismanagement that this government 
seems to bring to bear with the bills that are brought before the 
House and the programs that they’re attempting to dismantle or 
take away, Mr. Speaker. And I mean, we see it even in terms of 
things like the research and development tax rebate. I’ll have 
more comment on that when the next bill is brought forward in 
debate here. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, we do have a lot of questions about 
these types of bills and how the government is actually making 
the decisions that they’re making. It seems to be kind of by the 
seat of the pants, Mr. Speaker, where they’re sort of reacting 
rather than having any sort of long-term plan. 
 
We heard a lot of big talk from the minister last year in the 
budget about how this was going to be done. We’ve heard big 
talk from the Premier about everything’s on the table and 
everything’s going to be reviewed. And yet when we’re 
questioning ministers in committee, turns out that no, that 
wasn’t on the table and that wasn’t on the table either and the 
things that we like the best aren’t on the table, but the things 
that we don’t like are on the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s no way to run a government, and it’s 
certainly no way to represent the people of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s their elected function to do; as government they should be 
representing the people that elected them. But we see over and 
over again that they choose to represent a select few, those who 
have access to them. And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think as far as this bill goes, we’ll have a lot of questions 
for the minister in committee, and we’ll want to be able to ask 
some of the more technical questions there about how these 
decisions were made. But at this point, I think I’m prepared to 
conclude my comments on Bill No. 68, An Act to amend The 
Fuel Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act be committed to 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 69 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 69 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my pleasure to rise to speak today to Bill No. 69, An Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
There’s a number of changes that are being reflected in this bill, 
many of them reflecting indications from the minister in the 
budget. There’s a whole list of things that are being changed 
here in this bill. He certainly described them fairly succinctly in 
his speech on April 24th when he moved the reading. I guess 
that was just yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s quite a bit of information in terms of what is being 
done in this bill. I just want to comment particularly today on 
one of the specific changes to section 56.3 of The Income Tax 
Act, 2000. And what we see here is a changing to a formula. 
These formulas are quite something to look at, Mr. Speaker. 
And if you look at the formula in section 56.3, it is quite 
something to behold. And I won’t put Hansard through the 
effort of trying to replicate that in Hansard because there’s lots 
of mathematical brackets and parentheses, three different types 
of parentheses. 
 
So it’s just for, you know, if people listening or people reading 
this want to look at it, they would have to look at the section as 
it existed until now, and that’s section 56.3, and then look at 
clause 16 of the new Act where it’s changing the formula for 
the tax on credit unions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you look at the explanatory notes that this section is reflecting 
to, it talks about . . . I’m just going to find it here. Section 16 in 
the explanatory notes. Oh, here it is. It says that: 
 

Section 56.3 is being amended to phase out the special 
provision that allows credit unions to apply the small 
business tax rate to taxable income in excess of the 
$500,000 small business threshold. The phase-out will 
occur over four years beginning in 2017. 

 
So what this signals to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that credit 
unions are now under attack by the changes in this one section 
of The Income Tax Act. And I’ll share with you why that is. 
 
[14:45] 
 
This has been something that’s been in place, and the role of 
credit unions in Saskatchewan and in the financial institutions 
of this province is very clear and very unique, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
documented. It’s well known. And the federal government 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

actually recognized that for quite some time, but took that 
away, I believe, in 2014. And at the time, we had the previous 
Finance minister of this province indicate that that wasn’t going 
to happen here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to share with the Assembly today what the 
Finance minister said on April 8th, 2014. And this is what he 
said: 
 

As part of the development of the budget, Mr. Speaker, we 
were able to carefully assess the implications of the federal 
tax change on both the provincial tax system and on 
Saskatchewan credit unions. We were also able to consider 
the importance of Saskatchewan’s credit unions to the 
provincial economy through the dominant role they play in 
financing the growth of Saskatchewan’s small and medium 
sized businesses. 

 
In Saskatchewan there are 55 credit unions operating 297 
branches in 264 communities. Credit unions are the only 
financial institution in 162 communities in Saskatchewan. 
Credit unions were very appreciative of our decision. Keith 
Nixon, CEO of SaskCentral said, “It is clear the 
Saskatchewan government recognizes the contributions 
credit unions have made to the communities of this 
province.” 

 
As a result of this assessment, I was pleased to announce in 
the 2014-15 budget that our government will not follow the 
federal measure and will instead retain, for provincial tax 
purposes, the special income tax reduction for credit 
unions. 

 
So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. There’s the former Finance 
minister indicating that government’s awareness and 
appreciation of the important role that credit unions play, not 
only in small communities. In my hometown, Lafleche, that’s 
the only banking institution left in the town of Lafleche. There 
used to be two or three and now it’s down to one, and it’s the 
credit union, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that is I think a sign that this government is turning its 
back on small- to medium-sized businesses, and it’s turning its 
back on smaller communities here in Saskatchewan that are 
served so importantly by the credit union system. 
 
If you look at the budget document from ’14-15 you’ll see more 
of the same language, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll quote here: 
 

Controlling spending, as opposed to raising taxes, was the 
choice Government made as the best way forward. Not all 
of the choices were easy but they reflect Government’s 
commitments and priorities to maintain steady growth. 
 
Government has also chosen to maintain the current 
provincial tax provisions for credit unions, including the 
special income tax reduction and exemption from paying 
the provincial capital tax, recognizing the restraints credit 
unions face related to raising capital as well as their 
important place in the economy of our province. 

 
So there in the budget of ’14-15 again we see this government’s 
recognition that the way credit unions are able to raise capital is 

very, very different than the chartered banks, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s something I think that’s been borne out through the 
history of the credit union movement here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact if you look at the history of my own hometown’s credit 
union, it was the first rural credit union established in this 
province, in the late 1930s. And there was a special film that 
was produced in 1962 celebrating the 25th anniversary. And 
I’ve seen that film, Mr. Speaker. It’s called Neighbourly 
Dollars and it tells the story of farmers faced with years and 
years of drought who were still surviving, but needed access to 
capital. And there was no bank that would loan them the 
money, so a bunch of people got together and pooled their 
capital together, those that could afford it. And the story tells 
about the first farmer who came forward and said, I will invest 
in your bank. I will invest in your credit union. 
 
They followed the movement of farmers in Quebec and farmers 
in Germany who recognized that the chartered banks’ interests 
were not looking out for the small business, for the small 
farmer, for the small entrepreneur, for the new young people 
entering into the business world, or . . . Well farming is 
business, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what the credit union 
movement has done in this province and it continues to do so. 
 
And three years ago we had a minister of Finance who said yes, 
yes to credit unions; yes, we recognize the importance. Now he 
was from a small town, Mr. Speaker, and maybe that’s why. 
Maybe he was hearing from the people and understood the 
importance of the credit union. But we see a complete rejection 
of that in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. And this section 
number 11, or whatever section’s changing — 56.3, I’m going 
to pull it out again to make sure I get it right. That is the one 
that is changing what’s happening to credit unions here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s changing the face of credit unions. This is 
section 16 of this bill that we’re talking about right now, and its 
impact is going to be significant. 
 
Credit unions have produced some pretty good materials in 
terms of why this is important, how they are the engines of 
growth. Credit unions are the engines of growth here in 
Saskatchewan, and in 2016 they produced a document saying 
engines of growth, Mr. Speaker. And I’m just going to share 
with the House here some of the things that the credit union was 
saying and why this tax exemption is so very important. This is 
by the CEO [chief executive officer], Keith Nixon, and the 
president, Russ Siemens, and this is what they’ve said and I’m 
going to quote: 
 

We invite elected officials to review this brochure which 
describes the way Saskatchewan credit unions are helping 
grow the economy. We are highlighting credit union 
investments in local communities and the range of ways 
credit unions support Saskatchewan’s economic growth. 
This brochure provides a statistical summary of the 
benefits credit unions provide to the economy and to their 
472,000 members across Saskatchewan. 
 
We listened with interest on June 1st as the Saskatchewan 
Finance minister delivered the provincial budget. 
Saskatchewan’s government is embarking on 
transformative change in an effort to continue to support 
economic growth but to also bring the budget back to 



April 25, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

balance. 
 
Saskatchewan’s credit union system is also undergoing 
transformative change. Several factors are driving 
transformative change within the credit union system, 
including the torrid pace of technological change, our 
members’ increasing desire to access financial services 
remotely, new national and international compliance 
measures, and federal legislative changes to the second tier 
of the credit union system. 
 
Credit unions are exploring new technologies to ensure 
their members also have access to the latest conveniences 
and security measures when accessing financial services 
such as mobile banking and remote deposits. Credit unions 
are striving to improve their operating efficiency in order 
to meet new capital and liquidity requirements for financial 
institutions. And nationally credit unions are collaborating 
on revamping in clearing and settling and payment systems 
to respond to changes in federal legislation. 

 
And they go on to say at the end that: 
 

We encourage Saskatchewan MLAs to balance the goals of 
economic growth and fiscal prudence with competitive 
fairness in our taxation system. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the change that you see in front of us today 
is exactly the opposite of that. It has now said there will be no 
more competitive fairness for the credit unions in this province, 
and that is very, very unfortunate. 
 
One of the things that the credit unions have also shared is some 
information in terms of the change that this is being proposed. 
So we know that in this budget, that government has announced 
the phase-out of the small tax business rate for credit unions. 
What is this going to cost, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I had a discussion with the minister in committee about this, 
and we’ll talk about it a little bit more when this bill comes to 
the committee stages, but they’re saying that this is going to 
cost the credit union system over $11 million per year by 2019 
when this kicks in. 
 
So you are taking a huge hit for these credit unions to be able to 
continue to support economic growth in small communities, 
economic growth like in the communities like Carrot River and 
Nipawin. I mean these are the communities that need the 
support of the credit unions to be able to bring forward these 
ideas, the small- and medium-size businesses that the credit 
unions serve, the farming operations that the credit unions 
serve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Credit unions, they say in their article here that “Credit unions 
used that capital [that $11 million] to support lending 
opportunities for small and medium businesses, agriculture 
producers and consumers. [And of course] the capital also 
supports community impact investments with local businesses, 
community projects, and programs.” 
 
And I can’t tell you, before I got elected, Mr. Speaker, how 
many times the credit union came to the aid of community 
organizations when they had projects they wanted to get off the 

ground, either through corporate donations or through special 
funding, lending activities. So this is something I think that’s 
going to affect communities large and small. It’s going to affect 
non-profits. It’s going to affect local businesses and certainly 
agriculture producers, and in the end run, for sure, consumers. 
 
And there’s a little bit of background I want to share with you 
too as well here, Mr. Speaker. “Saskatchewan’s small business 
tax deduction for credit unions was designed to accumulate 
capital in cooperative financial institutions.” That’s what this 
deduction is for. It’s a very deliberate one that makes a lot of 
sense, Mr. Speaker, and allows these co-operative financial 
institutions the access to capital that they needed to accumulate. 
 
Now what do banks do when they need capital? They just issue 
shares and they trade them on public exchanges. It’s that 
simple. Credit unions can’t do that. They don’t issue shares like 
the banks do, and which makes them unable to benefit from the 
federal incentives that banks have like generous capital gains 
exemptions. 
 
So there are plenty of exemptions that the banking institutions 
are able to access. Credit unions can’t access them. And now 
we’re cutting the legs out from the one thing that helped them 
stay competitive. 
 
I think that’s all I’m going to share on that for now, Mr. 
Speaker. I know the credit unions have issued a press release, 
and they’re very concerned about the impact of this change. 
And I think consumers, I think agricultural producers, small 
businesses, medium-sized businesses, small communities, 
NGOs [non-governmental organization], all of these folks are 
going to be severely impacted by this one change, where really 
it’s giving an imbalance to the chartered banks. Chartered banks 
can access, through share issuing, various kinds of capital. And 
so this was only fair. That’s all that this exemption was, Mr. 
Speaker, was creating fairness, and we see a government that’s 
just ripping it away. So that’s another legacy that this 
government will have. 
 
One other thing I do want to touch on today, Mr. Speaker, is 
changes to section 63.3. And basically what I’d like to do here, 
Mr. Speaker, is ask the government a few questions because 
what this change does . . . It’s in reference to research and 
development tax credits. We see a government that had . . . 
There is a tax credit in existence right now, but it’s 
non-refundable. So what has this government done? Well 
they’ve changed it so that it is now a refundable tax credit. 
 
But I’m just really puzzled, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve had 
this discussion before in this House. And we have a Premier 
who clearly indicated that he was not in favour of refundable 
tax credits; he looks at them as grants. And if you’ll recall, Mr. 
Speaker, that was in relation to the refundable film employment 
tax credit, which was a refundable tax credit. And what did this 
government do? They turned it into a non-refundable tax credit, 
which basically ended the film industry here in this province. 
So now all of a sudden we have a government who says, oh I 
guess we really do like refundable tax credits, but only in the 
context of the research and development for corporations. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are many things that I would like to 
speak to in relation to this bill, but I think those are the two 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2017 

most egregious ones, and we’ll certainly want to be able to ask 
questions of the minister in terms of, again, the policy decisions 
that are being made, the core analysis, how this fits into 
transformational change, what sort of policy rubric was used. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to rue the day when this bill goes through because of the 
terrible changes that are being thrust upon the credit union 
system, but also the inconsistencies in policy that we see from 
this government. 
 
So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that will be 
the extent of my comments here in the House. And so I will 
conclude my comments on Bill No. 69, An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member that Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the hard work of our committees this afternoon and 
this evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:59.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2289 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2289, 2290 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2290 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2290 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2291 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2293 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moosomin and District Regional Park Named Park of the Year 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2293 
 Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipient 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2293 
 Care of Older Adults Conference 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2293 
 Optimist International Oratorical Contest 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2294 
 Provincial Skills Competition Engages Youth 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2294 
 Paddling Club Wins Medals at Club Crew Championships 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2294 
 Wholesale Trade Numbers Strong 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2295 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2295 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2295 
 International Trade and Provincial Economy 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2296 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2296 
 Children in Provincial Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2297 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2297 
 Support for Vulnerable Children and Youth in the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2297 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2298 
 Intent of The Interpretation Amendment Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2298 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2298 
 The Education Amendment Act and Operation of School Boards 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2299 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2299 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2299 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2299 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2299 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2300 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 2301 
 Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2301 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 2304 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




