


















































November 27, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 18A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3089 
 November 27, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
recognize three individuals who are seated in your gallery 
today: Elaine McNeil, Sharon Maher, and Jessica Broda. They 
are joined with some other supporters as well. 
 
Elaine McNeil is a long-time international educational 
consultant, post-secondary international nursing instructor, and 
University of Regina international project coordinator. Elaine 
has worked extensively in the area of human rights with women 
in Africa and the Caribbean. It is clear, not only from Elaine’s 
dedication to helping others but by her charge in taking 
initiative, that she is helping to make meaningful changes both 
locally and internationally. 
 
Sharon Maher is a dedicated lifetime member of Grandmothers 
4 Grandmothers Saskatoon or G4G, which is a local group of 
grandmothers who support the African grandmothers raising 
children who have been orphaned as a result of HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome]. Jessica Broda, the executive director for 
Saskatchewan Status of Women, also joins us today. 
 
Elaine, Jessica, and Sharon join us today in recognition of the 
United Nations’ orange campaign, 16 Days of Activism and in 
particular Unite to End Violence Against Women and girls. I’d 
like to thank all of them for being here today and ask all 
members join in in welcoming them to the legislature today. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in with 
the Minister of Justice in welcoming Elaine, Sharon, and Jessica 
to their Legislative Assembly today for the UN [United 
Nations] orange campaign and the Unite to End Violence 
against Women. I’m wearing my orange today as well. So I 
would like to ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This afternoon we see the galleries are quite full today, and that 
is because we have a special group of people who represented 
Saskatchewan this past summer in three different summer 
games, in multi-sport games. 
 
We have the Tony Cote First Nations Summer Games 
participants, the North American Indigenous Games, and the 
Canada Summer Games athletes here this afternoon. Earlier 
today we held a reception to welcome the athletes, coaches, 
organizers, and their parents and families from these 
competitions to celebrate success in Saskatchewan sports we 
had this summer. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to read each of our guest’s names and 
sport into the record, Mr. Speaker. You can give a wave if you 
so choose when you’re introduced real briefly here. I’ll start by 
introducing some of the coaches and athletes from the Cote 
First Nations Summer Games. We have coach and mentor Chief 
John McNab, table tennis coach Derek Mercer, lacrosse coach 
Don Larson, softball and volleyball coach Claudia Goodwill. 
 
Cory Kinequon and Dakota Mistickokat placed fourth overall in 
the softball team; Juleah Bird Duesing, five gold medals in 
athletics; Sirainn McNab, bronze medal, softball; Christian 
McNab, bronze medal, softball; Shawn Longman, bronze 
medal, softball team again; Elias McNab, silver in mixed 
doubles canoeing. 
 
Brinn Cote is part of the soccer team; Sky McIvor, silver in 
archery; Echo Desjarlais, under 18 soccer team. Hunter 
Bellegarde participated in the under 14 soccer team; Myles 
Bellegarde, bronze in the 100-kilogram weight division; Rosetta 
Cyr, gold medallist, under 14 softball; Takoda Morris, gold 
medallist, softball. And Sirainn, Cory, Dakota, and Julian, also 
I’ll mention they were part of the 2017 1A six-man provincial 
football champs out of Raymore. 
 
Next I’d like to introduce some of the coaches and athletes from 
the Saskatchewan delegation to the North American Indigenous 
Games that took place in Toronto this summer: softball coach 
Claudia Goodwill; archery coach Matt Bird; long-time lacrosse 
coach Don Larson; coach Roberta Soo-Oyewaste, lacrosse — 
sorry if I got that wrong. 
 
Christian McNab, bronze medal at both of the games; Rosetta 
Cyr, again softball; Elias McNab, silver and bronze in the 
mixed doubles canoeing; Fearance Francis, silver medal, 
soccer; Juleah Duesing again, three silver and a gold in the 
same sport; Julian Geddes, volleyball team; Lillian Pinay, silver 
medal, wrestling; Myles Bellegarde, gold medal, softball; 
Nathaniel Poorman, gold medal, volleyball team; Shawn 
Longman, volleyball; Sistene Yuzicappi, five medals in five 
categories in athletics; Christian McNab, discus; Sky McIvor, 
archery again; Takoda Morris, gold medal, softball; Tianna 
Longman, volleyball team. 
 
Finally I would like to introduce some of the coaches and 
athletes from the Canada Summer Games: chef de mission 
Mark Bracken; assistant chef Alison Brown; swimming coach 
Laura Desautels; baseball, Greg Brons; swimming, Craig 
Niewstad, the coach there. Alyssa Clairmont, bronze in the 



3090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

diving event; Becky Dean, bronze in the 1500 metre freestyle; 
Cassandra Chometa, soccer team; Emma Spence, bronze medal, 
200 metre breaststroke; Julie Labach, 800 metre gold medallist, 
silver in the 1500; Kendall Keller, gold in softball; Michael 
McGillivray, bronze in the 800 metre swimming; Payne Wylie, 
three bronze medals in athletics; Penny Mulenga, female soccer 
team; and last but not least — almost done here — Portia 
Switzer on the volleyball team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these athletes represented our province this past 
summer very well. They made us all very proud. I ask all 
members to welcome them and say thanks to their efforts, as 
well as their families. Thank you for coming here this afternoon 
and letting us share it with you. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I just want to join with the minister in 
welcoming these athletes, these coaches, their supporters, the 
organizers to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Certainly the Canada Summer Games, the North American 
Indigenous Games, and the recently renamed Tony Cote First 
Nations Games, Mr. Speaker, it’s a wonderful time for our 
province in terms of young people being able to get out there, to 
push their boundaries, to strive to succeed. And as the minister 
has well pointed out in terms of the roll call for the medals, 
they’ve done just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I just want to say, on behalf of the official opposition, that 
we’re very proud of you all. We want to see you continue that 
success for all of us here in Saskatchewan. And again I just join 
with the minister and ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these very important people to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of this 
honourable Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce guests 
today. Please welcome to their legislature, seated in the west 
gallery is Ms. Kaley Pugh, executive director of Animal 
Protection Services Saskatchewan. Animal Protection Services 
of Saskatchewan enforces The Animal Protection Act. Their 
dedicated staff applies their knowledge and expertise to the 
resolution of concerns about animal care across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve previously introduced Mr. Al Scholz who is 
here again today, but today he’s accompanied by Mr. Blair 
McClinton who is president of the agrologists’ provincial 
council. The Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists regulates 
the profession of agrology in Saskatchewan by ensuring its safe, 
competent, and ethical practice. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 
all members join me in welcoming these guests to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a 
tradition of our great province and of course of our great nation 
of Aboriginal leaders, it’s very important that we’re honoured 

and that we pay tribute to a chief that’s in the room. I think it’s 
really important that that tradition continues. And before I go on 
to introduce or to say hello to some of the athletes, I think it’s 
appropriate that I recognize a First Nations leader in Chief John 
McNab of the George Gordon First Nation who is here today, 
and to tell the chief it’s an honour to have you amongst us. And 
he’s here of course supporting the athletes as well. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And in my own language, I’m just so proud of all the athletes of 
Saskatchewan, especially those in the First Nations and 
indigenous games, as well as the Saskatchewan Games. You 
make us all very proud. 
 
And you should know that I participated in the North American 
Indigenous Games in volleyball. And we had such a wonderful 
time, and we captured gold that one year. So I have a little bit of 
history in the games. But I also profess to be a hockey player. A 
lot of people don’t know I played 17 games with Boston in the 
late ’80s — Boston Pizza, out of P.A. [Prince Albert]. 
 
But to point out that the athletes that are here, to tell you, all of 
you, you’re the best and we’re all very proud of you. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
indeed an honour to introduce to you and through you to 
everyone in the Assembly a class of fabulous students sitting in 
the west gallery from the Humboldt Collegiate Institute. There’s 
39 grade 12 students, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, 
who comes each and every year with his students, Mr. David 
Millette. Along with Mr. Millette is Mr. David Rowe and Mr. 
Rettger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just make note that Mr. Millette is also the 
volleyball coach, and this past weekend the senior boys won the 
gold medal at the 4A boys’ provincial volleyball tournament. 
So congratulations to any of those players that are with this 
group. Welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is indeed an honour to have so many special guests with 
us here today watching the work that we do and being involved 
in this process. 
 
I’d like to join with the Minister of Agriculture in also 
welcoming three special guests, as he noted before: Ms. Pugh, 
as well as Mr. Al Scholz, and Mr. Blair McClinton. It is 
gratifying when we have stakeholders who are able to be with 
us and to watch the proceedings here in this Assembly. So I 
would ask all members to join me in welcoming these special 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce, 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

sitting in your gallery, Mr. Zeeshan Goraya and Safeer Ahmed. 
Zeeshan Goraya is a missionary in charge of Ahmadiyya 
Muslim Jama’at, Regina chapter. 
 
And Safeer Ahmed is a very good worker of the community 
these days. He is working on Canada flag 150 and trying to set 
a world record to collect 150,000 signatures from coast to coast. 
And these days the part of that flag, one panel, is in Regina and 
he is collecting signatures on that one. I ask all the members to 
join me welcoming them in their own Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Regina Pasqua in welcoming these leaders 
from the Regina Ahmadiyya community. 
 
Had the opportunity with a few of my colleagues to join you 
and your larger community over the summer in Saskatoon at 
your conference. It was a wonderful opportunity to get to know 
more about your community and have the opportunity to learn a 
little bit more as well. I’m happy to see you here, as always. 
Looking forward to maybe checking out that flag that you are 
collecting signatures on after question period. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of St. Walburg, 
Paradise Hill, Frenchman Butte, and Neilburg. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
on behalf of the town of Balgonie in my petition today because 
someone has to. Mr. Speaker, this is in reference to the 
permanent closure of Main Street access to Highway No. 1 in 
the town of Balgonie. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 

west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and the 
Main Street. 
 
They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street of the Balgonie 
intersection, but would not allow public access to cross 
east- and westbound lanes. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we do this day in, day out, we have 
presented page after page of this petition. And on this particular 
page, Mr. Speaker, they are from the town of Balgonie. And I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed this petition wish to bring 
to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of domestic violence amongst provinces in Canada. 
Employers should be obligated to reasonably accommodate 
survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. Employees 
who are survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a 
leave of absence from their employment without penalty, and 
Saskatchewan must do much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what we’ve asked for in our 
private member’s bill, Bill No. 605, which I’m very hopeful 
that the Minister of Justice and his colleagues will pass into law 
very shortly. Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this 
petition come from Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising to present a petition to 
end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for Saskatchewan families 
and businesses. The people who have signed this want to bring 
to our attention the following: the Sask Party has hiked taxes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses by $1 billion per year, 
and at the same time they handed over $100 million in tax 
breaks to corporations and the wealthy and well-connected. 
 
Because of the Sask Party’s PST [provincial sales tax] increase, 
Saskatchewan has become the only province in the country 
where people are charged PST on life and health insurance 
premiums. And for producers, the Sask Party’s new tax on crop 
insurance is a devastating hit. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 



3092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed the petition today 
come from the communities of Yellow Grass and Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. The undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to our attention the following: that 
the Sask Party has cut at least $674 in government funding for 
every student across Saskatchewan; and then the Sask Party 
hiked education taxes by 67 million but cut total government 
funding for education by $121 million; and even though the 
Sask Party’s making us all pay more, our kids are actually 
getting less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals that signed this petition want to 
draw these following points to your attention: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; that the Saskatchewan Party 
government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this critical 
infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
The individuals that signed this petition come from the 
community of Prince Albert. I do so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to restore funding to 
post-secondary institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your 
attention that the Sask Party is making students and their 
families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement; that 
Saskatchewan students already pay the second-highest tuition 
fees in Canada; that this budget cuts 36.8 million from 
post-secondary education and 6.4 million from technical 
institutions; that funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid 
Fund and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that 
the Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Regina and 
Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always good to be recognized in this Assembly. I rise to present 
a petition to reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the closure of the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre left 15 people out of work 
and had a financial impact on their families, obviously, and the 
local economy. They point out that the closure was hurtful to 
elders within the community who benefited from the help of 
inmates doing the job, and indeed the inmates benefited from 
doing that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that the closure of Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre hurt the families of the inmates while learning new 
skills, while working with skilled employees to obtain 
employment upon release. Mr. Speaker, they point out that the 
distances involved make visitation from families — that 
connection that’s so critical to successful rehabilitation, Mr. 
Speaker — is made all the more challenging with this closure, 
Mr. Speaker. And they point out that the training opportunities 
for the inmates again to get treatment, to get training, which is 
so critical to fighting against reoffending, Mr. Speaker — all of 
those opportunities were made all the fewer, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s a shame. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the good 
community of Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

Northcote. 
 

Affordable Lunch Program at Prince Albert Campus 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The students at 
First Nations University, Prince Albert Campus now have the 
opportunity to buy an affordable hot lunch. This is because of a 
subsidized program, which is the first of its kind in 
Saskatchewan. The program kicked off on Wednesday, October 
4th, with staff from the Canadian Mental Health Association 
serving fresh bannock and hot stew for only $2.50 per student. 
Mr. Speaker, the program is a partnership between the Canadian 
Mental Health Association, the University of Regina Students’ 
Union, and the local students’ union from First Nations 
University. 
 
The local students’ union saw a real need for hot meals for their 
fellow students. Many of the students are parents who are 
worried about feeding their children and often put themselves 
second. With this program, students have access to a healthy 
meal at noon and can focus on their studies and their families. 
Other universities in Saskatchewan only offer for-profit lunches 
to their students, making this a very unique Prince Albert 
solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in applauding 
the efforts of and congratulating the Canadian Mental Health 
Association, the University of Regina Students’ Union, and the 
First Nations University Prince Albert Campus’s student union 
for developing a one-of-a-kind subsidized lunch program for 
the students of the Prince Albert campus. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Unite Campaign Against Gender-Based Violence 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 25th 
is the beginning of the Unite campaign: 16 Days of Activism 
against Gender-Based Violence. This campaign was launched 
in 2008 by the then United Nations Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon. Its goal is to prevent and eliminate violence against 
women and girls around the world by building upon existing 
international legal and policy frameworks while raising 
awareness on the issue through all UN offices and agencies 
worldwide. 
 
This year’s theme is Leave No One Behind. This campaign has 
received significant support from organizations all across the 
globe. One such group is the Grandmothers Advocacy Network 
who are here today. GRAN [Grandmothers Advocacy Network] 
is a cross-Canada network of volunteers made up of a strong 
core of older women. Unite calls on all of us to join forces and 
recognize the significant global issue of violence against 
women and girls. We all feel the impact of gender violence and 
we must all be part of the solution. Only through attention and 
action can we make a difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank those with GRAN who advocated 
for this event. And I ask that all members of this Assembly join 
me in pledging our support for Unite and the 16 Days of 
Activism against Gender-Based Violence campaign. Thank 
you. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Hosts Canadian Ultimate Championship 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 
attend the 2017 final championship game on Sunday, August 
27th where Nova Scotia defeated Ontario to win the Canadian 
Ultimate Championship mixed division final in Saskatoon at 
Gordie Howe Bowl. This is the first time that Canada’s national 
ultimate flying disc league championships have been held in 
Saskatoon, and the organizers did themselves proud. 
 
For the first time, Saskatchewan won a gold at the nationals as 
the Saskatoon Penguin Village, the team of mixed players aged 
33 and up, won its Canadian Ultimate Championship master 
division at home. All told, 26 teams took part with up to 500 
people cheering from the sidelines.  
 
“It’s growing in popularity in terms of participation,” said 
Aaron Chubb, the event director for the Saskatoon-hosted 
championships. “Fans are a bit slower to come around. That’s 
one of the reasons we bid to have the Canadian Ultimate 
Championships — to raise awareness about this incredible 
sport.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sport shares elements of football and 
basketball with players, who cannot run with the disc, 
attempting to pass it across the scoring line into the opposing 
team’s end zone. But, Mr. Speaker, the most important aspect is 
that the play is not run by referees but by the players and their 
respect for each other. The tournament drew more than 600 
athletes from across Canada to Saskatoon, and the winner of the 
tournament will represent Canada at the World Ultimate Club 
Championships next year. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Saskatoon 
organizers for such a great event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Minister of Agriculture Rides Steer for Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
attendees at Agribition were given a special treat this weekend, 
and members of this House were given a reason to worry about 
an emergency cabinet shuffle. On Saturday the Minister of 
Agriculture participated in a steer-riding competition at 
Agribition against their CEO [chief executive officer], Chris 
Lane. The event was held to raise funds for STARS [Shock 
Trauma Air Rescue Society] ambulance, although many 
members thought this could actually cost STARS more money 
by having to come save the minister. 
 
I was able to attend, and both myself and my grandchildren 
were thoroughly entertained. It was a successful event. Not only 
did both riders survive, but over $2,500 have been raised by the 
minister’s office. This number does not include the amount 
raised by Agribition and donations continue to pour in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all the amazing attractions at Agribition, 
this was still one of the most popular moments. A video I 
posted on Twitter of the minister has been viewed over 2,000 



3094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

times. Mr. Speaker, the minister may now don a politician’s suit 
and tie rather than a cowboy’s hat and spurs, but after Saturday 
there can be no doubt he is still a cowboy at heart. 
 
[14:00] 
 
On behalf of all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to thank 
all those who donated to STARS and congratulate the minister 
on not breaking a leg. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Knights of Columbus Fundraiser for Children’s Hospital 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 21st, the 
Mount Carmel Knights of Columbus held a very successful 
fundraiser. The council raised $23,539 towards the Knights of 
Columbus Children’s Hospital Fund. The event raised funds 
through a dinner, cash, and silent auction. The event was sold 
out and had guests attend from the communities of Biggar, 
Wilkie, Unity, Saskatoon, Macklin, Landis, and Handel.  
 
Guest speakers of the evening were from Saskatoon Knights of 
Columbus: Wayne Koshman and Shawn Sheer, speaking about 
the Knights of Columbus Children’s Hospital Fund. Mr. 
Speaker, the Knights of Columbus council would like to thank 
the sponsors and the community for coming together and 
making this night such a success for such an important cause. 
 
The Knights of Columbus councils are known for their 
charitable acts at local, national, and international levels as they 
work to raise funds and awareness to important causes that 
deeply impact their families and communities. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to especially thank Clarence and Nicole Perlinger for 
doing a wonderful job with the dinner and organization of the 
evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in thanking 
the Mount Carmel Knights of Columbus council on their 
successful supper and silent auction, as well as their generous 
donations to the Knights of Columbus Children’s Hospital 
Fund. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Construction Experience Gained Through  
Dual-Certificate Program  

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
rise and share some of the good work that Great Plains College 
is doing in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. Last week Great 
Plains College announced a brand new, innovative, 
dual-certificate program at its Rosetown campus. The first of its 
kind in Saskatchewan, the carpentry and production line 
welding certificate program will enable students to develop a 
variety of skills needed for a successful career in the 
construction industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new and exciting program was made possible 
thanks to Robinson Residential Design Inc. who have partnered 
with the college. This will not only foster the success of the 

program but also connect students to industry leaders. The 
partnership will allow students to gain hands-on construction 
experience by building an energy-efficient tiny home. At the 
end of their project, students will have nearly 600 hours of 
trades time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how our 
post-secondary sector is responding to the needs of our labour 
market. I’d like to thank Robinson Residential Design for their 
work in providing this opportunity to students in the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency, and of course I’d like to 
commend and thank Great Plains College for developing this 
innovative program. Mr. Speaker, I ask all member to join me 
in congratulating Great Plains College on the launch of its new 
program and for bringing practical learning opportunities to 
Saskatchewan students. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Railway Provides Employment Opportunities 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am thrilled to 
announce that CN rail is looking to hire nearly 100 positions in 
Saskatchewan. CN rail intends to hire 40 new positions in my 
constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, with another 30 in 
Saskatoon, 14 in Humboldt, six in North Battleford, and one in 
Canora. The company is in the process of hiring across Canada 
with a specific focus in the West. By the end of the year, CN is 
projecting to hire 3,500 new employees and expects to hire 
another 2,000 more next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Patrick Waldron, the spokesperson for CN rail 
said, and I quote, “Due to the strong and recovering economy 
across Canada, new business is coming CN’s way, and some of 
these positions are attributable to very strong economic 
conditions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, CN rail is mainly looking for conductors. So that 
means that Melville will have 40 new full-time, permanent, and 
well-paying jobs. This is a great opportunity for the people of 
Melville and across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CN rail transports approximately $250 billion 
worth of goods annually for a wide range of business sectors 
ranging from resource products to manufactured products to 
consumer goods. These goods are very important to 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in celebrating 
CN rail’s announcement to hire nearly 100 new positions in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal-Provincial Relations and Power Generation 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
2005 the current Premier said that the Sask Party supported our 
government, the NDP [New Democratic Party] government’s 
lawsuit with Ottawa over equalization to get more fairness in a 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3095 

Saskatchewan energy accord. But once they got elected, they 
dropped it. Now, Mr. Speaker, yet another former minister has 
come out from under cabinet confidentiality and is telling us 
what he really thinks. The member for Saskatoon Northwest 
spent quite some time as the Justice minister, but he’s only now 
saying he wants to open up the lawsuit again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the Premier dropped the lawsuit and said, 
“I absolutely believe that over the course of time we’re going to 
succeed in this relationship where the previous government 
failed.” Mr. Speaker, he did not. Now his former Justice 
minister is threatening to take the Liberals to court. Does the 
Premier admit that he failed to get better results from the federal 
Conservative government? Does he support his former Justice 
minister’s renewed call? And why did he drop the lawsuit in the 
first place? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for her question. And 
once again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll disagree with the premise of the 
question. The preamble is full of information that needs to be 
clarified here on the floor of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that upon being elected to 
government, it was pretty clear from advice we were getting 
that the lawsuit prepared by the members opposite when they 
were in government was not going to be successful. And so we 
had to make a decision to try to negotiate with the federal 
government on a number of issues and achieve something 
meaningful for Saskatchewan people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did that get you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well happily the Deputy Leader of the NDP 
has asked, where did that get us? How about the south bridge 
project in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, how about 
record, at the time, record investment in housing for the 
province from the federal government? How about a quarter 
billion dollars for the carbon capture facility in southeast 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? If you add up all of those projects 
. . . and the bypass. Well the list just keeps going on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did we get everything we wanted from the 
previous federal government, the Harper government? The 
answer’s no, Mr. Speaker. But we were able to make progress 
on behalf of Saskatchewan people. We were able to attract 
federal dollars back to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and now, and now, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
members opposite are a bit conflicted on the most important 
federal-provincial issue that exists, and that’s a federally 
imposed carbon tax. The would-be leader of the NDP from 
Meewasin likes a federally imposed carbon tax. This side of the 
House says that’s not right for the province of Saskatchewan. 
I’m looking to hear from the new Leader of the Opposition as to 
what she thinks about that carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — No issues about equalization, apparently. Mr. 
Speaker, the lawsuit is just one example of the Sask Party’s big 
talk not matching the facts. Let’s look at how they’re 

mismanaging power generation here in our own province. They 
promised to get to 50 per cent renewables by 2030, but they 
have no realistic plan to get there. Their only answer seems to 
be to blindly brag about CCS [carbon capture and storage], 
which performed at 85 per cent capacity in October, which is 
actually a good month for CCS. On average over the last year, it 
ran at 43 per cent. Mr. Speaker, they spent $1.5 billion and it 
works less than half the time. Worse that that, it was just the 
third time in the last 13 months that the facility worked for the 
whole month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in just over a year, because of policies brought in 
by the Stephen Harper Conservatives, whenever the carbon 
capture goes down, power generation will also have to be shut 
down. In the face of the facts and SaskPower’s own concerns, 
how can the Premier even consider expanding CCS, and how 
does he justify all of the rate hikes they’ve been forcing on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first point is, her 
question on equalization was answered. The advice was we 
couldn’t win the lawsuit that the NDP started, so we set out to 
get investment back to this province from the federal 
government. Witness the bypass. Witness the Circle bridge 
project in Saskatoon, or the carbon capture facility. That would 
be approximating, I think, 6 or $700 million right there that they 
never managed to get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You see, when they were in office, they did a lot of talking. 
They did some threatening. They set up a website. I think they 
were going to raise a flag for fairness. I think that was another 
campaign they launched. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we got to work on those 
files and we secured those dollars back. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there was some other non-financial issues that we dealt with 
with the federal government, including the potash takeover. 
When this province here, the people of Saskatchewan needed 
the then federal government to listen to our viewpoint, Mr. 
Speaker, that happened because this federal government made 
the case against that takeover. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess we’ll welcome more questions on the 
federal-provincial file. But with respect to Boundary dam 3, I 
want members to be encouraged — 1.75 million tonnes of CO2 
captured, Mr. Speaker. The kind of technology to fight climate 
change that’s heralded by the United Nations, Mr. Speaker. 
There was only one project in the preparatory work to the Paris 
conference, only one Canadian project that was listed by the 
United Nations, and that was Boundary dam 3. 
 
Later this week, together with governors from a number of US 
[United States] states at the western governors’ meeting, I’m 
happy to report I’ll be signing a brand new MOU 
[memorandum of understanding], a co-operation agreement 
with those states, because they like what they’ve seen from 
Boundary dam 3 and they want to work together on CCS. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposite House Leader. 
 
 



3096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on October 24th the Premier 
went live and in colour on Facebook and said they had heard 
the Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, he said they were going 
to repeal Bill 40. But then, two days later, he said they would 
repeal every part except the wind-down section, and he said 
they would keep that section only long enough to finish the 
scrapping and selling off of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister for SaskEnergy tell us what he 
thought of the Premier’s commitment to repeal Bill 40, even 
though they’re keeping the part that lets them scrap and sell off 
STC? And since he’s still overseeing the sell-off of STC, thanks 
to that legislation, what assurances can he give Saskatchewan 
people that they will not use it and the new legislation that they 
are proposing to sell off SaskEnergy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we put Bill 40 in 
place to provide a definition that wasn’t there. The people 
across the way said oh, whoa, there’s some hidden agenda. 
There’s something sneaky going on. There’s something not 
right. So we said, right, fine, we’re not going to go ahead and 
do anything without coming back to the people. So we repealed 
it. We took it out of the legislation. The portion about the 
definition is gone, so that doesn’t exist anymore. 
 
We’re in the middle of the windup of STC when this is going 
on. Why cloud the waters on that? If they want to do something 
on it afterwards, we’re glad to have the discussion with them at 
some point down the road. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Cloud the waters, Mr. Speaker. There’s more 
flip-flops over there than at any number of beaches this winter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But last spring the then Justice minister said Bill 40 had nothing 
to do with the scrapping and selling-off of STC. Then the 
Premier said they need it for the sell-off. Then the Premier said 
he was scrapping Bill 40. Then a day after that the Minister 
Responsible for STC said again they did not need Bill 40 to 
scrap STC. Then the very next day and again last week the 
Premier said again that they need to keep that part of Bill 40 to 
finish selling off STC assets. Mr. Speaker, both sides of this 
story cannot be correct. 
 
And now the Sask Party is making sure that SaskEnergy’s 
exclusivity is no longer to be protected by law. If their bill 
passes, it could be signed away with the stroke of a pen behind 
closed doors. Mr. Speaker, we can’t trust them with these things 
in the light of day, let alone behind closed doors. So after 
scrapping STC and all the secret meetings to sell off SaskTel 
and SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], is SaskEnergy 
next on the Sask Party’s chopping block? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Justice and Attorney General. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, not very many days ago 
we had a Speech from the Throne, and I want to read part of 
that because the members opposite obviously weren’t paying 
attention that day: 
 

Consequently, my government will repeal the provisions of 
Bill 40 that allow for the sale of a partial equity position of 
a Crown corporation. 

 
And then it . . . Before that it says: 
 

Over the last few months, my government has heard from 
many Saskatchewan people concerned about this 
legislation and the potential sale of even a small stake in a 
Crown corporation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we want to give the Saskatchewan people 
comfort, that that’s something that they don’t need to worry 
about, notwithstanding the fact that former Premier Romanow 
said in April of 2000: 
 

We believe SaskTel must expand its business and look at 
partnering where it makes sense for the provision of 
improved services. 

 
And that same premier said: 
 

And in the arrangement of the partnership, some swapping 
or exchanging of shares was part . . . [and] parcel of the 
payment process. I’d look at . . . [them]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not there. We want to give the people of 
Saskatchewan some comfort that we’re going to protect their 
Crowns. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Government Position on Reproductive Health 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will sleep better knowing that. 
 
Last week in this House, the Premier said that a woman’s right 
to choose was not an issue for the Sask Party. He said that the 
caucus hadn’t even discussed it. But then in the rotunda and in 
the media we heard not only had the caucus discussed it, they’d 
even sought legal counsel about how to restrict a woman’s 
access to reproductive health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Rural and Remote Health has 
been uncharacteristically silent on this issue lately. Can he 
confirm that this is a non-issue for his cabinet? And will he 
commit to working with the Health minister to ensure improved 
access to these health services in the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this has nothing to do with 
access, nothing to do with access to health care. Mr. Speaker, 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3097 

our government remains absolutely committed to live up to the 
provisions of the Canada Heath Act, the provisions that have 
been laid out in the Supreme Court of Canada. There is no 
change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any of our caucus members can bring forward 
anything at any point in time. We welcome those kind of 
discussions. If we obtain a legal opinion with regard to those, 
that’s a healthy discussion to type of have. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re not changing the ability of our caucus members to bring 
forward ideas. But I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker: we will look 
after the reproductive rights of women in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the public affairs officer for 
Action Canada for Sexual Health and Rights said that provinces 
don’t really have a choice in the matter, and I quote: 
 

The Charter of Rights and Freedoms is clear, so is the 
Canada Health Act, which includes abortion as a medical 
service and so is international law around 
non-discrimination and reproductive rights. 

 
Mr. Speaker, even so, that government is failing women by not 
providing sufficient and equitable access to reproductive health 
services across the province. And the Saskatoon Sexual Health 
centre says the closure of the STC is making the situation even 
worse for women in rural and remote areas. 
 
So again, to the Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote 
Health: will he respect the law of the land? Will he take 
women’s health seriously, and will he work to ensure that these 
health services are not just limited to Saskatoon and Regina? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have respect for the 
laws of the Government of Canada. We have respect for the 
decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada. We will ensure that 
those laws are implemented and, Mr. Speaker, nothing will 
change. That is the current status and, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
assure the people of our province, we will continue to support 
and respect the laws of the province, whether they’re federal, 
provincial, or ones that are made by the courts. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project  
and Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last week I asked the minister for 
any information they had regarding the lawsuits initiated by 
landowners whose land was expropriated for the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] and the Regina bypass projects. I got no 
answers. So today I’m going to try it again. We know that there 
have been over a dozen lawsuits launched against the Sask 
Party government over their land expropriation practices for the 
Regina bypass and the Global Transportation Hub, and we 
know that some of those lawsuits have been settled by the 

government for an undisclosed amount. As of September, the 
total value of those settlements was $11 million for the GTH 
alone. Can the minister tell us how much has been added to that 
total since September? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
raise issues of expropriation and land assembly by the 
government. Mr. Speaker, over the . . . [inaudible] . . . number 
of decades the province has assembled land for a variety of 
different uses, whether it be the Cornwall Centre, whether it be 
road widening on Highway 11, whether it be a variety of 
different things. Sometimes they’re used for public purposes, 
sometimes for private purposes, but typically they’re used for 
road widening, that type of thing. And, Mr. Speaker, we try 
wherever possible, as did the ministers opposite when they were 
in government, you try and negotiate willing buyer, willing 
seller. And, Mr. Speaker, nothing has changed on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they assembled land for the Cornwall Centre in 
Regina. It proved to be a good addition for downtown Regina. 
And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes those things need to be settled in 
the courts; sometimes they’re settled voluntarily and, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to continue with that type of practice. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s Global 
Transportation Hub is really a total transparency flub. We’re 
talking about taxpayers’ dollars, over $10 million in tax 
settlements — settlements alone. And these are simple 
questions that the minister should be able to answer. 
 
We know that there are 15 lawsuits. We’re talking about 
lawsuits launched against this government due to the way they 
expropriated lands for the GTH and the Regina bypass. Of those 
lawsuits, six have already been settled by the government, 
including one from the landowner whose land the government 
expropriated and sold . . . well we don’t know if it was sold. It 
could’ve been given to Loblaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the GTH minister won’t give any information 
on how much the government settled each lawsuit for, will the 
Minister of Highways at least tell us the total amount of all the 
settled lawsuits for the bypass? That’s your ministry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the expropriation 
proceedings that have been used in our province are the same 
ones that were used when the NDP were in government. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve always been on record as favouring willing 
buyer, willing seller. They don’t always exist. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, any one of the titles that they want to look at, 
any one of those titles will, if they look at the top corner of the 
title, have the value of the land that was paid for that particular 
piece of land. Mr. Speaker, they’re welcome to have a look at 
that. We’ve indicated that the number of titles they wanted to 



3098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

look at for the Regina bypass would cost them about $1,900 if 
they wanted to examine every title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is litigation with some of those parties, 
often those parties require that there’s confidentiality on some 
of those things. And, Mr. Speaker, that process is no different 
now than what it was when the opposition was in government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — That minister knows that we’re not asking for 
those individual amounts. All we’re asking for is the global 
number of all lawsuits that were settled. You have not even 
begun to answer that question. Mr. Speaker, this minister needs 
to provide the people of Saskatchewan answers. 
 
The government claims they’re so confident in their 
expropriation abilities and they want us to believe there’s 
nothing to see here. They say this was normal and it was all 
done by the book. But if they’re so confident, why did they 
settle so many of those lawsuits, Mr. Speaker? We’re not asking 
for details on individual lawsuits. We simply want to know the 
total cost to taxpayers of all the lawsuits that the government 
has settled to date. 
 
Now either the minister will make good on his government’s 
promise . . . one of these ministers will make good on that 
promise to be open and transparent. Tell us how much you 
spent settling lawsuits, and why you settled instead of standing 
by your process and your word. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last week the 
questions were all about how much will it cost them to get them 
information from land titles. How much will it cost them to 
have to go back to ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]? And they wanted us to interfere with the 
independent processes of ISC to save them the $1,900, Mr. 
Speaker, even though ISC had voluntarily supplied this. 
 
They didn’t ask us, but they’d supplied them with a 
spreadsheet, an Excel spreadsheet, that listed the title numbers, 
the amount paid for each one, whether they were done 
voluntarily, whether they were done by expropriation, with all 
of the dollar values on it. 
 
So this week they decide oh, well maybe there was some 
lawsuits involved. So they want us to go back and identify 
which lawsuits were done where and when. Mr. Speaker, we try 
and settle those things. We want those things kept out of court. 
We want people to feel comfortable with the things that have to 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they’ve got a specific question about a specific 
parcel or a specific transaction, let them file an FOI [freedom of 
information] request or a written question and we’ll see what 
we can do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Crime Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, almost every night, crime leads 
the news in this province but this government does little more 
than one-off announcements. And they’ve completely ignored 
the importance of taking a preventative approach to crime, 
investing in social programs and building safer communities. 
 
The minister doesn’t have to take my word for it. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatoon’s outgoing police chief agrees: 
 

We have to put money into housing. We have to put 
money into jobs. We have to put money into education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, instead of investment, the Sask Party has cut 
social services, cut community-based organizations, and cut 
funding for municipalities. Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party 
ignored the police and created a perfect storm for the situation 
to get worse, not better? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been in government 
right now for just in excess of 10 years. During that period of 
time, we have invested in safer communities through a variety 
of different initiatives to reduce break-ins, vehicle theft, and a 
number of different crimes that were taking place. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, during the last few months, things have 
gotten bad again with regard to use of opioids and fentanyl and 
a number of other hard drugs, and we have a problem with 
gangs. We’re working with the police to try and address that 
because, Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of those things in the 
last while, the homicide rate has gone up, and we’re concerned 
that that’s happened in spite of the best efforts of some of the 
police officers that we have in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to correct something that I’d said last week. 
I said that we had added 750 RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] officers in rural areas. The fact is we have 750 police 
officers in rural areas. We also have 124 RCMP officers in the 
First Nations policing program. We’ve increased funding for 
policing by . . . RCMP funding up 68 per cent since 2007. 
 
Municipal police grants are up 100 per cent since ’07. In ’07 the 
grants were $6.78 million; in 2017, over $14 million. We’ve 
added 120 municipal police officers, and we’ve got now 258 
officers on the protection and response team that are focused on 
rural crime. Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the concerns that our 
citizens have, and we want to be able to address them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, recently Regina police chief 
Evan Bray said: 
 

Let’s work with addictions, let’s work with social services 
. . . education, health. That improves the health and safety 
of our community if we can provide a holistic, social 
justice view of things, rather than always catching the bad 
guy, locking them up. 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

Mr. Speaker, police chiefs understand that preventative action 
through positive programming is how we best fight crime. And 
municipal leaders are doing all they can with fewer resources. 
But while the Premier has his foot out the door and the Sask 
Party caucus is pounding their chest instead of helping to solve 
the problem, Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party start taking 
these concerns seriously and work with municipalities rather 
than cutting funding, making one-off announcements, and 
passing off their responsibility? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the concerns 
that are being raised by the member opposite. She’s from Prince 
Albert. She will know that former police chief Dale McFee 
developed and implemented the hub and COR [centre of 
responsibility] model in Prince Albert. It had significant 
benefits in reducing usage of social services, usage of 
emergency services. We liked the things that Dale McFee was 
doing in Prince Albert, so in fact we hired him to become 
deputy minister of Corrections and Policing. 
 
So now he’s implementing that strategy across the province 
and, Mr. Speaker, it’s showing some effects as we work 
forward, we work to try and break down the silos between the 
different ministries so that people could share information. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the point the member makes about trying to use 
prevention is something we absolutely agree with. If we can 
save a young person while they’re still a student before they get 
in trouble with the law, we’ve done the right thing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Staff Numbers in the Education System 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, day after day the minister’s tired old 
spin and rhetoric doesn’t match up with the facts. Again, there 
are thousands more students in our classrooms and 188 fewer 
teachers and support staff. She called this a slight decline. Last 
week looking forward, I asked the minister if she would commit 
to not reducing the number of teachers and funding even further 
for our kids’ classrooms next year and she refused. So did the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after everything, how can the minister still suggest 
that more cuts to education are coming? As the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest said, “School buildings can’t teach our 
kids.” So again, will the minister commit to not reducing the 
number of teachers and funding again in next year’s education 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
I’ve said is that the overall picture is pretty stable. Across the 
province, we have over 9,000 regular classroom-based, 
full-time employees which of course includes teachers. And this 
year, there are 95 fewer through attrition and retirement. 
 
Increases and decreases were in large part related to enrolments, 

Mr. Speaker. There were increases in teacher numbers and 
enrolments at Saskatoon Public, St. Paul’s Catholic, Prairie 
Valley, among others. And some decreases at North East 
School Division. There are fewer teachers, but the division also 
has 90 fewer students. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, divisions have risen to the 
challenge. Last week, I read a headline and story about South 
East Cornerstone Division. The headline read, “School division 
shortfall not as severe as expected.” This is good news, Mr. 
Speaker. The chief financial officer said, while they’d originally 
budgeted a $5.6 million deficit, they came in at 1.9. And they’d 
reduced where possible, looked for efficiencies, reduced 
unnecessary travel as directed by the government. She also said, 
“All the changes we’ve made have not resulted in any changes 
at the classroom level.” We thank them for that, Mr. Speaker, 
and the efforts of all school divisions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 110, 
the animal protection amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 110 be now introduced and read the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 111, The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 111 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 



3100 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to The Election Act, I hereby table 
the report on the 28th general election submitted by the Chief 
Electoral Officer. I’d also like to table the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library annual report ending March 31st, 2017. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The 
Agrologists Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was a pioneer in 1946 when we 
became only the second jurisdiction in Canada after Quebec to 
regulate the profession of agrology. Mr. Speaker, we want to be 
in the forefront again as we modernize and update the Act. The 
last significant amendments to the Act occurred in 1994, and 
much has changed in agriculture and in the profession of 
agrology since. 
 
As such, the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists, the SIA — 
which was created by the Act in 1946 — has asked for updated 
legislation, and the SIA and its members support these proposed 
changes. 
 
The government, in conjunction with the SIA, undertook 
significant consultation to ensure there was broad stakeholder 
support to the legislation. We talked to top employers of 
agrologists. We talked to the educational institutes that train 
agrologists. We talked to the institutes of agrology in other 
provinces. We talked to provincial ministries and agencies, such 
as Saskatchewan Environment and the Water Security Agency. 
We also talked with other provinces to ensure there would be no 
labour mobility problems for agrologists accredited in other 
provinces. 
 
There was general support for our proposals. Saskatchewan 
Environment supports the amendments because the proposed 
new definition of “practise agrology” would allow more 
qualified persons to deliver services under the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code. 

Mr. Speaker, let me detail our proposed amendments and the 
rationale. The proposed changes will broaden the definition of 
“practise agrology” to reflect the fact that more and more 
agrologists are working in areas related to bioresources and the 
environment. The new definition will align with certifications 
provided through agricultural post-secondary institutions that 
go beyond training in primary agriculture. The University of 
Saskatchewan, for example, now offers undergraduate degrees 
in agriculture, agribusiness, animal bioscience, and renewable 
resource management. This new definition will also be 
consistent with most other provinces, thus supporting 
interprovincial labour mobility. 
 
The bill also broadens the academic requirements necessary to 
become a certified member of the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Agrologists. Previously one needed a university or college 
degree in agriculture from the University of Saskatchewan or 
equivalent to become a member of the SIA. The amendment 
changes the requirements to a four-year university or college 
degree or equivalent in agriculture or bioresources. This 
amendment also gives the SIA the discretion to determine on 
their own what education and training programs they recognize. 
 
It’s also proposed to add a new provision to the Act that would 
allow the SIA to issue a restricted licence to practise to persons 
with less than a four-year degree, in other words, a college 
diploma. This supports interprovincial labour mobility as 
Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario allow diploma graduates in 
agriculture to practise independently with restrictions. 
 
The bill proposes to increase the number of public appointees to 
the SIA council from one to two. A second public appointee 
will help manage the workload and ensure that council and 
committee work proceeds in a timely fashion. 
 
It’s also proposed to remove the deputy minister of Agriculture 
as an ex officio member of the SIA council. The deputy 
minister’s presence on council is redundant as the SIA regularly 
reports to the ministry, and the government’s public appointee 
positions also provide oversight. 
 
We also propose to give the dean of the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Agriculture and Bioresources the 
option of appointing an official representative on the council. 
The dean of Agriculture’s busy schedule may not allow 
attendance at every meeting. Instead of not attending, the dean 
would have the option of appointing a representative to attend 
on her or his behalf. 
 
Another amendment being proposed is to allow the SIA to enact 
administrative bylaws for other matters deemed necessary for 
the effective administration of the institute. The SIA is a 
long-standing professional body in this province. There is no 
reason why the provincial legislature needs to be involved in 
overseeing the administrative changes to its bylaws. 
 
It’s also proposed to remove the requirement that professional 
engineers, geoscientists, and forestry workers be members of 
the SIA. There are some areas of an agrologist’s practice that 
can overlap the areas of practice of engineers, geoscientists, and 
forestry workers. The SIA has had discussions with the 
engineering, geoscience, and forestry professional associations 
and is happy to exempt these professional groups from the need 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

for SIA accreditation. 
 
We also want to make it easier for the SIA to serve documents. 
Accordingly we are proposing another new provision to the Act 
that would allow SIA to serve documents indirectly via a 
substitutional service as well as directly through personal 
service or registered mail.  
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, a 
lot has changed in agriculture, agrology, and society since the 
Act was last amended in 1994. The way people communicate 
has changed considerably in that time and the language in the 
existing Act does not accommodate the new world of electronic 
communication. Currently the Act requires that the SIA conduct 
all official communication with its members through the mail. 
Electronic communication is much more efficient and 
inexpensive. It’s time to bring the Act into the digital age. The 
bill will also enable the SIA to determine via its bylaws how it 
will communicate with its members. 
 
And finally, it is proposed to replace the term “membership 
certification” in the legislation with “licence.” “Licence” is the 
term the SIA itself uses. This is also the term used in the model 
professions Act and by other professional bodies, for example, 
nursing and engineering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taken together, these amendments to The 
Agrologists Act will ensure the Act is relevant to the current 
practice of agrology in Saskatchewan. They will support 
agrologists’ labour mobility across Canada. They will ensure 
the public continues to be protected in matters related to 
agrology, and they will improve the internal administration of 
the SIA. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The Agrologists 
Act, 2017 be read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 100. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased, on behalf of the official opposition, to make initial 
comments as it pertains to Bill No. 100, The Agrologists 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the agrologist profession is 
a very complex profession, as we look at ways and means in 
which we not only work with the livestock industry, Mr. 
Speaker, but more so, the commercial production of any crop. 
And the agrologists, as a definition, Mr. Speaker, when we look 
at some of the challenges that they face in terms of their 
profession, one of the things that we are privy to, as a northern 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], is the incredible 
insight of many of our members, both the current caucus 
members and the past caucus members, on the value of course 
of the many different players as it pertains to the agricultural 
sector. 
 
And quickly, very quickly as I became an MLA, Mr. Speaker, 
we learned a lot about how rural Saskatchewan operates. We 
were taught a lot about how the agricultural sector benefits the 
province of Saskatchewan. I can tell you right now that one of 
the first lessons I learned as a new incoming MLA was the 
incredible value of agriculture. And some of the players that are 

out there, whether it’s livestock or whether it’s crop production, 
that the amount of benefit that the province of Saskatchewan 
receive from the agricultural community, Mr. Speaker, is 
phenomenal. It is the backbone of our industry overall, or 
certainly it is the number one industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the backbone of our economy. And these were 
things that were taught to us at a very early start, you know, as 
an MLA. 
 
And I think it’s really, really important that the message we 
received when we were in the NDP caucus is to learn as much 
as you can, not just from what the northern issues are — 
certainly that’s important, Mr. Speaker — but to also learn 
about other challenges that the province had because once you 
become an MLA, Mr. Speaker, and a member of government, 
then you have to govern for all. And that’s an important 
message that we learned early on in our career. And that’s why, 
when there’s something that comes up within the agricultural 
sector, some of the issues that I’ve learned over the years, it’s 
an opportune time for us to learn more about what is impacting 
rural Saskatchewan, what is impacting the livestock industry, 
what is impacting the overall agricultural community. These are 
things that are important to the opposition, as they are important 
to me, as we begin to learn and delve into these matters, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it’s really important that absolutely every one of our caucus, 
and certainly every member from all throughout the province, 
must learn the value of agriculture, must learn the value of 
livestock, must learn the value of rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had some good teachers over the years, and we 
continue having those teachings coming forward. And that’s 
why it’s important that from the opposition perspective we have 
a well-rounded view of how important agriculture is in our 
province. 
 
And yes, we don’t have the experience of living and working on 
a farm, Mr. Speaker, but as you sit back and listen to some of 
the members on this particular side of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, who were raised on the farm and know a lot about the 
agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker, it really opens up your 
perspective as to just how valuable and how important the 
agricultural sector is to our province. 
 
So one of the biggest players, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
providing advice, in terms of improving yields, in balancing 
those yields to meet some of the livestock production, is of 
course the agrologists of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And this 
is something that is important for people to know, that these are 
very well-trained individuals that have a lot of information as 
to, as I mentioned, how to certainly have sustainable and good 
yields and a wide variety of crop production. 
 
And of course some of the crop that are produced are meant to 
support the livestock industry, Mr. Speaker, so it all works hand 
in hand. And it’s important that not only do we learn off some 
of the more senior farmers who have some great ideas and great 
concepts, Mr. Speaker, but the agrologists come along and they 
have a lot of teaching and training. And certainly over the years, 
Mr. Speaker, you see the agrologists’ role gradually evolve to 
also include a number of other new trends that are affecting and 
impacting yields, and certainly affecting and impacting the 
benefits to, you know, to the livestock operations throughout 



3102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These agrologists are now going into water management. 
They’re looking at some of the soil science, Mr. Speaker, some 
of the more troubling challenges with soils in our province. 
They have been accustomed to gradually adapting their trade 
over a number of years and they’ve become more well rounded, 
more professional, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the value of the 
agrologist sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
They know as well as we know that there are certain challenges 
facing the agricultural community overall. I made reference of 
course to the transportation crisis of 2008-2009, Mr. Speaker, 
when there were billions of dollars of our crop were stuck in 
bins because the federal Conservatives and the provincial Sask 
Party members couldn’t get the crop to market. And how many 
different producers and farmers sat on their crop and had them 
in their bins over many, many weeks and months, Mr. Speaker? 
And that cost them a lot of money. That was a failure that the 
agrologists of course couldn’t solve, Mr. Speaker, but those 
were real challenges to the agricultural sector. 
 
And now some of the agrologists are talking about the water 
challenges that we have as a province. And we spoke about the 
incredible challenge behind water management and yet, Mr. 
Speaker, again the Sask Party has not addressed those key 
critical issues that affect our agricultural community overall. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of different ways and means that we can 
look at this particular bill. I know some of my farm-based 
colleagues who have been raised and born on the farm and then 
have a lot of history as it pertains to, you know, to that 
particular lifestyle overall, Mr. Speaker, that we want to make 
sure that we certainly hear what they have to say. And as I had 
pointed out at the outset, it’s important that every member of 
the NDP caucus team learn as much as we can about every 
sector of Saskatchewan. And I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’ve had the opportunity to hear some of the members 
from our caucus talk about the value of rural Saskatchewan. 
And of course we realize, being a member of the government, 
the incredible, incredible contribution that the agricultural 
sector plays and pays to our provincial coffers. 
 
However on Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker, it makes an amendment to 
The Agrologist Act. The definition of “practise agrology” has 
been broadened. Of course this allows the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Agrologists to recognize the current scopes of the 
practice of agrologists that are now working in the province, 
Mr. Speaker. For example, as I mentioned, more agrologists are 
looking at bioresources and of course environmental 
remediation now. And the environmental remediation, Mr. 
Speaker, I read flooding and I read some of the changing 
weather patterns — these are some of the things that the 
agrologists now deal with. And as I said, their industry is 
getting much more complex. The teaching is getting greater 
and, Mr. Speaker, more and more so, the agrologists are 
learning a heck of lot more than the average person on the street 
about how to improve yields and of course how to have those 
important connections to the livestock sector and how that’s all 
important and relevant to the health and the economy of 
Saskatchewan overall. 

Mr. Speaker, we think that some of the changes to how they are 
being trained is a reasonable adjustment. It allows for 
adaptability as the field of agriculture changes, as I had pointed 
out. There are different demands nowadays, so the teaching has 
to be improved. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the 
agrologists are able to do that. And some of the changes in the 
bill allows for that and recognizes some of those changes. 
 
There’s also changes to the language for membership 
certifications to license, minor changes of the composition of 
the council and now allows for two public appointees as 
opposed to one. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s again some minor 
changes that allow the notice of meetings to be done in a 
manner prescribed in the bylaws instead of just saying ordinary 
mail. So by and large, those are some of the administrative 
changes. 
 
It also creates a category of restricted licensing for people who 
don’t meet the full four-year degree requirement, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it allows for people with a diploma instead of a 
degree to get licensed with certain parameters in place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, overall the changes in the bill are relatively 
minor and some of the stakeholders have expressed that they do 
not have any major concerns with this bill. We want to keep 
that channel open and the communication flowing. And 
obviously as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, during our comments 
here, that it’s important for every member of this Assembly, 
and more important for our side of the Assembly, to understand 
every sector of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is something that we pay close 
attention to, and as my colleagues have reminded me time and 
time again, it is the mainstay of our economy. It’s very valuable 
to Saskatchewan, has been and always will be of significant 
value to the future of our province. And once we understand 
that, Mr. Speaker, and try to learn more about it as a northern 
MLA, I think that does justice in our service to the people. So I 
think it’s important we stay engaged on these bills. But 
however, on that note, again other people that have more 
experience and knowledge on my side of the Assembly will 
speak at greater length on this bill. So at this point I would 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 100, The Agrologists 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 100. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The 
Agricultural Implements Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, The 
Agricultural Implements Act regulates the sale, lease, and 
lease-purchase of new and used agricultural implements. The 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3103 

Agricultural Implements Board appointed through the Act 
investigates and adjudicates complaints regarding warranties, 
repairs, and parts and services of agricultural equipment. 
 
It has been 14 years since the Act was last revised, and there 
have been significant changes in the farm implement industry 
and the marketplace in that time. The current Act does not 
reflect current advances in technology or farming practices. A 
number of stakeholders have approached the government to 
suggest changes or updates to the legislation. The Agricultural 
Implements Board has asked that the legislation be reviewed 
with an eye to increasing the levels of compensation for 
inadequate service. Agricultural implement manufacturers and 
dealers have asked us to consider the value of this legislation. 
 
Through ongoing discussion with our industry partners, it was 
agreed that the Act provided the framework for the industry, 
and that to balance stakeholder interests, the Act should remain 
in place. They point out: (1) agriculture is evolving at an 
unprecedented rate and that today’s farmers need access to the 
latest, most cutting-edge equipment available; and (2) flexibility 
is essential if implement manufacturers are expected to be 
industry-leading innovators. 
 
After consulting with stakeholders, the government is ready to 
act. Mr. Speaker, allow me to detail our proposed changes to 
the legislature. First, on the advice of the Ministry of Finance, 
the Agricultural Implements Compensation Fund will be 
eliminated and all transactions related to The Agricultural 
Implements Act will now go through the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
The move to budgeting and financial reporting on a summary 
financial basis means the fund’s financials are now being 
reported as part of the government’s financial results as a 
whole. Keeping a separate and distinct fund for implement 
compensation payments no longer serves a purpose. 
 
To address the Agricultural Implements Board concerns about 
inadequate compensation, the new Act will increase 
compensation levels and will also increase the penalties on 
distributors who fail to maintain an adequate supply of repair 
parts. The new penalties will reflect the current cost of 
purchasing and repairing modern agricultural implements. They 
will also reflect the cost of producers of lost revenue and down 
time as a result of inadequate parts service. 
 
The Act requires that implement dealers have parts available to 
the producer within 72 hours of a request. Now, Sunday has not 
been included in that time frame, meaning the mandated 
three-day turnaround could stretch to four days. A day is a long 
time, particularly during seeding and harvest. Mr. Speaker, 
most implement dealers are open seven days a week now and so 
there is no need for a Sunday exemption. Removing the Sunday 
exemption will get repair parts into the hands of producers or 
mechanics more quickly and will not place any unnecessary 
burdens on implement dealers. 
 
We have reviewed the Act carefully to ensure that there is a 
clear understanding of the terms. To that end, we will amend 
the Act so that the reference to repair parts will be amended to 
say “parts.” This change will help clarify which party is liable 
for parts, repair, and rental costs related to farm equipment. 

Finally, since we are updating the Act to take new technology 
into account, the clause “by any prescribed means” will be 
added to the sections dealing with written notes. This will allow 
all parties to make the best use of modern digital forms of 
communication and notice as it becomes available to conduct 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since The Agricultural Implements Act was last 
updated, many things have changed. The changes we are 
proposing will bring it up to date with technology and farming 
practices and allow the Act, the Agricultural Implements Board, 
our agricultural manufacturing industry, and implement dealers 
to continue serving the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that The Agricultural 
Implements Act, 2017 be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
moved that Bill No. 101, The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
once again I’m prepared to offer initial comments as it pertains 
to The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
And with the Act, some of the information that we’ve gleaned 
from this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, that the minister alluded 
to and touched on a bit, is the fact that it removes references to 
repairs and references either parts or parts and service, Mr. 
Speaker. And it repeals the section that outlines that the 
minister can appoint employees for the purpose of this Act. 
 
And it also has explanatory notes stating changes throughout 
the bill, and also certainly what is covered under The Public 
Service Act and other changes as prescribed, you know, 
throughout the bill, Mr. Speaker. It also talks about allowing 
notices to go out through other prescribed means, allowing for 
use of digital forms of communication — I’m assuming that’s 
email and I think even probably texting is included there, Mr. 
Speaker — and we need to get clarification on what is meant by 
other forms of communication, digital forms of communication. 
 
It would also allow for changes for the minister to impose a 
penalty on a dealer or a distributor. Previously it was a board 
that imposed penalties, Mr. Speaker. The Act also abolishes the 
Agricultural Implements Compensation Fund, and of course all 
compensation and penalties associated with this Act will now 
go through the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. 
 
Many penalties throughout the Act are increased. As an 
example, maximum award for compensation for a farmer under 
section 10 increases from 10,000 to 50,000. Maximum penalties 
for distributors who fail to pay an amount to the board required 
by section 12 was increased from 5,000 to 25,000. Penalties for 
distributors under section 24 increase from $5 a day to not more 
than 25,000. Penalties under section 25 for the supply or repairs 
by distributors increase from 5,000 to 50,000. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when a dealer orders emergency parts, they have 72 
hours for this part to be available. And previously these 72 
hours excluded Sundays and now Sundays are included. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go through a bit of the bill itself, 



3104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

Mr. Speaker. What changes when you talk about the 
Agricultural Implements Compensation Fund? Like all 
compensation or penalties associated with this Act will now go 
through GRF. Is there any dollars that would remain that the 
GRF would then claim as part of government’s income, Mr. 
Speaker? Obviously when you look at the compensation fund, 
we’d like to know how many dollars were in the fund. What are 
the trends over the last number of years? 
 
And it’s kind of odd, Mr. Speaker, that they would have a 
separate process, that as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, that 
there was a board that decided which penalties would be 
imposed. But not only are they abolishing the Agricultural 
Implements Compensation Fund, it’s now going to the GRF. 
And there’s a board that used to decide the penalties. Well now 
it’s the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So as you look at the changes itself, the question you’ve got to 
ask: why is the minister now heaping power on himself and 
making all these decisions on their own as opposed to going 
through a board, Mr. Speaker? And I’m assuming that the board 
itself was probably made of producers and certainly the 
implements dealers themselves. So there’s probably an issue of 
fairness there, Mr. Speaker. Now the minister has total control 
and total say. 
 
And again, as I had mentioned on the compensation fund and 
the penalties fund, now it’s going through the GRF. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the question we’re going to ask is, does the 
government get any financial reward for having all this money 
being channelled to the GRF if there is a significant amount? 
 
These are some of the questions that we have to ask for, Mr. 
Speaker. And as an example, we talked about the maximum 
award for compensation for a farmer going up as high as 50,000 
and 25,000, and certainly other fines that are out there, Mr. 
Speaker. How has the implement dealership responded to that? 
Obviously they would have some issue with that, and some 
concern. We need to ask them for their input as to how they feel 
about the increases because, Mr. Speaker, as you look at 
$10,000 penalty in one section, under section 10 it jumps up to 
50,000. Now obviously that’s a significant jump, and while we 
want to recognize that in today’s modern farming era, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are needs . . . There is more complex 
machinery. There are probably more complex parts. There’s 
probably more training required to install parts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all these definitions are always being modernized. And like 
I said before, there has been many changes, not only to the 
manner in which we farm but the machinery that we use to 
farm, Mr. Speaker. There’s actually been some phenomenal 
changes. And while, yes, we certainly want to modernize the 
language in any Act, Mr. Speaker, we have to know what effect 
some of the parts of this bill will have, not only on the farmer 
himself, which is primary in this case, but also the people that 
provide the implements for the agricultural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s . . . We’re going to be asking a lot of the 
stakeholders some questions as it pertains to the issues that I 
raised. It should be noted that if you look at the whole process 
of the dealers having 72 hours to make those parts available, 

how has the elimination of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, STC, how has that affected and impacted this 
particular part of the Act? Because obviously, Mr. Speaker, 
when we hear the Minister Responsible for STC talk about 
ridership, he cleverly ignores the freight concept, Mr. Speaker, 
and we know that the government right now is paying much 
more for freight through the private sector than they ever paid 
for STC, Mr. Speaker. So obviously they’re not giving the full 
story to the people. 
 
And now I would dare say that some of the changes, especially 
around including Sundays, which is primarily . . . before was 
considered a holiday, Mr. Speaker, that the value of STC in 
getting parts to all parts of the province of Saskatchewan, it 
must have had some incredible benefit for a lot of the dealers to 
exchange parts or to send parts from various parts of the 
province, if not North America, Mr. Speaker. That obviously 
was something that I’m sure that not only did the farmer benefit 
from but certainly the implement dealer as well. So what was 
the effect there? 
 
And now as a result of the decision to shut down STC, thereby 
resulting in less efficiency in getting the parts, and then of 
course getting the producer, the farmer back on track, Mr. 
Speaker, those are all impediments to ensuring that the farmer 
gets his repair done in a timely fashion. Now would that be . . . 
Would it be fair to assume that the Saskatchewan Party is now 
responsible for some of the delays and they themselves should 
be fining themselves as a result of eliminating the STC service, 
Mr. Speaker? Because as I mentioned, it was not just people 
that STC transported; it was equipment parts, Mr. Speaker. It 
was supplies, and there was a lot of cargo that the STC 
transported all throughout Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, as 
I said, this was a silly decision. They didn’t think it through. 
Once again their philosophical ideals took over from common 
sense. And that’s one of the reasons why the Saskatchewan 
people have had enough of the Saskatchewan Party, and I think 
they’re gradually getting the message. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that decision to close down . . . STC had so 
many benefits, so many benefits in place and now that they’ve 
eliminated it, has so many repercussions and, I might add, many 
negative repercussions especially as it pertains to Bill 101, The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act because in that Act 
suppliers have a certain time frame to get parts to their 
producers or to the farmers. And if they don’t get those parts to 
them on time and the service on time, obviously there’s 
penalties to be imposed and, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of 
STC further complicates that process. 
 
So I would say there is a lot more information that we’re going 
to be seeking, a lot more advice. We obviously don’t like the 
idea when the minister confers more power unto himself as 
opposed to a committee. We don’t like the idea that now all the 
compensation funds they have for this particular Act are going 
to the GRF. We know they’re going to take money off the top, 
Mr. Speaker. And again if we have any inkling of how bad the 
STC decision affects Saskatchewan overall, this is a prime 
example of how this has hurt the producer, how this hurt the 
implement dealerships throughout the province, and how this 
has hurt many sectors of the province in general, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why it’s important that people in Saskatchewan should 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

know that as a result of the ill-timed and ill-advised closure of 
STC, Mr. Speaker, it has repercussions throughout 
Saskatchewan. And this bill is another example of how they 
have not thought through their decision to shutter STC. And, 
Mr. Speaker, again this also affects the provisions in Bill 101. I 
think the people of Saskatchewan have just about had enough of 
the Saskatchewan Party. But as I said before, other people in 
my caucus will certainly have more advice to give on this 
particular bill, so I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 101. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No 101, The Agricultural 
Implements Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agri-food agencies serve 
an important purpose in our province’s agricultural industry. 
These agencies include 12 development commissions, 3 
development boards, and 5 marketing boards. They cover the 
spectrum of our agricultural industry, from all manner of crops 
and livestock to eggs and milk. Saskatchewan’s agri-food 
agencies are mandated to perform promotion and development 
activities, including research. Their activities help producers 
reduce input costs, increase production, and generally improve 
farm profitability. 
 
The Agri-Food Act, 2004 provides a framework for 
Saskatchewan’s 20 agri-food agencies. To date the Act has been 
an effective tool for industry growth and development; 
however, the Act is 13 years old. A refresh is in order to keep 
the legislation current. Our government reviewed the Act to 
identify potential areas for improvement. We consulted with all 
20 of the agri-food agencies as well as the provincial milk 
processor and the province’s two poultry processors. We looked 
closely at how our legislation compared to that of other 
jurisdictions. We had conversations with the Agri-Food 
Council, the independent, appointed board that supervises and 
monitors all agri-food agencies, and we talked to the Ministry 
of Justice. 
 
Through these consultations, we identified a number of areas 
for improvement. The proposed amendments will promote the 
principles of accountability, transparency, and efficiency, while 
reducing unnecessary red tape and increasing flexibility for 
agents. I will take a few minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
outline the proposed amendments. 
 
We propose to grant agencies the power to make governance 
and operational changes using board orders rather than 
regulatory amendments. A straightforward change such as a 

change to a board size or a term length currently needs to go 
through a full regulatory amendment. Allowing a change to be 
made through a board order approved by the Agri-Food Council 
will improve efficiency. 
 
The bill will also grant marketing boards power to develop and 
deliver animal welfare and food safety initiatives. Agencies 
already take a proactive role in these areas and this amendment 
will ensure their ability to lead these initiatives is directly 
recognized within the Act. 
 
The bill also proposes to clarify the role of the Agri-Food 
Council to ensure the Act reflects council’s role as adviser and 
facilitator in addition to its traditional role as supervisory body. 
The council currently provides valuable governance training to 
new agencies and ensures all agencies are following governance 
best practices, in addition to reviewing agency minutes and 
board orders. These important responsibilities will be clearly 
recognized in an updated Act. 
 
We also propose general housekeeping amendments such as 
clarifying timelines in which notification of orders or decisions 
must be provided. Additionally, changes are needed to reflect 
that the way we communicate has changed significantly over 
the past 13 years. The changes proposed will ensure agencies 
can use a variety of options to notify producers of information 
instead of requiring agency orders or other information to be 
shared by mail. The changes will provide flexibility for 
agencies to use other communication methods as needed. This 
is a practical change that will serve producers more efficiently 
and more cost-effectively. 
 
Our consultation with stakeholders was thorough and they have 
expressed support for these changes. These amendments build 
on the foundation of the Act and its purpose of promoting, 
developing, regulating, and controlling the production and 
marketing of agricultural products in Saskatchewan. 
 
In summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments to The 
Agri-Food Act will provide agencies more freedom and 
flexibility in determining general governance and operational 
matters. These changes will make the Act more forward looking 
while ensuring it continues to provide an effective framework 
for the province’s agri-food agencies. 
 
I move, Mr. Speaker, that The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
moved that Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
be read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again in 
keeping consistent with some of the teachings I guess, if you 
will, over time of how important the agricultural sector is to the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s such a complex 
industry. And certainly as you look throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan and certainly growing up in northern 
Saskatchewan, you learn that the breadbasket of the world are 
really the three Prairie provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 
Manitoba. And, Mr. Speaker, certainly as a young child 
growing up in northern Saskatchewan, I was always very proud 



3106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

of that reference. And it’s an amazing opportunity for us as 
Saskatchewan residents, no matter where we’re from and 
certainly what our backgrounds are, to learn more about 
agriculture and what makes it so strong and vibrant to this day. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again I want to say, preface some of my 
comments that it’s important to note is that you have to be very, 
very aware of what’s happening within the agricultural sector. 
And as we try . . . As an opposition MLA, I try from northern 
Saskatchewan to learn as much as I possibly can. And it was 
with a bit of confusion that I heard some of the comments as it 
pertains to the Canadian Wheat Board, some of the comments 
made by members opposite. And you look at some of the 
language in this particular bill where it talks about marketing 
boards. It talks about developmental boards, Mr. Speaker. And I 
sit back in the Assembly here and listen to some of their 
statements and their position as it pertains to the Canadian 
Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all of a sudden, you know, I started thinking to myself, 
well if this Wheat Board is there to help farmers collectively, 
why is the Sask Party advocating the sale of the Canadian 
Wheat Board? Why are the conservatives trying to get rid of the 
Wheat Board and why would they sell it to a Saudi group, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s just totally confusing to me because obviously if 
we owned the Canadian Wheat Board and they worked for our 
interests collectively and they actually had a history of being 
able to buffer some low years as compared to some robust 
years, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t we keep the Canadian Wheat 
Board? 
 
These are some of the things that were certainly bouncing in the 
back of my mind and you would ask a lot of questions of the 
value of the Canadian Wheat Board. And this particular bill, 
Bill 102, it talks about developmental boards and marketing 
boards in which they want to do some regulatory changes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then it kind of dawned of me, like while they were 
certainly trying to do minor changes to marketing boards and 
developmental boards, Mr. Speaker, or development boards, 
Mr. Speaker, they failed on a big front, and that’s of course the 
Canadian Wheat Board. And now they’re trying to do some 
changes to the smaller marketing boards throughout the 
province, as the minister made reference to. 
 
And the challenge I see, again not having any agricultural 
background and not having any degrees, is that why would you 
first of all shuttle and kill off the Canadian Wheat Board and 
sell it to some overseas or out-of-country country, I guess, and 
where they would control the Canadian Wheat Board? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Why would the conservatives and the Sask Party advocate for 
that? That really confused me at that time, Mr. Speaker, because 
overall, overall as you look at the challenges I think to the 
agricultural sector and that is that the farmers in the province of 
Saskatchewan are excellent at what they do. They are top-notch. 
And not only do they certainly grow their produce, Mr. 
Speaker, but they also raise animals. And the amazing thing is 
they look after their land very well. Notwithstanding a few 
challenges around illegal drainage, Mr. Speaker, by and large 

most of the agricultural sector have a great respect for the 
environment. 
 
And you notice or you see all these attributes and the strength 
within the agricultural sector and they’re very, as I mentioned, 
economically they are the powerhouse of the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re one of the mainstays of our economy. 
So we learned that over the years being a northern MLA. 
 
And as you sit here and watch what the conservatives are doing, 
Mr. Speaker — and certainly the Sask Party from my 
perspective are, you know, they’re one and the same — I see 
them getting rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. And I say to 
myself, why would they do that, because doesn’t the Wheat 
Board help the producer? Well they said, no, we’re going to go 
to the private market or the market in general. 
 
And then you look at some of the changes they’re doing to 
some of the smaller marketing boards in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Well wouldn’t that hurt that particular sector of 
agriculture? And I think it does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How about the grain transportation crisis, the point I made 
earlier? Does that hurt the producer? No action on the Port of 
Churchill as a result of, you know, of the train tracks being 
inaccessible, Mr. Speaker. Like, these are all issues that really 
hit agriculture so hard — so hard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m sitting here in my opposition bench and thinking, well 
what are the conservatives going to do about all these 
problems? Well, Mr. Speaker, they did nothing. They did 
nothing. So here I am, a northern MLA that has limited 
experience and exposure in most of my adult life as it pertains 
to agriculture, and I see inaction, and I see real threats to the 
agricultural sector. And yet, the people that pretend to care for 
the agricultural community, the conservatives and the 
Saskatchewan Party, are sitting on their hands, not doing 
anything. Mr. Speaker, they sold off the Canadian Wheat 
Board, and they are not responding to the Port of Churchill 
crisis. 
 
Several years ago, the current Minister of Highways, who was 
the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
president at the time, didn’t say a peep, didn’t say a word 
because he was told by his political masters do not talk about 
this agricultural transportation crisis. Well he didn’t say a word, 
Mr. Speaker, and they continue not saying a word about the 
incredible transportation crisis that this province faced in 
getting our producers’ goods, and certainly the livestock, that 
they’ve grown to the markets, Mr. Speaker. We’re a landlocked 
province, so why wouldn’t they address it? And this is why it’s 
so confusing to me as a northern MLA, the inaction of the 
Saskatchewan Party when it comes to critical points of 
agricultural sector. 
 
And this bill, Mr. Speaker, talks about the development boards 
and marketing boards, and how they can change some of their 
membership, Mr. Speaker. Well, can the Sask Party tell us 
today what are they doing to protect some of these marketing 
boards that are smaller in nature, as compared to the Canadian 
Wheat Board? Because, Mr. Speaker, some of these marketing 
boards are under extreme threat by what they call global trade. 
And the Saskatchewan Party understand what global trade is, 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3107 

but yet they’re doing very little to prepare our sector, our 
agricultural sector, the breadbasket of the world.  
 
In these changing times economically, the fact that they have 
not done very much to prepare the people of Saskatchewan, 
especially the agricultural sector, for the new way of trade, Mr. 
Speaker, and commerce throughout the world, Saskatchewan is 
at a deep threat, Mr. Speaker. There are real threats to our 
ability to grow crops and there are real threats for us to continue 
building our cattle industry, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes on, 
and yet I see the Saskatchewan Party not dealing with the 
matters at hand which we talk about international trade. 
 
And people need not go any further, Mr. Speaker, than the mad 
cow crisis that was experienced by Canada a number of years 
ago. This is a prime example of how quickly the markets can 
turn against Saskatchewan produce, and how quickly that the 
livestock industry can be infected and impacted, and how badly 
some of the repercussions are to our provincial economy, Mr. 
Speaker. We cannot have an ad hoc approach or a hit-and-miss 
approach that the Sask Party and the Conservative governments 
have been advocating for years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when they make a major mistake in 
agriculture, and I would make reference to the grain 
transportation crisis of 2008-2009, they won’t say a word about 
it. They will not say a peep about that problem, Mr. Speaker. 
And political masters have told some of their followers, in 
particular as I made reference to the current or the past 
president of SARM who is now acting as the Minister of 
Highways, he knew this was a major problem, but with a 
Conservative prime minister, with a conservative Premier, he 
was told to sit on his hands, not say a word. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we had producers with crop in the bin for a 
number of months. And does that hurt our provincial economy 
overall? Well from my vantage point, it certainly does. It 
certainly does. And when we look at the impact on agriculture, 
does it have an impact on the North? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
Absolutely. As Saskatchewan people, we’re all fans of the 
agricultural sector, northern Saskatchewan included. We 
understand the value of what is being produced in the farm 
fields, what is produced on our farms, Mr. Speaker. And we 
also know that we’re a landlocked province. So not being able 
to get cattle or to get the livestock or get our product to market, 
that has a significant . . . That offers some significant potential 
problems for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
But so far, Mr. Speaker, there’d been very little word from the 
Saskatchewan Party as to how they’re going to address some of 
those incredible challenges to Saskatchewan’s agricultural 
community. I say to the people in Saskatchewanland very 
simply that the trust and confidence you’ve had in the Sask 
Party has been misplaced. The Canadian Wheat Board — gone, 
sold to the Saudis, Mr. Speaker. They control the Canadian 
Wheat Board today. And when it comes to some of the changes 
within, Mr. Speaker, that’s required to really build a robust 
economy for the agricultural sector, they have not addressed the 
growing water crisis. The transportation crisis of 2008-2009, 
not a peep, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you wonder why the farmers continue to have some faith 
in the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. The bottom line is I 

think they have been very patient with them. And certainly from 
my perspective I think that patience is wearing thin, because we 
obviously see there’s been very little effort on the 
Saskatchewan Party’s front to protect the agriculture sector to 
the extent that they should. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan, as a landlocked 
province, is one of three prairie provinces that produces great 
crops. They produce great livestock. And the Saskatchewan 
Party has not been dealing with the real issues that threaten that 
agricultural sector, and that is everything from the Port of 
Churchill closure, Mr. Speaker, to the challenges around BSE 
[bovine spongiform encephalopathy], to the challenges of 
preparing our agricultural sector for international trade, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
All these things are very, very important, and on every front the 
Saskatchewan Party has failed to deliver. And I say shame on 
them because again from my vantage point from northern 
Saskatchewan, all I see is just a complete failure of the 
Saskatchewan Party to protect the agricultural sector of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know some of my colleagues will have a lot 
more to say about this particular bill. So on that note I move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill 102, The Agri-Food Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 
to speak about The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017. Saskatchewan has a number of 
provincial emblems that celebrate its rich heritage, including the 
provincial bird, which is the sharp-tailed grouse; provincial 
animal, it’s the white-tailed deer; provincial tree, the paper 
birch. The provincial sport is curling. The provincial flower is 
the western red lily, and provincial mineral is potash. 
 
The purpose of this amendment is to establish the 
Tyrannosaurus rex as the official fossil emblem of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan’s fossils are of tremendous value to scientists 
exploring the history of life on earth, a source of great 
fascination to our residents and tourists, and fossil discoveries 
are a source of pride for many Saskatchewan communities. 
Designating a provincial fossil will help bring attention and 
recognition to these aspects of the province’s natural heritage. 
Although the provincial emblems are not exactly as designated 



3108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

to Executive Council, a public engagement process was used by 
the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport, Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum in consultation with the office of protocol for the 
selection process. 
 
In November of 2015 the Royal Saskatchewan Museum 
generated a province-wide campaign encouraging people to 
help select the new emblem to represent Saskatchewan, as well 
as to discover more about the province’s rich fossil history. 
Through this process, the public voted through a paper ballot at 
the museum or province-wide online for one of seven fossil 
candidates. The seven options for voting were Mo, the 
long-necked Plesiosaur found near Ponteix. This 30-foot-long 
marine reptile was a new species to science when it was 
discovered. Scotty, the Tyrannosaurus rex discovered near 
Eastend, one of the largest and most complete T. rex skeletons 
ever found; Kyle mammoth, a 12,000-year-old giant 
elephant-like woolly mammoth.  
 
The Herschel short-necked Plesiosaur, found near Herschel; this 
marine reptile was also a new species to science when it was 
discovered. The Brontothere, a rhino-like mammal found near 
Eastend from 35 million years ago. Big Bert, the most complete 
and best-preserved specimen of this 92 million-year-old 
crocodile found near Carrot River; and Thescelosaurus, a 
plant-eating dinosaur species unique to Saskatchewan, found 
also near Eastend. 
  
Ultimately the Tyrannosaurus rex was selected and on May 17, 
2016 results were revealed at the RSM [Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum] by former minister of Parks, Culture and Sport, the 
member from Coronation Park. 
 
While Manitoba and Nova Scotia have a provincial fossil and a 
number of states in the United States have a state fossil, 
Saskatchewan will be the first province or state with a 
Tyrannosaurus rex as an official emblem. People of 
Saskatchewan helped make the decision, selecting a provincial 
fossil that is representative of and unique to Saskatchewan. 
 
To conclude, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport has moved that Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be now read for a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
been a member of the Assembly for a while, and I’ve really 
grown accustomed to the manner in which the Saskatchewan 
Party promotes themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, this particular 
bill when we spoke about The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act, when they made reference to a fossil 
nomination, I thought they were going to nominate the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, Mr. Speaker. So I wanted to make 
sure we stood up and wanted to pay particular attention to this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, because they are an old, tired 
government and they need to go. I think it’s important to note 
that while the fossil emblem is not the Sask Party themselves, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we note that there has 

been some competition for this particular emblem.  
 
And of course the minister made reference to a few examples, 
and most certainly I think the most famous one is the T. rex 
fossil, Mr. Speaker. It certainly, just for the size of it and 
certainly the historical perspective of T. rex, it really shows the 
incredible spirit of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. So 
again, a few other members will make a few comments on the 
T. rex being the fossil emblem for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I think again and I pointed out, I’m certainly 
glad that the Saskatchewan Party didn’t nominate themselves 
for the fossil emblem award themselves.  
 
So on that note I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017. 
This bill will make housekeeping changes to numerous pieces 
of English legislation in order to update and modernize their 
provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes will update legislation to 
uniformly refer to “the Court of Queen’s Bench.” Currently 
there are various styles of reference that are used, including 
“Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan.” 
The change will ensure consistency between different pieces of 
legislation and aligns with The Interpretation Act, 1995, which 
already defines “Court of Queen’s Bench” as “Her Majesty’s 
Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan” for all Acts. The 
proposed changes will also assist in preparing for Crown 
succession by substituting reference to “Her Majesty” with “the 
Crown” throughout various Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also the Latin phrase ex parte is commonly used 
in legislation in reference to matters such as applications and 
hearings where a party is not required to provide notice to the 
other party. The proposed changes will replace this Latin phrase 
with the simple wording “without notice.” This change is 
particularly beneficial to self-represented litigants and other 
members of the population who may be required to consult 
legislation but do not have legal background. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes will make a number of 
additional updates to further clarify and modernize the existing 
language of legislation. These changes are all housekeeping in 
nature and will not have a substantive impact on the provisions 
of the legislation being amended. With that, Mr. Speaker, I am 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3109 

pleased to move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 108, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
think it is any surprise that this particular bill, as you look at the 
statute amendment law 2017, that it affects or impacts a lot of 
the other bills that the minister made reference to. And it’s 
important to see how those effects change the intent of different 
laws throughout our province. 
 
As we all know in this particular business, it’s important to pay 
attention to the wording of any Act. Because as I said time to 
time, there’s a significant difference in the Acts when you use 
the word “shall” versus the word “may.” Both those words . . . 
One can assume that they would mean the same, but quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, there are some significant changes of 
intent when you use different language. An example I used was 
“shall” versus the word “may.” Mr. Speaker, there are some 
rules and regulations that attach themselves to every definition 
of both those words, and it’s important that we pay attention to 
the changes in any particular law bill that might be coming 
forward. And that’s why when you look at some of The Statute 
Law Amendment Act and some of the changes under this bill, 
we have to make certain that the wording is innocuous and that 
the intent to change some of the rules on these bills aren’t 
intended to hurt any particular community at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as you look at the bill there are, as I’ve said, changes to a lot 
of different Acts, changes such as removing the language “as 
amended from time to time.” That language is gone. Certainly 
updating reference to the Court of Queen’s Bench; update 
references to “of Her Majesty” with “the Crown.” Mr. Speaker, 
what significant change is that? Because obviously there is a 
significant change in the wording. Replacing outdated 
references to legislation contained within certain Acts; updating 
definitions throughout several pieces of legislation; replacing 
“department” with “ministry,” Mr. Speaker.  
 
And that while we know that the Saskatchewan Party, one of 
their first major moves as it became government is going to 
replace the wording of “department.” Instead of having Social 
Services department, they wanted to do Social Services 
ministry. Like we were really impressed with that first move of 
language changes, Mr. Speaker, but that’s exactly what they did 
as their first initial bold step. So I think it’s important that we 
try and find out the definition changes that’s being amended in 
Bill 108.  
 
And the other significant point, Mr. Speaker, the language, and 
this is the important part of law, I think. And certainly from my 
perspective, when they use some of the wording like ex parte, 
like the average person like myself, well what does ex parte 
mean? It’s Latin obviously, but what’s the importance of that 
particular phrase? Well obviously it means without notice, but, 
Mr. Speaker, you can see the language barrier. And the changes 
— the terminology, the definition of some of these wording, 
and even moving a certain Act to another Act — these all have 
major implications on how we interpret law. And I think it’s 

important that people make an effort to understand what exactly 
the changes are being proposed. 
 
And that’s why, as the opposition, we listen to the bills being 
proposed. We then of course offer . . . take the time in the next 
two or three months to assess that information, reach out to 
people that may have advice for us and which we always 
constantly seek that advice, and to see if there’s any significant 
changes from their perspective as the language in this particular 
bill would dictate. 
 
So it’s important that we understand the changes, the wording, 
the intent. These are all things that are important in this 
particular Assembly. And we will certainly again lean on those 
within my caucus that have some significant legal background 
and certainly have a lot of interest in these particular bills, and 
they’ll certainly have their opportunity to comment on this bill 
as you move it further down towards proclamation. So on that 
note, I move that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 108, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 108. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017  
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
recognize you as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I recognize you and 
respect you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). This bill will make 
housekeeping changes to numerous pieces of bilingual 
legislation in order to update and modernize their provisions. 
Mr. Speaker, several of the proposed changes in this bill mirror 
changes contained in the English statute law amendment piece 
such as replacing the outdated term “ex parte.” In addition, a 
number of unique housekeeping changes are contained within 
this bill such as: replacing outdated cross references to 
legislation and updating the phrase for “extraprovincial 
corporations” that is used in the French version of The 
Non-Profit Corporations Act, 1995. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes in this bill are 
entirely housekeeping in nature and will not have a substantive 
impact on the legislation being amended. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, I am, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 109, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2) be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 



3110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

look at some of the changes that are being proposed in Bill 109, 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister spoke about, there’s a few 
administrative changes that’s important that we note. And 
certainly from my perspective, we want to be able to make the 
justice system much more, much more easier to understand, Mr. 
Speaker, because obviously from my perspective, as I 
mentioned from some of the earlier discussions on some of the 
earlier bills, when you use the language “ex parte” in a court of 
law it really confuses a lot of people. And I’m all for the notion 
of using English that people could understand so we can 
understand our justice system better. So it’s important to note, 
as I said, some of the interpretations or the definitions and the 
rules being proposed on any amendment, that we have to pay 
very close attention to that because, as I mentioned, wording, 
interpretation, intent of that word is really, really where we need 
to spend a lot of time. 
 
So under this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, there are changes to a 
lot of different Acts. As I said, I think there would be easy to 
assume the consequential changes to the earlier bill, Bill 109 
. . . sorry, 108 when they updated definitions to several pieces 
of legislation, they updated references to outdated departments. 
They replaced outdated references to legislation contained 
within certain Acts. They replaced the language “ex parte” to 
“without notice” and they also removed the language, “as 
amended from time to time.” 
 
So some of the bills in 108 are similar to the bills in 109. 
They’re obviously two separate bills, so the same process must 
be undertaken. But again, I would point out to the people that 
are out there that may want to give us some advice on not only 
this particular bill, as it changes the wording and the intent. I 
think once the word changes, then the intent also should come 
into question and how it affects the bills and the application of 
law and so on and so forth. These are very complex discussions 
that need to occur on any legal bill, Mr. Speaker. And as I 
mentioned at the outset, there are people within our caucus that 
have a better understanding of how the justice system works, 
and obviously we will be looking forward to some of their 
comments. 
 
But also I ask the people out there that have a network of legal 
minds, whether it be a law firm or a student or somebody just 
fresh out of law school, that if they have any perspective on this 
particular bill or any bill coming forward as it pertains to 
justice, that our caucus is always looking forward to networking 
with you, getting advice from you. And that information is 
highly sought after and highly valued. So I would certainly 
want to encourage the people that are out there paying attention 
to these bills, that if you have any information, please contact 
us, or any concerns. We’ll certainly bring the issues and matters 
forward as it pertains to the bill and the word changes 
associated with Bill 109. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 109, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise and enter into this debate. And it’s one 
that I understand might be a little overdue, but it’s good to have 
it here before us at any rate. 
 
I am a little perplexed, right off the get-go because I look at the 
back and I see that it was moved by the Minister of the 
Economy, but the person giving second reading speech was the 
Minister of Energy and Resources, and so I’m not sure who was 
responsible for this bill. It would be, I think, the Minister of 
Economy as his name is on this bill, but I don’t know who is 
going to be speaking in committee. But at any rate, we’ll get to 
that when we get to that. 
 
But it’s just an unusual move that the person that’s named on 
the back of the bill is not the one who gave the second reading 
speech. And I guess to the first question, sometimes people are 
gone for a variety of good reasons. And whether or not they 
were, I’m not going to get into that debate because that’s all 
what we do here and that’s fair enough. 
 
But the question before us is whether the minister who put 
forward the bill does stand by the second reading speech that 
was given by the Minister of Energy and Resources because 
that’s very, very important. Because as I know, and anybody 
who has served that has had the privilege of being a minister, 
that these second reading speeches, in fact, really do outline the 
intention of the government, the intention of the government of 
the day when it comes to bills like this. And it actually can be 
used, can be cited as evidence when you’re trying to interpret 
the legislation. If it’s not as clear as it might have been, then the 
second reading speech by the minister could be used to 
illuminate, articulate, and hopefully not speculate on the 
meaning of the legislation. 
 
And while I would assume that the Minister of Energy and 
Resources would have been quite involved in the development 
of the bill, I assume the Minister of the Economy was as well. 
His name is on the bill. And I assume as well that the Minister 
of Environment would have been as well. Interestingly, the 
history of the Minister of Environment who is now on his 
second round, just came out of Energy and Resources and so 
probably had quite a lot to do with this piece of legislation. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So I’m sure between the three of them they know and they are 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

quite familiar with the . . . And it’s quite interesting because the 
current Minister of Energy and Resources was also a minister of 
Environment at one time. So, you know, it was quite a bit of a 
musical chairs, and they all had their finger in this one piece of 
legislation. 
 
And interestingly, Mr. Speaker, I too had some fingers in this 
piece of legislation back in the early 2000s when I was the 
minister of Environment and worked with the minister of 
Economic Development, is what we called the person at the 
time. That was our term. They were the lead on it, but clearly 
we had an interest and the folks within the ministry, the 
Department of Environment at the time, played a major role, 
played a major role. And I think the member from Athabasca 
who was also a minister of Environment also had an awful lot 
to do with this. 
 
It takes a lot of work to get the balance right here. Because as 
we know, as we are completely committed to on this side of the 
House and I really hope they are on that side of the House . . . 
There is, you know, we would call the triple bottom line, where 
you have the three lines where you think about the three bottom 
lines in terms of economic development. Of course there has to 
be a sound business case to the development. That is critical, 
that you have a sound business plan. That has got to happen. 
The second one is you’ve got to have a sound environmental 
impact assessment. That makes a lot of sense too. And then 
third, and particularly we see in vulnerable communities where 
often they depend on projects like this, there is the social 
implications. The third bottom line is the social aspect of it as 
well. 
 
And we can see examples around the world where we have 
situations that have not worked out well because they’ve not 
had a really good approach to the triple bottom line that often 
has been used. And, you know, you can think of whether it’s in 
Africa or in Asia and some of the projects, large projects 
particularly. Whether it be the social impact has been huge, the 
environmental impact has been negative, and sometimes we 
even see where there has been investment in mines particularly, 
where it hasn’t panned out to be the way it has. 
 
But fortunately here in Saskatchewan . . . and we’re glad to see 
that the government of the day has continued the commitment 
to this piece of legislation, the reclaimed industrial sites. We 
introduced and passed that legislation back in 2006 or ’07, and 
then there was a five-year implementation of the legislation to 
see how people, how industry responded to it. Of course they 
were consulted, as they were in this past period. So that would 
have taken to 2011 or ’12, and then the government took it back 
and did an evaluation assessment of it. And that was always the 
plan, that there was going to be a period of time of review after 
the first five years. So they have done that and so we are glad to 
see that they actually are following up with that. 
 
And of course when we looked at it in 2006, you know, 
Saskatchewan’s a very, very attractive place for industry to take 
a look at investing, in terms of whether it be mining, any kind 
of project along those lines. And the point of this legislation 
was that you would put money aside, set money aside or 
resources aside so that when the project was finished that it 
could be turned back to its natural state, its first state that it was 
found in. 

And we had seen, and my colleague from Athabasca, the real 
learning here in Saskatchewan of course was the uranium mines 
up by Uranium City, Gunnar mine and the other mines that we 
are still paying. And I don’t know what the tab is right now but 
it continues to grow because there were not resources set aside 
for proper decommissioning and proper reclamation of the mine 
after the fact. And there’s two or three mines that that’s the 
scenario and we are left holding the bag. And we can’t have that 
situation where you have abandoned mines. 
 
We often see it in the cities and our communities where we 
have orphan gas wells or a gas storage from gas stations that 
were there and then they were, are essentially abandoned. And 
the orphan wells, gas storage tanks are just too, too expensive to 
do anything about. And of course if you’ve been in Saskatoon 
this summer you would have seen the project on the corner of H 
and 22nd where it’s not an easy thing to reclaim a site when 
something’s been left to sit for a long, long time, for many, 
many decades because there was never part of the business plan 
to set aside resources to reclaim the land. 
 
And so this is important that we set this up and we think of this. 
And the term that’s often used in the environmental world is 
from cradle to grave. So if you’re building a mine and you’re 
setting it up, you’re setting up, considering we’re all excited 
about something new. And so you get the cradle part is exciting, 
you know, and the new build, the new jobs, all of that. What 
could go wrong? 
 
Well you know, at some point there is a finite resource. And 
whether the mines exhaust themselves and there’s no resource 
left, or the world has changed and that particular mineral or 
whatever is no longer needed in our world, then something has 
to change. And so there’s a variety of reasons why . . . Or 
market prices are such that mines get closed down that were 
once thought to be successful and the business plan was solid 
and no longer is. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is important that we have set aside 
. . . And I understand we were one of the first in Canada as a 
province to set this, to do this kind of thing. And I hope we’re 
still leaders in this because it is critical, it is critical that when 
you set a standard . . . And some may balk at the idea, saying, 
well this is something that business won’t like. Actually it is 
interesting because if you set out the rules clearly and have 
them involved at the beginning so there are no surprises and this 
is part of the business plan, then they will participate. 
 
That’s what we found in the early 2000s and leading up to 
2006. There was never a question about whether or not . . . And 
we saw in fact following that, the boom that happened in 
Saskatchewan with the resources, and whether it was uranium 
or whether it was with potash, that they were quite willing to 
step up to the plate, understanding that in the new world 
thinking that the environmental impact is a huge, huge part. 
And we can make plans and you can make part of the plans 
right from the beginning so that the industrial site is seen as 
cradle to grave. And the grave will be properly prepared for and 
that it’s not a surprise, nobody’s surprised when that happens, 
as opposed to the earlier experiences that we had in the far 
North with uranium, especially around Uranium City where that 
was not managed in the end as well as it should have been. 
 



3112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know we’ve got lots of work today to do, but 
I just want to cover the four parts that they have talked about in 
Bill No. 85. That the minister now requires the site holder to 
provide acceptable financial assurance before a closed site can 
be accepted into the institutional control program. And I 
understand that probably now when we talk to the minister 
we’ll hear more about that in terms of . . . Because at some 
point the company may not last as long as they would like to, 
and think they’re going to be around to manage. Somehow there 
has to be a program, and these programs will be in place for 
decades if not longer. 
 
And now as well, a new section outlines that a minister can 
transfer a closed site from the institutional control program to a 
responsible person. Now that’s going to be interesting, and 
that’s one of the questions we’ll have in committee is, what 
does that mean? Is that something where they think they might 
actually restart the site, that in fact they found a new use or have 
discovered more of the resource on-site and they want to start 
over again, or what is it that they are looking for? What would 
make that a viable and reasonable thing to do? 
 
And then as well a new section will allow the minister to 
appoint a fund advisory committee, which seems to make sense, 
you know. And the committee is exempt from liability from 
investment decisions, obviously. And we assume that these will 
be . . . Probably some of them will be people within the 
ministry and they will . . . When you’re dealing with large 
amounts of money, hopefully you’ve got the skills and the 
capacity to make the right decision and there won’t be those 
surprises, but we need to make sure that’s the case. 
 
And importantly that they maintain that the minister must 
conduct a review of the Act every five years. It gets a little 
vague though about what will be expected in that review. 
 
And so with that, I know that the minister talked about some of 
the things that she’s looking forward to putting forward but, as I 
said . . . And she talks about she’s pleased, and I quote, “. . . 
that this bill has the support of industry, industry organizations, 
and the federal and provincial regulators involved in our 
stakeholder consultations.” And so that this addresses some of 
the concerns. 
 
I’d be curious to know whether some of the people . . . Now it 
talked like they . . . and very importantly they talked the 
business side, the investor side, the people who would be the 
primary, you know, stakeholders. But I think the other primary 
stakeholder group that we need to really think about of course 
are the environmental groups who have become much more 
sophisticated, much more understanding of this government’s 
approach to environmental regulation in that there is a high 
degree expected in terms of technical knowledge. And so I’m 
not sure if some of those people have been consulted on this. I 
think it’s important to reach out to those. 
 
And then the other, third group that I think that should be, and 
they’re very close to these industrial sites, are the northerners 
particularly, but anybody . . . And I think in rural Saskatchewan 
if you happen to live close to a mine site, you’re thoughtful. 
You see the tailings pond. You see the tailings particularly; we 
often think about that at the potash mines. We see them and it’s 
become a fact of life and people driving through often wonder 

what those big hills are. We all know what they are, but they 
wonder about that. 
 
So this is an issue for all of us in Saskatchewan. And so has the 
ministry responsible for this . . . And I think it’s the Economy. 
As I said, there was some confusion that may need to be 
clarified at some point, but we’ll assume it’s the Economy 
because that minister’s name is on it. And so we’ll be having 
some questions about that. But we will be having questions 
about who was consulted, and is it appropriate or not 
appropriate. 
 
I would feel it should be clear that there are other groups who 
should be consulted in these kind of pieces of legislation to 
make sure they’re as good as they can be and as solid as they 
can be and that we really are leading the country, and that we’re 
also seen as the best place to invest for these kind of activities 
that can have a long-lasting effect. But people will know . . . 
Sure we’ll get behind the investment, but we know at the end of 
the day it’s a cradle-to-grave approach and that people will 
accept that, knowing that we will reap the benefits but, with so 
much that’s in the world today, that there is a limited thing. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be taking my seat soon. I don’t 
think there’s . . . Let me just think if there’s anything more I 
need to say. I’m not sure; I’ll look over there and see if anybody 
sparks a thought. But, Mr. Speaker, with that, I move 
adjournment on Bill No. 85. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:00] 
 

Bill No. 86 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. No, I’m 
not Mr. Belanger, but I just want to clear that up for my 
colleague from Regina Coronation Park. But as ever, good to 
take my place and join the debate at this stage of Bill No. 86, 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now there are a lot of things that get addressed in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. And you know, some, in terms of the 
degrees of impact or seriousness, there are . . . There’s a whole 
swath of society that would be able to attest to the ways that 
things under child and family services either go right or do not 
go right. 
 
And when you think about growing up with your friends and 
the different folks that head off into different things, maybe this 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

one wants to be an entrepreneur or somebody wants to be a 
professional athlete or someone goes into the fire service or 
someone goes off into social services, Mr. Speaker, becomes a 
social worker and in turn lands up working in child and family 
services or in child protection. And this being Saskatchewan, 
there are a lot of different ways where we see how that system 
can go right, and there are a lot of different ways where we can 
see how that system hasn’t worked out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in terms of the ways that it can go right, you know, there’s 
a broader discussion to be had around things like colonialism or 
racism or the Sixties Scoop or residential schools. Or even now 
the whole question of the seizure of kids, Mr. Speaker, from 
homes and from families and how our adoption system these 
days has evolved certainly, but how the challenges remain. And 
it seems that not too many months go by where the adoption 
system is again in recruitment mode and trying to find places to 
put kids that have been seized and have moved from foster care, 
Mr. Speaker, and are ready for adoption. 
 
Or the ways that jurisdiction and the wrangling and the funding 
and the proper resourcing of the system, Mr. Speaker, between 
First Nations, Métis, and the Government of Saskatchewan, 
again how that is working or is not. And you inject into that, 
Mr. Speaker, the role of the federal government. And I think of 
things like the work of Cindy Blackstock and the work that has 
been done there to establish the inequity between what happens 
on-reserve and the resources that are on offer, and the way that, 
you know, as for whatever problems it’s got, the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s system having a significant resource advantage 
over that experienced on-reserve. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you think about things like the 
Canadian Human Rights Tribunal decision that was made in 
response to the Canadian caring society, and very much 
spearheaded by Cindy Blackstock, and I think locally the FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] was a party to 
that suit, Mr. Speaker, trying to again get the child and family 
services on-reserve on a level playing field with the rest of 
provincial jurisdictions. 
 
And you think about how long that is going on and then the fact 
that that has been appealed by the federal government. And you 
think about how again there are few things that are more 
important in terms of the work we do in this legislature than 
getting some of those things right and putting aside the 
jurisdictional wrangling. And again I always think of . . . 
There’s a great saying from Sitting Bull, Tatanka Iyotake, who 
once said, you know, “Let’s come together and see what we can 
do for the children.” And that’s good advice then, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s good advice now for any level of government. 
 
And again you don’t have to look too far to see where the 
system is either failing or succeeding, where the system’s either 
in sort of ongoing crisis or where it’s not. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, far too often we hear about how the system is failing, 
and it’s not . . . I certainly do not fault the hard-working men 
and women that are in that system that are tasked with making 
some very heart-wrenching decisions, Mr. Speaker. I don’t fault 
this government, Mr. Speaker. I think I fault us as a society for 
not giving it the attention and the resources and the careful 
thought that is needed to do better. Because the way that not 
doing better has worked out is that we fill our jails, we make for 

threats in our community that need not be there, and we in a 
systematic way are party to the wasting of so much human 
potential. And again, Mr. Speaker, that the stakes are so high, 
you’d think that there would be a better way to do this work 
than through the court system or through the judicial system, 
the quasi-judicial system in the case of the Human Rights 
Tribunal, and get some things sorted out in a fundamental, 
generational way. 
 
Some of the best work that this government has done was the 
early on convening of the child and family committee of 
cabinet, the work that had been done from the . . . under the 
leadership of the Ministry of Social Services in conjunction 
with the FSIN and the MNS [Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] 
and the different tables that were under way there, Mr. Speaker. 
But that that work has gone on as long as it has, seemingly to as 
little effect as it has, makes you sit back and wonder, you know, 
what is it that we continue to get wrong? 
 
Now again this is fine legislation in and of itself. It’s brought 
forward by a . . . The minister’s a fine individual. And like I 
say, there’s again a lot of good men and women doing work in 
that ministry, often under very difficult circumstances. But you 
know, what does it say about us as a society where again many 
of our fixes for these situations are administrative and would 
seemingly amount to tinkering around the edges of the broader 
problem that again seems to present, you know, in a new way 
every generation or so? 
 
So is it a question of resources? Is it a question of jurisdiction? 
Is it a question of power sharing, Mr. Speaker? Is it a question 
of dealing with that intergenerational legacy of different things 
that have gone on in our society, Mr. Speaker, knowing those 
things for what they are and acting upon them? Is it recognizing 
the truth of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and then 
proceeding on in earnest with the steps that are in accord with 
the calls to action? I’d say that yes, it is. 
 
But again we seem to have problems in this House even 
recognizing the truth part of the truth and reconciliation, which 
is unfortunate to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again it’s with a heavy heart that we approach these 
discussions. And again, you know, there are some arrows 
pointing out of this to making better use of things like a person 
of sufficient interest and the roles that kinship care play in a 
child’s life, or the roles of, you know, family cohesion and what 
we can do as a society in a way that helps people, not makes the 
problem worse or puts that problem down the line. There again, 
to quote the minister’s second reading speech, “The 
amendments in Bill 86 are generally administrative in nature,” 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as the minister goes on to relate, hopefully this sets a stage 
for better and bolder things to come because again, Mr. 
Speaker, the way that the system doesn’t work plays itself out 
in some terrible waste of life and potential. And we see that in 
all sorts of different ways, Mr. Speaker. We look at our 
corrections system or we look at what’s happening with 
addictions in this province. Look what happens with crime. This 
is part of this, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t say these things lightly 
and I don’t say these things to, you know, play the blame game 
because certainly there are parts of this that we all have 



3114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

responsibility for. 
 
There are some things that are going right. I was pleased to see 
the opening of a home where the focus is on keeping families 
together but in a therapeutic setting. And again great to see that, 
Mr. Speaker, but we see too little of that. Whereas alongside we 
see again the different sort of problems that I’ve touched on in 
my remarks here today. 
 
So in terms of the legislation coming forward that is mostly, 
generally administrative in nature, given the magnitude of the 
challenges, the ongoing crisis that we’re dealing with, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know that this does the job. And I don’t know 
that . . . You know, I know for a fact there are kids in care right 
now that minute to minute is a tough enough thing as it is. 
Waiting for the next round of legislation or setting up the 
administrative suite of measures to hopefully to foster further 
co-operation through the sector, I mean meanwhile you’ve got 
kids that are paying the price for our collective failure to deal in 
a better way than has been the case to date. 
 
So I know others of my colleagues have different things that 
they will be saying in this debate, but I guess I’d move to wrap 
up my remarks in this particular debate, Mr. Speaker, saying 
that, you know, we’re looking for more. We’re looking for 
better. We’re looking for a sign that all different levels of 
government, you know, on reserve, off reserve, that we can 
figure out a better way to put our heads together and do right by 
the kids of this province — all the kids of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. But with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 86, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 86. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:15] 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 
Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to rise to enter debate here in the legislature. Today it’s 
my pleasure to talk about Bill No. 87, The Data Matching 
Agreements Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For a Luddite like me, data matching and what this bill does is 
hard for me to wrap my head around. I do know just a few 
months ago I heard a really great program about data matching 
and lawyers using data matching to search large documents, Mr. 
Speaker, to try to find bits and pieces of information. And it 
sounds like that’s much what’s going to go on here, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Data matching, for those Luddites out there like me, it’s the act 
of using software to track and analyze large amounts of data. 
And this particular Act outlines how this would happen and the 
efforts to ensure privacy and good practice. 
 
It’s always good to look at the minister’s second reading 
speech. Often there can be more to the second reading speech or 
more to the bill than is in the second reading speech, but it’s a 
good place to start, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular Act will allow for the matching and linking of 
information in databases, the minister says to facilitate 
fact-based decision making within government. I’ll talk a little 
bit later about fact-based decision making in this government, 
but he goes on to say that “This Act promotes co-operation 
amongst government institutions sharing information while still 
protecting the privacy rights of individuals, following 
recommendations made by the Office of the . . . Privacy 
Commissioner.” 
 
I’m curious, I think, some of the questions that’ll come up in 
committee. So it’s being made on recommendations by the 
Privacy Commissioner. I’m wondering if every 
recommendation that he would’ve made has been included in 
this report, because I know that there’s been — oh pardon me, 
in this legislation — because I know there’s been legislation 
that comes before us previously around privacy that perhaps not 
all recommendations make it into legislation. So I know that the 
critic responsible will be covering some of that off in 
committee. 
 
“This . . . Act will create a statutory authority for government 
institutions and prescribe local authorities to enter into 
data-matching agreements and participate in data-matching 
projects using personal information or personal health 
information.” 
 
The minister goes on to say, his explanation: “Data matching is 
where information from one database is matched or linked with 
information in another database.” He points out that “This Act 
will establish requirements for the initiation of a data-matching 
program by a government institution or prescribed local 
authority and also place requirements on participating 
organizations.” 
 
Again as someone who isn’t very familiar with data matching, I 
know one of my questions would be just around examples. 
What does this look like? Has data matching . . . I know this 
legislation is just coming forward with recommendations from 
the Privacy Commissioner, but has the government already 
been doing some data matching in its work? So those will all be 
questions that get asked, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure, in committee. 
 
The Act also: 
 

. . . will require parties to a data-matching project to enter 
into a data-matching agreement which meets the criteria set 
out in the Act. Oversight will be provided by the 
government access coordinator where the initiating 
organization is a government institution, and the Office of 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner generally. 

 
He points out, “The government access coordinator and the 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

Privacy Commissioner will review agreements and provide 
comment.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there’s been . . . When it has come to . . . 
It is the access coordinator right now in each ministry who 
coordinates access to information requests or freedom of 
information requests, they’re called provincially. And there 
have been challenges I know not just within or from our caucus 
seeking information, but the news outlets and others who have 
run into trouble with the government in trying to access 
information, with the government withholding information or 
charging exorbitant fees which make it cost prohibitive to get 
information, or in fact instead of answering questions here in 
this House, telling the opposition, well do a freedom of 
information request, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But back to this bill. Back to Bill No. 87, the data-matching 
agreement. This Act, as the minister points out, it “. . . 
establishes reporting requirements where a data-matching 
project has been completed and sets out expressed good faith 
liability protection for disclosing information and compliance 
with such an agreement.” 
 
He says that: 
 

. . . the Office of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner will continue to retain all of its investigative 
and recommendation power under The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act and The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 

 
I don’t have the details in front of me, but I know that it’s been 
a long time coming in terms of the need to update, actually, our 
freedom in information privacy Act. I know the Privacy 
Commissioner would like to make those rules a little bit more 
robust to increase accountability and transparency, and that’s 
something that hasn’t come before this House, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know that our Privacy Commissioner and previous 
privacy commissioners have recommended some changes and 
amendments to make public access of government decisions 
more readily available. 
 
And the speaker — pardon me, Mr. Speaker — the minister 
also points out that: 
 

The government access coordinator . . . [will be] a new role 
that will be created through consequential amendments to 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act 
. . . [and this] coordinator will review data-matching 
agreements for government institutions and provide 
comment. The . . . access coordinator will also receive 
reports from government institutions where a 
data-matching project is completed. 

 
So these, Mr. Speaker . . . I think it’s an interesting area and an 
interesting place and time where, when you have large blocks of 
data, in this particular news story that I had heard about, 
lawyers and the use of it in preparation for cases being able to 
go through literally thousands and thousands of pages of 
documents that would previously have to be combed through by 
a person by hand . . . There’s still work that needs to be done in 
analyzing the data that you come up with, but it’s an interesting 

place to be here in 2017, and technology and how it facilitates 
our work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m very curious. I’d like to know a little bit more about the 
data-matching projects that have occurred and, if nothing has 
happened yet, what this might look like and some examples of 
that. 
 
It’s interesting to me when the minister, in his speech, talked 
about fact-based decision making. That jumped out at me, Mr. 
Speaker. As a critic here in the opposition I would argue that 
fact-based decision making would be a very nice thing to see 
from this government, that by and large we haven’t seen that. 
We can go to the wind-down of STC. And we have a minister 
and a ministry in Health, in particular, where a decision was 
made and then people are searching for answers on how that 
decision will impact people. So I believe in evidence-based 
policy, and fact-based decision making sounds like a good idea. 
 
I think about another area for which I was the critic when this 
government got rid of the film tax credit. There was all kinds of 
evidence and facts that showed that that helped generate income 
and jobs here in Saskatchewan, and the government ignored 
that. So I’m interested in . . . And there are many, many 
examples along the way in my eight years that I’ve been in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, but I am interested in their comment about 
fact-based decision making. 
 
One of the things . . . We’re talking about accountability and 
transparency here because we have large pieces of information 
and expectations to security that are involved in this bill. We 
have a Premier who can’t figure out how to stop using his 
private email server at the Sask Party office for government 
business. We have major concerns about accountability and 
transparency when it comes to the GTH land scandal, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have the privilege of serving as the Chair of the Public 
Accounts Committee. It’s the only committee chaired by the 
opposition and it is in fact a scrutiny committee. And I know 
that members have asked, an opposition member has asked on 
repeated occasions to have a key figure appear before our 
committee, which it was normal practice actually. It’s 
interesting to me when you have a ministry come before the 
Public Accounts Committee it’s normal that the deputy minister 
responsible for that ministry is the witness who appears along 
with, if it’s a third party organization, whether it’s the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board or a school board, the school board 
appears but so does the deputy minister of Education. Or if it’s 
the Arts Board it would be the Minister Responsible for Culture 
along with the Arts Board. So it’s been very unusual in my time 
as the PAC [Public Accounts Committee] Chair to see that 
Laurie Pushor has not, as the deputy minister responsible for the 
Economy, has not appeared before the committee. It was quite 
unusual, actually, that happened. 
 
So I know that in general we have serious concerns about how 
this government deals with accountability and transparency — a 
government who had committed to be the most accountable and 
transparent government in Saskatchewan’s history, which I 
think it’s been shown to not be the case, Mr. Speaker. But I 
think the Privacy Commissioner has made some 
recommendations and it’s good to see them in legislation. I’d 



3116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

like to know if there were more recommendations by the 
Privacy Commissioner and what maybe didn’t make it into the 
legislation, but those are all questions that I know the critic 
responsible will ask, questions once this bill gets to committee. 
 
But with that, with respect to Bill No. 87, The Data Matching 
Agreements Act, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 87. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 88 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to stand 
today to add my comments to the debate with regards to Bill 
No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring a little bit of reference to 
some of the comments that my colleague, the member from 
Cumberland, referred to when he was giving his responses to 
this bill. And he continuously referred to the member of Prince 
Albert Northcote, but I know he meant to refer to the member 
of Prince Albert Carlton, you know, and that is the minister that 
brought forward this bill. And so I just wanted to make sure that 
anyone who is researching this bill can understand that he made 
a little bit of an error there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, getting to make some comments with regards 
to changes with regards to this bill, my understanding is this is 
an Act that is administered by Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance — so oftentimes we refer to that as SGI, Mr. Speaker 
— and it’s talking about people who are injured in vehicle 
accidents and how they administer some of the costs that are 
related to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And first I want to talk a little bit about how important it is and 
how wonderful our Crown corporation of SGI is for the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’re very fortunate to have a 
government insurance company that provides affordable 
insurance for our vehicles and medical insurance when we need 
it, if we’re ever in a situation where we’re in an accident. And I 
know the staff that work at SGI are wonderful. I’ve had the 
opportunity to work with them due to some of the incidences 
I’ve had with regards to vehicle collisions, some of them maybe 
my fault, some of them not so much. But in any case, they’ve 
always been very good to work with and very helpful and very 
professionally trained, and I appreciate the services that they 
provide. 
 

I know other people from other provinces, some of my relatives 
or friends, they talk about how they really wish they had an 
opportunity to get auto insurance from a Crown corporation like 
we have with SGI because of the affordable rates that we 
experience, and then the benefits that we get with regards to 
dividends when the insurance company doesn’t need to pay out 
because people are having less accidents or using the insurance 
a lot less. And so I think that’s really important that we keep 
that in the back of our mind when we talk about these Acts and 
the importance that these services are for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SGI has a safe driver recognition program, Mr. Speaker. And 
with regards to this recognition program, they have safety rating 
scales and they’re based on your driving history. And so people 
who have been safe drivers are awarded a discount on their 
vehicle insurance, and drivers that may have displayed riskier 
behaviour or happened to be in some different collisions are 
assessed and they receive financial penalties. So I know this 
program has been well received by a lot of people, because they 
appreciate the fact that they’re getting rewarded for their safe 
driving records. And so having some of your insurance 
discounted with regards to that is very helpful, you know, and 
people appreciate that. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And I know people, as soon as they get into an accident they’re 
like, oh no, what are my points going to look like? And that’s 
what you oftentimes hear them talk about, and so it really does 
put that in your mind when you’re driving. So some of the 
changes that are with regards to this bill have some implications 
with this recognition program, and that’s why I thought it was 
important to talk about that a little bit. 
 
So this bill defines chargeable incidents for the purpose of the 
safety rating assessment. Mr. Speaker, I was looking in there 
and wondering why they needed to define “chargeable incident” 
and why, if that was something that would affect your rating 
assessment, why that wasn’t already in the Act or the bill? And 
so I still don’t really have a clear understanding of why that was 
needed to be more defined. 
 
And I hope that whoever is going to be looking at this bill and 
figuring out if these changes are going to be good or not . . . 
Because my other understanding is some of these changes are 
coming into effect because there was some other changes the 
last time and they didn’t realize the impacts. So I think it’s 
really important that we take a lot of time to understand what 
the potential impacts could be when you’re making changes to a 
bill. 
 
And so I’m wondering, like if you were in a car accident and 
whoever the agent was determined that there’ll be a chargeable 
incident, are they in a position that they can identify that? And 
if in fact you were charged but then proven innocent, what kind 
of implications does that have, you know? And so . . . Because I 
read later on with regards to that, and they talk about the 
conviction aspect, if you are charged with an offence and then 
convicted, how then the insurer could go back and receive the 
compensations that they already paid out. So do we need to . . . 
How do we go about with determining which chargeable 
incidences we determine aren’t going to be included or are, and 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

which ones are? Because I’d hate to put agents in a position 
where they have to make these decisions. But when people are 
convicted, then I think that changes everything. So that’s why I 
don’t understand the reason why we need to have that defined 
to the extent that it was. 
 
They also said a part of the definition of chargeable incident is 
duplicated in the regulations, and so they made changes to 
eliminate this duplication because it was not necessary, and 
everything will be more efficient when changes are required to 
the listed offences. So again there’s been some more changes 
there. And I don’t understand what the purpose of that 
duplication was at one point and why it’s not necessary now. So 
excuse me for the lack of information I have with regards to 
this, and I know the critic responsible will have a better 
understanding and do the due diligence of talking to the 
stakeholders that would have some better understanding of it 
than maybe I do. 
 
So when SGI changes a driver’s safety rating, Mr. Speaker, the 
driver has the option to appeal this decision with the Highway 
Traffic Board. And so this is a great opportunity to have outside 
observers look at a situation and make a determination of 
whether that decision from SGI is warranted. 
 
And so part of the process of the appeal, the Act indicates that 
the board will contact the driver applying for the appeal to 
schedule the appointment. But apparently, according to what 
the minister’s remarks were, he indicated that they’re going to 
be changing the rules to indicate that the driver will contact the 
board, because apparently that’s what’s being done at this point. 
And I’m not understanding why the drivers would be contacting 
the traffic board. I would think it would make more sense for 
the Highway Traffic Board to be contacting drivers on their 
time, and making those appointments. But I guess if people are 
already making those calls, who’s monitoring them? Who’s 
scheduling them? And I guess that would be something to look 
into too. Like is it going to be too convoluted, or maybe it does 
make more sense. Like, so I think that’s another area that 
should be looked into to see if this is going to be a decision that 
we’re going to see later down the line, that it’s going to make 
more work than we anticipated. I think we need to make sure 
that that’s looked into. 
 
So another change that they’re going to be making with regards 
to the amendments to this Act is if a driver is convicted of 
criminal negligence causing death. Or I’m thinking, because the 
minister said, “. . . and criminal negligence causing bodily 
harm,” I’m wondering if its needing to be both of those or if it’s 
and/or — those two different offences — or if they have to be 
together. 
 
SGI can recover any insurance paid for, with regards to pain 
and suffering or bereavement damages, from that driver’s third 
party liability insurance. So, Mr. Speaker, my understanding of 
this is that if someone is convicted of an offence, that then SGI 
can go back and say, you need to pay us back whatever money 
was put into their medical expenses because of the accident, or 
if they’ve deceased, the family members, or if there was any 
payments with regards to that. 
 
My question I guess, Mr. Speaker, would be: if these people are 
convicted, at times they might be in the justice system. And the 

justice system has an obligation to ensure that their medical 
needs are met and handled, so what cost of medical expenses 
will then be under the Department of Justice as expenses? 
Because my understanding is they have that obligation to ensure 
the individuals get the medical treatment that they need, you 
know. 
 
And so if SGI isn’t going to be the person who provides that, 
then it might be held on to another ministry of ours and so it’ll 
be taken from one pot to the other. Or how much expenses 
would that . . . And would there be other ministries that might 
see some expenses with regards to that? I don’t know, like 
Social Services or other agencies that provide health care for 
individuals. I’m not quite sure, but . . . 
 
And so I guess another change that I’m going to talk about is 
that because of changes that was made to this Act in 2016, some 
of the cost penalties to the more riskier drivers, they doubled 
the cost to them. And so they’re making amendments to this 
Act to allow for people to be able to make monthly instalments 
with regards to what they would be owing for penalties. And I 
was kind of a little bit shocked about that because I thought, 
well I know some of these penalties can be quite big and I 
would have thought that SGI would’ve already been allowing to 
take a monthly payment with regards to that. 
 
But I’m glad that this is going to be allowed then because a lot 
of people really do want to pay for their mistakes but they can’t 
just put down the money immediately. So if they have an option 
of doing monthly instalments, that’s a good plan. And so when I 
talk about people who maybe have gotten some benefits from 
SGI with regards to their medical expenses but then they were 
criminally found negligent and then now they have to pay that 
back, I’m hoping they’ll also be included with regards to that 
monthly instalment because I think some of those costs might 
be just too big for people to be able to pay immediately. And if 
they’re making that effort and they’re trying their best, I think 
we need to honour that and respect that, that they’re taking the 
responsibility. 
 
But I guess one of the things is, if we haven’t been doing this as 
a corporation, how much more is it going to cost with regards to 
implementing a program or a process in order to allow for this? 
Are we going to need more staff to be able to manage a monthly 
program? Or will people be able to just do like bank 
withdrawals? And then who sets that all up? Or will there be 
more people coming in on a monthly basis to make payments? 
And so will this be a program that needs to be set up? Will that 
cost extra money? So how much money will that cost to start 
implementing this program I think is a question that needs to be 
asked. 
 
And then there’s the more . . . clarifications in this Act with 
regards to finances given to family members that require 
counselling because of someone being injured in a collision, 
Mr. Speaker. And so they kind of identify who is a family 
member and they provide more definition with regards to that, 
and then they clarify a little bit about that aspect. 
 
One thing that I saw that was lacking in there is they don’t 
clearly identify counselling in there, or services. So I don’t 
know if this is just based on the agent’s response and what they 
feel is appropriate or if there are any boundaries with regards to 



3118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

that. I think it’s really important that . . . And I think this is a 
really good thing that SGI does, is provide that counselling 
because, as we see, if people don’t get services to deal with a 
trauma then we’ll see those effects later down in life. And so I 
was happy to see that being part of this Act. And it’s up to 
$5,000 with regards to the benefits that are allowed. And so I’m 
assuming that’s per family member that’s requiring this service 
because when they identify people who are eligible, they say 
parents. So I’m wondering if it’s for both father and mother or 
if it’s for them combined, or brother and sister, if it’s for each 
individual member. 
 
So I guess those would be some questions that I’m sure the 
critic will ask when there’s time to do so. And I know my 
colleagues will have a lot more to add to the amendments to this 
particular Act. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 
make a motion to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 88. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into debate on this Bill No. 89, An Act to 
amend The Education Act, 1995. It is kind of a different kind of 
Act that we have before it. It almost looks like a private 
member’s bill. It has a preamble; we don’t usually see 
preambles in government bills. And it goes on, whereas, 
whereas, whereas. And whether that’s part of . . . 
 
What we have seen, unfortunately, from the Premier in his 
grandstanding on this particular issue — where calmer minds, 
more reflective minds can find a solution that we would think is 
more appropriate — that the Premier and the minister of the day 
last year, when we had heard the ruling, actually jumped to 
some positions that I think weren’t in the best interest of the 
people of the province. We have a situation today where, 
myself, I introduced a petition, and it’s been daily, about the 
costs of education, how that’s being cut, cut over $600 per 
student in this province. We have a situation like that and here 
we are dealing with a bill where, no doubt if the ruling stands 
from last spring, that it would be a shift, quite a significant shift 
in how things are done here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:45] 
 
But we know that there’s a process in place, a time-honoured 
process, one that we’ve seen. And in fact the government side 
often refers to it in terms of the court system and honouring the 

court system, the judicial branch, and letting it do its process. 
We’ll see how that unfolds, but we need to give them some time 
to do that. And there is an appeal process that’s happening. 
 
And we have met with both sides of the issue and both sides, all 
sides, are taking this very seriously. This is a serious, serious 
matter, but this government seems bent on . . . I don’t know 
whether it’s creating a diversion. I found it interesting today the 
minister in an answer to a question period essentially said — 
and we’ll see what Hansard says tomorrow — but when she 
read from a headline in a paper saying that essentially it’s not a 
total disaster what’s happening in education in Saskatchewan 
today, just a little, a little, a little, a little bit of a debacle, you 
know. 
 
And here this is the kind of legislation that we have before us, 
that we have before us today, and we’re debating this in all 
seriousness when really parents today when they come home at 
suppertime, will be talking to their children: how did your day 
at school go? And they will be talking about, they wish that 
they had another learning assistant in the classroom; they wish 
that the classes weren’t quite as crowded as they are today, and 
that there were more teachers, there were more resources. But 
the reality is that the government has cut, while they increased 
the taxes and what people are paying by some 120 million, 121 
million, yet cut over $60 million in the total funding. Now they 
will play some interesting math over there. And they like to talk 
about the last 10 years. But what we often ask over here, where 
did that money go? Where did that money go? 
 
And here we have a situation where we have this bill before us 
today and the minister just today is talking about that headline, 
and saying, well she was expecting something much worse and 
it’s not quite as bad. It’s not . . . We averted a total disaster. 
 
But you know, I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that when I’ve 
known people who have been on school boards and teachers 
and everybody who’s been connected with the school system 
. . . And you know, I think of myself that I first started teaching 
in the fall of 1982, a few years ago, and it was up north in a 
small village called Makwa, a great little community. And I was 
actually with the member from Meadow Lake at the reunion a 
few years ago, and over 800 people. I think he was a little 
surprised to see me standing in front of the Co-op, but I was up 
there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Not in front of the Co-op; 
that would not be a surprise. But I was a little ways from home 
but it always felt like at home. And I was up there for seven 
years. 
 
But I always see that school boards, teachers, parents, kids will 
make schools work. And that’s been what we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve always been doing that. And we have a 
situation today where we really need to make sure that we have 
this ruling that, as I said, really if unchallenged would provide a 
huge shift in how we do things in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s got to be clear. And I want to make sure we get this on 
the record here because the government always likes to get out 
in front and say what our position is. But when we’ve been 
clear about our position and that we support publicly funded 
education, which includes both our public systems and our 
Catholic systems. We’ve been very clear about that, and we’ve 
always felt that way. And I think that’s important. We have 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

people on our side who have recently been on the public school 
board and also has been on a Catholic school board. And our 
kids go to all the schools here. And so, Mr. Speaker, we know 
the situation that we see. 
 
But we also know very clearly that things are not as they should 
be in our classrooms. And clearly this government, the 
leadership within the government, are failing, are failing the 
students and failing the future generations of our families 
because they are eliminating the growth. And the cuts, the 
mismanagement, the waste, the scandal that this government 
has really put out there in the last 10 years when they had 
record revenues, record revenues. Now often they will try to 
portray it as if it was business as usual. And they made . . . they 
had found this money from someplace that we were unaware of. 
 
But it would fact . . . The province is booming and now we’re in 
a situation where they’ve had to cut, had to cut the very things 
that we should hold near and dear to ourselves and be ready to 
invest and stand, and stand. And these are not the times, these 
are not the times when you cut funding in our classrooms. 
 
And so we’ve said, and we’ve said this right from the beginning 
when the court ruling came out, that in order to move forward, 
we need both time, time and clarity are needed. We support the 
appeal because it could provide both. But the Sask Party’s 
grandstanding provides neither. And this is what’s so alarming. 
And we’ve seen this from the Premier in his last weeks here in 
the legislature that he’d rather grandstand and divert attention 
from what really is happening. 
 
And as the minister said, and I think we’ll hear more and more 
about this, but we have a situation where she talks about 
wanting certainty in the classroom. But yet in her own Throne 
Speech, she opens the Pandora’s box of uncertainty, 
uncertainty. And where we’ve had several weeks and letters to 
the paper and all sorts of people questioning, what does she 
really mean? What does she really mean? And this has really 
been a challenge.  
 
So on one hand she’s calling for certainty, but on the other hand 
she can be pretty, pretty vague and, you know, suggesting to a 
lot of people question marks about the direction that so many in 
our province have said this is the right direction to go. And I’m 
thinking around treaty education, that there were several weeks 
where people were really, really questioning, what does that 
minister really mean? What in her heart does she really mean? 
And she still hasn’t actually come clean on that but she has — 
and I think by the government’s insistence — that she really is 
clear about the mandate of treaty education in our schools. 
 
And I have to say, you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you 
watched the Grey Cup last night, but I thought it was so neat at 
the beginning when the indigenous fellow talked about the two 
teams that were playing and one was from the traditional 
grounds, the homeland, of the Mississauga against the 
traditional lands of the Blackfoot confederacy. Which I thought 
was really neat. What a view of Canada. It made me feel really 
proud that this is happening right across Canada. And yet I hope 
that wasn’t lost on many people here because we often think of 
Mississauga as the community, but I don’t think of them 
necessarily as a First Nation, but truly they are and we need to 
think about that. We need to think more about that. 

And so when we talk about certainty in our education there 
should be some things that we’re certain about, that we are 
certain about. And, Mr. Speaker, we are certain that our system 
of public education that includes both the public and Catholic 
system will be valued and will be honoured and will continue 
forth. We need to allow the processes that are there right now to 
continue. This is not the time. And it’s a dangerous thing, and 
the unintended consequences of using the notwithstanding 
clause at this point, we are not sure what the ramifications of 
that could be. That could be huge. Have we really thought that 
right through, or was this a knee-jerk reaction of a government 
that was looking to divert attention in the spring from a budget 
that was bad news for everyone but particularly education? 
 
And we’re talking about education today and we’re seeing the 
minister dodge questions about the fact there are fewer teachers 
in our classrooms, but yet more students; fewer learning 
assistants, but more students. We’re seeing real, real impacts. 
And we’re still not having dealt with the question that 
indigenous students in our province get funded at a lower level 
— and not by a little bit; by a lot, by a lot — than their 
neighbours, and how we need to address that issue. And that’s 
an issue that’s real, a real issue that has impact not only on 
those students, the indigenous students and their families, but 
also on our economy. This could be a huge thing, and the 
University of Saskatchewan has produced research to back that 
up. 
 
We’re seeing the fact that because of that budget last year, 
where the government had announced a mandate of . . . a cut of 
3.5 per cent, and in fact a leak in terms of the bargaining that’s 
happening between the teachers and the impact it’s having on 
the morale of teachers at a time when they need support, at a 
time when we had the minister saying, well, it wasn’t a total 
disaster, just a debacle. This is something that we can’t let go 
of. This is a time when we need to come together. We need to 
come together, and I’m not sure that using the notwithstanding 
. . . I’m sure not using the notwithstanding clause is not an 
appropriate signal. We will get the clarity, and we will get the 
balance that’s appropriate. But I think that we need to see what 
happens with the appeal and where they’re going. 
 
So this is irresponsible to be throwing around comments or let’s 
do the notwithstanding, particularly, particularly when the 
Premier is about to leave. This is one that I’ve not heard the 
candidates speak on. Clearly many of them are, and I know 
several of them are just status quo, keeping the same line going 
forward. That is unfortunate because clearly when you’re 
having leadership, this is a problem. 
 
So we’re very concerned that the government is playing politics 
with our kids and their classrooms, and the impact will be felt 
for generations because once you lose that kind of ground, the 
ground of losing $674 per student is hard to make back up. It’s 
hard to make up. And while they can talk about some of the 
things they’ve done, this is the reality, that tonight when parents 
and their children are sitting around their classrooms, they’re 
going to be talking about this, about how are things in the 
school. And so this is a real concern that we have. And I think 
that when we look at the issues that are before us, the 
indigenous education, the lack of equity with that, the issue 
around the uncertainty that the minister has introduced around 
treaty education and has refused to come clean, and then the 



3120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

fact of the cuts to, you know, per student. That is huge. 
 
So we have some real concerns, Mr. Speaker, with this. I mean 
this will be interesting as we get into the debates further on this, 
the questions and more on this. I know my colleagues will have 
a lot to say as we hear more, as the school year rolls out. We’re 
going to be breaking for the Christmas break soon, and we’ll be 
hearing about how things are actually going in the classroom. 
We hope for things to be much better than just a near close call, 
or a near disaster as the minister would categorize it, because 
that’s just not good enough. That’s not good enough for our 
kids. It’s not something I would expect. 
 
And, you know, now that I’m a grandparent, I’m thinking more 
about generational change, generational improvement. My kids 
had a great education. I want my grandkids to have a great 
education. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
adjournment on Bill No. 89, An Act to amend The Education 
Act, 1995. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3089 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3089 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3089 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3090 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3090 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3090 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3090 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3090 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3090 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3091 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3092 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3092 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3092 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3092 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Affordable Lunch Program at Prince Albert Campus 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3093 
 Unite Campaign Against Gender-Based Violence 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3093 
 Saskatoon Hosts Canadian Ultimate Championship 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3093 
 Minister of Agriculture Rides Steer for Fundraiser 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3093 
 Knights of Columbus Fundraiser for Children’s Hospital 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3094 
 Construction Experience Gained Through Dual-Certificate Program  
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3094 
 Railway Provides Employment Opportunities 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3094 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Federal-Provincial Relations and Power Generation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3094 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3095 
 Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3096 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3096 
 Government Position on Reproductive Health 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3096 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3096 
 Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass Project and Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3097 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3097 
 Crime Rates in Saskatchewan 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3098 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 
 Staff Numbers in the Education System 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3100 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Agrologists Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3100 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3101 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 
 Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3107 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3108 
 Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3108 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 
 Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3110 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3112 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3114 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3116 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3118 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




