






















































Hansard: November 16, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 13A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2949 
 November 16, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, to all the 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a friend of 
mine, Marjan Shah. He is a good businessman in Regina, with 
his son Maaz Shah. Later on today, I will tell about Maaz Shah 
in my member’s statement. 
 
I would like to ask all the members to join me and welcome 
them in their legislative. Thanks. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed this petition wish to bring 
to the attention of this legislature the following: Saskatchewan 
has the highest rate of domestic violence amongst the provinces 
in Canada. Employers should be obligated to reasonably 
accommodate survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. 
Employees who are survivors of domestic violence should be 
able to take a leave of absence from their employment without 
penalty. And Saskatchewan must do much more to protect 
survivors of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what we call for in our private 
member’s bill, Bill 605. I’m very optimistic that the Minister of 
Justice and the Minister of Labour, who’s actually the same 
person right now, will see the benefit of this legislation and will 
call on his counterparts to pass it into law. Those who signed 
this petition today come from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising to present a petition to 
end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for Saskatchewan families 
and businesses. The people who have signed this petition would 
like to bring to our attention the following: the Sask Party has 
hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families and business by $1 
billion per year, and at the same time Sask Party has handed 
over $100 million in tax breaks to corporations and the wealthy 
and well connected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party increased the PST [provincial sales 
tax] to 6 per cent and applied it to everything, from groceries 
and children’s clothes to a case of beer and even insurance 

premiums. Then the Sask Party’s new tax on crop insurance is a 
devastating hit on producers. Many small and medium-sized 
businesses, including those in the restaurant, tourism, and 
construction industries, will be hit hard by the Sask Party tax 
hikes. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who’ve signed the petition today 
come from the fair city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I do 
so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert, which is also supported by the leadership 
candidate Rob Clarke for the Sask Party. 
 
The individuals that signed this particular petition want me to 
draw these points to your attention: that the Diefenbaker bridge 
in Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the southern 
part of the province to the North, and that this need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that the support of the people and municipal 
governments of Prince Albert and neighbouring communities 
for a second bridge is overwhelming and has been joined by 
support from industry groups, the Saskatchewan association of 
regional municipalities, and many others across the province; 
and that the Sask Party government refuses to stand up for 
Prince Albert and this critical infrastructure issue. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 
 
The individuals that signed this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the community of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
the Sask Party is making students and their families pay for 
Sask Party financial mismanagement; that Saskatchewan 
students already pay the second-highest tuition fees in Canada; 
that this budget cuts 36.8 million from post-secondary 
education and 6.4 million from technical institutions; that 
funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and 
scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and that the Sask 
Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling their 
first home plan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the northern village of Buffalo Narrows, 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following: that 
the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre left 15 
people out of work and financial impact on their families and to 
all local businesses. They point out that the closure hurt elders 
within the community and their ability to take benefit of the 
help of the inmates doing odd jobs and helping the community 
generally. 
 
They point out that the closure of the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre hurt the families of the inmates who would 
be learning new skills while working with skilled employers to 
obtain employment upon release. They point out that the 
closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre took the 
inmates far away from their families, which make visitation 
difficult or non-existent at all. And, Mr. Speaker, they point out 
that the closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre 
took away from inmates the chance to get treatment and to 
obtain training tickets which of course goes towards 
rehabilitation and successful rehabilitation, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre to better the community for 
generations to come. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Buffalo 
Narrows and region. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave for 
introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Yorkton. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you a great group of 30 grade 8 
students from Columbia School in Yorkton. And they’re 
participating in A Day at the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. Accompanying the students today are their teachers, 
Elora Lake and Sarah Christie-Petrovich, and officials from the 
Provincial Capital Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, A Day in the Legislative Assembly 
is an educational program that was introduced in 2012 by the 
Capital Commission, part of the 100th anniversary of the 
Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Building, and is now 
offered each spring and fall. Since its introduction, the program 
has become a valuable tool for hundreds of the province’s 
students to learn about our democratic process and the roles of 
the members of the Assembly. 
 
The students from Yorkton will be touring the historic 
Legislative Building today and observing MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] at work. And I thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, personally, for agreeing to lead the panel discussion 
this afternoon at the Chamber. And who knows, perhaps one of 
these days some of these students may find an interest in public 
service through the Public Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, 
or one day they might be standing in my place and introducing 
another group of students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I invite all members to join me in welcoming these fine 
students to their Legislative Assembly, and I look forward to 
visiting with them later. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This petition I’m presenting is in reference to the permanent 
closure of Main Street access of Highway No. 1 in the town of 
Balgonie. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and the 
Main Street. 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

The people of Balgonie and the area also respectfully 
request that the Government of Saskatchewan put up a 
locked gate on the apron between the eastbound lanes and 
westbound lanes of Highway No. 1 and Balgonie’s Main 
Street intersection. This gate would allow emergency 
services access to the eastbound lanes of Highway No. 1 at 
the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, but would not allow 
the public access to cross east- and westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page 
they’re from Zehner; they’re from Balgonie; they’re from 
McLean; they’re from White City, and all throughout the 
region, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Louis Riel Memorial Day 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
November 16th, 2017 marks the 132nd anniversary of the 
execution of Louis Riel. He was executed for his role in leading 
the North-West Resistance in defence of Métis rights. 
 
Louis Riel fought for basic human rights. He was a leader not 
only for the Métis, but for all Canadians. Mr. Speaker, Riel was 
a man who stood up not only for the Métis, but the non-status 
Indians, indigenous people, and the settlers whose land were 
taken away from them through encroachment. Today is not only 
one of remembrance, but also one of celebration of the Métis 
people’s biggest heroes, a man who ended up paying the 
ultimate price for the betterment of his people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are events taking place across Saskatchewan 
which offer a wonderful learning opportunity to broaden 
people’s views of Canadian history. This education is one of the 
calls to action under the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
As we commemorate Louis Riel Day, I would also like to 
honour Métis people and the Métis communities across Canada. 
We best honour Riel’s sacrifice by working in this House in and 
around the province with a focus on improving Métis people’s 
quality of life. To accomplish this, we will need a distinct and 
innovative approach and a real partnership with the Métis 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I ask all 
members to join with me in remembering and celebrating the 
life of Louis Riel and his sacrifice to improve life for all 
Canadians. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, the 
Moose Jaw Sask Polytechnic campus will hold a ceremonial 
flag raising for Louis Riel Memorial Day. The event will 
feature a flag raising, a traditional meal provided by Sioux Chef 
Catering, baking, and jigging. 
 
[10:15] 

Mr. Speaker, flag raisings will be held in Moose Jaw, Prince 
Albert, Regina, and Saskatoon polytechnic campuses. It is 
important that we recognize such important history as we 
honour indigenous communities in Saskatchewan. By raising 
this flag, we are acknowledging Louis Riel’s life, his legacy, 
and his contributions to the Métis community. He was very 
passionate for youth and education, as he dedicated his life to 
teaching the importance of Métis culture. 
 
I am proud of my Métis heritage, as well as being a first cousin 
to Louis Riel. 
 
I will close with this quote from Louis Riel and ask all members 
to carry it with them today: “We must cherish our inheritance. 
We must preserve our nationality for the youth of our future. 
The story should be written down to pass on.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in thanking 
Sask Polytechnic for putting on this important event today. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Thunderchild First Nation Resident Wins Indspire Award 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today to 
recognize a friend, Mr. Michael Linklater, who has been 
selected to receive an Indspire Award in 2018. The Indspire 
Awards recognize significant contributions by indigenous 
people in Canada. Michael is from the Thunderchild First 
Nation, and he is also a constituent of mine in Saskatoon 
Meewasin. I first got to know Michael when he was working 
with young people at the White Buffalo Youth Lodge just down 
the street from my house. 
 
Michael will be honoured for his work in the sports and athletic 
category, having played university basketball and been a star 
player in the FIBA [Fédération internationale de basket-ball] 
3 x 3 basketball tournaments and travelling around the world. 
 
He is also being recognized for his work with the Boys with 
Braids campaign. This campaign works to inform Canadians 
about the cultural significance of braids in First Nations culture. 
For Michael, the idea of Boys with Braids was necessary after 
his own experience with bullying and seeing his own sons being 
bullied in school. Boys with Braids has gained international 
attention and has been recognized for its role in breaking down 
harmful stereotypes and views regarding indigenous people. 
 
It’s great to see such a fantastic role model for all people across 
the province recognized for his excellent work. I’d like to take 
this moment to ask all members of the House to join me in 
congratulating Michael for his well-deserved award as an 
Indspire winner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan 
Holds Grand Opening 

 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my pleasure 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

to bring greetings on behalf of the government to the 
Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan grand opening, 
yesterday afternoon. I would like to thank Executive Director 
Jamie Eng, staff, and board, as well as President Bruce McKee, 
for their leadership and congratulate them on making their new 
home a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many other mental illnesses, schizophrenia is 
different for everyone. It takes the efforts of many to deliver the 
services and programs to address mental health and addictions 
which can be very complex. Mr. Speaker, community-based 
organizations play such an important role in the education and 
delivery of mental health services. 
 
For years the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan has 
provided incredible services and programs to the public, as well 
as families and friends of those living with schizophrenia. I 
thank them for the advocacy that they do for the families across 
Saskatchewan who are in need of support. Mr. Speaker, 
encouraging communities to educate themselves and become 
aware of the complexities that come with mental health brings 
communities closer together. 
 
I would like to thank my colleagues, the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest and the member from Regina Rosemont, 
for also joining me to the grand opening event. Each and every 
member of this Assembly is no stranger to mental health and 
the effects it can have on our families and our communities. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in congratulating 
the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan’s grand opening. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Donation to Children’s Hospital 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in the House today to acknowledge and thank a very 
generous family from the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 
who’s donated $1 million to the Jim Pattison Children’s 
Hospital. 
 
The family of the late Ken Cugnet donated this money late last 
year to go towards new pediatric surgical suites. Mr. Speaker, 
this is just the latest example of the generosity of this family as 
they choose to stand and help the most vulnerable in our 
province, ensuring that the best medical practices and 
experiences are readily available for families. 
 
The suites will be located near the pediatric emergency 
department and are designed to meet the needs of children who 
are requiring surgery. They will include an operative area and 
an induction room where parents can stay with their children 
while anesthesia is being administered to the young patient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is hard to imagine what a family may be going 
through while their young child is in the hospital. This gift that 
the Cugnet family has given will give space for families to 
come together during a difficult time under the best medical 
supervision. So, Mr. Speaker, I now ask that all members join 
me in thanking the family of the late Kenny Cugnet, his wife, 
Jo-Anne, and sons Dan, Craig, Tim, and Matt and their families, 
for their generous donation and their dedication and care for 

families across this province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Junior Squash Player Rising in National Ranks 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand in 
the Assembly today to recognize a special individual from 
Regina, Maaz Shah. Maaz Shah is in grade 7 and goes to Jack 
MacKenzie. He is a 12-year-old and is a nationally ranked 
squash player. He is currently ranked sixth in Canada for boys 
under 13 rankings, but he did want me to mention that he is 
expected to rise to fifth after his most recent victory. This 
victory was an undefeated showing at Alberta Jesters junior 
squash open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Maaz was born in Toronto and, like so many 
others in the past decade, moved to Regina in 2008. He has 
since fallen in love with the sport of squash, and through talent 
and dedication found success, and he enjoys that. 
 
Maaz has had opportunity to travel across the world to 
complete, including the British Junior Open in Sheffield, the 
Scottish Junior Open in Edinburgh, US [United States] Junior 
Open in Connecticut. And he has told me that his dream is to be 
squash world champion. And after this success so far, I would 
not bet against him since I know that his family moved from 
Pakistan from the town produced two squash championships, 
Jehangir Khan and Jansher Khan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I do like to 
congratulate Maaz on all his success. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

National Nurse Practitioner Week 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
November 12th to the 18th is National Nurse Practitioner 
Week. This is a time we set aside to nurse practitioners for their 
excellent work they do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurse practitioners are committed, passionate 
professionals who play an extremely important role in health 
care teams. They dedicate themselves to everyday high quality 
care for both patient and family centres.  
 
Mr. Speaker, nurse practitioners are registered nurses with 
advanced education. They perform physical assessments, order 
diagnostic tests, diagnose and treat common medical conditions, 
and prescribe medications. They also perform minor surgical 
procedures. 
 
Our government values what they do, and we appreciate their 
contributions to patient care in urban, rural, and remote 
communities in our province. As we continue to work towards 
providing the best care possible all across our province, nurse 
practitioners will continue to play a significant role in our 
communities. Together we’re improving primary health care 
services for Saskatchewan people to receive the care they need 
and deserve every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I offer my deep appreciation to all nurse 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

practitioners working in the Saskatchewan health care systems. 
I ask my colleagues to join me in wishing them the very best 
this week. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party like to talk a lot 
about their first couple of years in office. But they don’t have 
much to brag about in the last couple. We only need to mention 
the Regina bypass. They handed it to a foreign conglomerate 
and let it take up 60 per cent of the highway budget. And the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub], Mr. Speaker. Bill Boyd, 
Laurie Pushor, Joe Donlevy: Mr. Speaker, these names were at 
the centre of the scandal, but we all know the whole cabinet is 
complicit. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake spoke his mind during his 
very brief appearance in the leadership race, but it’s back to the 
company line now. Mr. Speaker, those still running to replace 
the Premier have called for everything from a full inquiry to 
selling the whole thing. But, Mr. Speaker, the latest entry, Rob 
Clarke, says that none of them can earn the trust of 
Saskatchewan people because they were in the front bench or 
backrooms for all of these scandals and insider deals. 
 
So again, knowing what he knows now, does the Premier wish 
he had fired Bill Boyd and Laurie Pushor instead of trusting 
them with the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all, I’ll need to correct the preamble of my hon. friend opposite. 
She characterized the first couple of years of Saskatchewan 
Party government as highlighting a number of successes. But I 
want to encourage her to also consider what’s been happening 
here lately in the last number of years, even through the low 
resource prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bypass she mentioned, for example, the largest 
infrastructure project in the history of the province, on time and 
on budget, 90 per cent Saskatchewan contractors being used, 
Mr. Speaker. How many schools did we open this fall in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Nineteen brand new schools, not 
eight years ago but just this fall. And I was at an event up in 
Saskatoon when we were working on . . . They are still working 
on a brand new children’s hospital for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there is the North Battleford 
Saskatchewan hospital that’s under way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also tell you that through some difficult 
resource times in terms of prices, international commodity 
prices, we’ve seen our population grow every single quarter, 
Mr. Speaker. So the good news is, in just eight years ago, if the 
hon. members are . . . could just be a little bit more optimistic 
and hopeful, they’d look around and see how strong this 
province is through that period of time. 
 
And by the way, that strength includes things like the Global 

Transportation Hub where there is over 800 brand new jobs that 
have been created there, where private companies together with 
the public sector are investing in a world-class logistics centre 
as our province seeks to continue to increase exports and keep 
our economy strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Education Curriculum 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — That’s pretty funny, Mr. Speaker, because 
that’s not what those leadership candidates are saying about the 
GTH. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Education stood in this 
place and said that she wanted to apologize “unequivocally.” 
But, Mr. Speaker, she didn’t really apologize and she definitely 
equivocated. She introduced her apology by saying that she was 
erring, “Erring on the side of caution, probity, and honour of . . . 
this House.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, either she really doesn’t get it, or she does and she 
hopes we don’t. The word “err,” Mr. Speaker, means to be 
mistaken or incorrect or to be wrong. In motivating her 
apology, she said that she was wrong to apologize. Put another 
way, the minister said in this legislature that, for the sake of 
decency, she would say sorry even though she was wrong to do 
it. When she should have been asking, is it too late to say I’m 
sorry, she was dragging us all back to, it wasn’t me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier really stand by this “sorry, not 
sorry”? Will he finally send a clear message he said he wanted 
to send yesterday and fire this minister? Or is he comfortable 
erring on the side of less-is-more when it comes to indigenous 
education — which is a serious issue, even though this Premier 
is heckling and laughing in his seat right now — and the 
education of all Saskatchewan children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, sorry 
means sorry. I apologized yesterday, an apology that stands on 
the record, that was meant genuinely and unequivocally and 
fully heartfeltedly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the Premier said yesterday, we are all treaty people. And as a 
government that mandated treaty education, we will ensure that 
students continue to be taught treaty education as is the case 
right now. Since 2012 we’ve provided the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner over $1 million to deliver treaty education, to 
renew resources which are now in use in schools across the 
province, Mr. Speaker, an invaluable resource that will 
continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, both the Premier and the 
minister keep talking about a dispute in the facts of what was in 
that assignment. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no dispute. The 
curriculum, it’s up on the ministry website. You can look at the 
assignment itself, which is posted online. And yet the minister’s 
refusing to give a direct apology. 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

Two days ago, when asked directly what she was apologizing 
for, all the minister could say was for bringing up her son. What 
about the teachers? What about the parents? What about the 
students? What about indigenous peoples across Saskatchewan? 
All she’s apologizing for is the “confusion” that she may have 
caused others. She’s blaming them and taking no responsibility 
herself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the media gave her many chances yesterday, but 
the minister refused to admit she was wrong and refused to 
admit that treaty education is fair and balanced. How can the 
Premier be satisfied with that? How can he stand by that 
minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, once 
again the apology was meant unequivocally. I apologized to 
everyone that the member for Rosemont has mentioned and that 
stands and will continue to stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we remember the record 
across education that has demonstrated a clear commitment to 
First Nations and education that will continue. The First 
Nations and Métis education fund will continue. Increased 
graduation rates for First Nations and Métis students will 
continue to be top of mind, Mr. Speaker. Developing programs 
such as Following Their Voices, Help Me Tell My Story, Pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten], KidsFirst, early childhood intervention 
programs have also seen substantial increases in funding under 
our government. This is all part of the broader commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, that will continue. And the apology, once again, 
stands. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that he’s 
satisfied with the apology, but she hasn’t apologized to anyone 
but her son. She didn’t even retract her statement. Mr. Speaker, 
not in the weeks that have passed, not in the written statement 
that she released, not in the statement that she gave yesterday, 
and not even after reporters were questioning her for several 
days has the minister even retracted her concerns about 
indigenous education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister finally and begrudgingly 
admitted that there’s no equivalency between the indigenous 
experience and the settler experience. Well no kidding, Mr. 
Speaker. From witchcraft reasoning, though, through to 
questioning the value of indigenous education, these are 
concerns that she has shared in and out of this Assembly for a 
long period of time. How did this Premier ever see it fitting to 
name that person the Minister of Education? How can he stand 
by that minister now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 
serve in this position and will continue to do all I can every day 
to regain any trust that has been lost in any circumstance 
involving this. Mr. Speaker, once again, the apology stands 

unequivocally. And I think it’s important that we remember too 
the proud record that I am also very proud of, Mr. Speaker — 
the commitment in visible ways to the spirit and symbolism of 
truth and reconciliation. 
 
You look at the mâmawêyatitân centre in the old Scott 
Collegiate, Mr. Speaker — the name means, let’s be all together 
— for students and community members, included a 
community kitchen open to the neighbourhood, a recording and 
dance studio, two gyms, a science lab, a construction shop, 
police outreach, and elders in residence. Mr. Speaker, the hub 
model at work. We’re proud of that. Beautiful Chief Whitecap 
School in Saskatoon, which marked a unique partnership 
between Saskatoon public schools, our government, the federal 
government, and Whitecap Dakota First Nation. It includes a 
cultural room, historic murals that will help all students learn 
about Dakota culture and history, including grades 5 to 8 
students from Whitecap who are attending. They are beautiful, 
Mr. Speaker, proud symbols and we are proud of them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sorry and take full 
responsibility for standing up out of turn. 
 
That wasn’t hard. However the minister is still refusing to admit 
that her comments on indigenous education were wrong, saying 
only that others “misunderstood.” And the minister still hasn’t 
explained her own motivation or what her intentions were when 
she decided to call into question indigenous education. She has 
said that she will respect the mandate, and that’s fine, Mr. 
Speaker. Despite what the Premier has said, the minister has 
signalled that curriculum is ultimately in the hands of cabinet 
— and that means in her hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan parents and educators deserve to know what the 
minister actually thinks and what motivated her to call 
indigenous education into question in the first place. Will the 
minister finally explain what she believes and what she was 
trying to do when she decided to question indigenous education 
in our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I will simply repeat what I 
said and what I have said, that the apology was meant 
unequivocally and sweepingly, and that I regret any 
misinterpretation or any intentions or confusion that resulted 
from the comments, Mr. Speaker. Once again I refer back to the 
earlier apology and my commitment, our commitment clearly, 
unequivocally stated to support mandated treaty education in 
schools in our province. And I also refer to my apology of two 
days ago — three days ago now — for having raised my son in 
a public forum; my undertaking not to do so again. And again 
the Thursday comments that was made last week, Mr. Speaker, 
that our government was the first to implement mandated treaty 
education and that will continue to be the case across the board, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

Education Curriculum Review 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said the lines 
that the minister was apparently supposed to say, that the only 
curriculum under review is math and coding. But the minister 
stated at the media scrum at the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] that social studies are under review as 
well. And that’s why parents and educators are concerned. 
 
The minister’s comments have been following her for the past 
week — in this House, in media scrum after media scrum, and 
everywhere she goes. And that’s why people are concerned that 
the minister still hasn’t been clear about what she intended with 
her comments. Beyond her “broad, sweeping,” or “sweeping,” 
or “broad-based and sweeping” apology, can the minister 
simply tell us what motivated her cynicism and drive-by smear 
of indigenous education in the classroom? Or will she just 
admit that she’s simply not up to the task, and resign? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
opposite has raised a curriculum reform and curriculum 
development, we do wish to be very clear that in the Throne 
Speech we announced that we would be developing curriculum 
on coding, which is quite simply exciting news for the students 
of this province so that they can begin to take their place 
alongside Finnish students and Irish students and students in BC 
[British Columbia], and be prepared for the new tech economy. 
And at least one candidate for leader on that side has called for 
just that — inclusion of what he calls digital literacy into the 
curriculum. And we’re getting there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also announced that we would begin expanding math 
reinforcement and supports in common-sense ways, ways that 
have worked, and broaden access to methods that have proven 
successful in other jurisdictions. Other curriculum development 
has been under way for a while, Mr. Speaker, from before my 
time, in secondary arts education, jazz vocal, I believe, and 
guitar. Some phys ed updates, practical and applied arts. 
Nothing too controversial there, Mr. Speaker. And secondary 
social sciences, a reference committee was struck for that one, 
and we are waiting to hear back from them. I believe it’s in 
early December. That’s the end of the story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Government Response to First Nations and 
Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That government 
talks a lot about reconciliation, and some of them say that they 
are committed to moving forward. But their actions show 
otherwise. Over two years ago, this Premier promised an 
apology for the province’s role in the Sixties Scoop. First the 
Premier blamed a scheduling conflict. The latest excuse is that 
he can’t go ahead with it because FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations] has some requests before they’ll 
join him for his photo op. Mr. Speaker, the Premier says he 
understands that we are all treaty people but, like the Minister 
of Education, he just doesn’t seem to know how to apologize. 
 
The FSIN has said they are looking for compensation. The 

federal government has agreed that it’s necessary. Ontario 
courts have sided with the survivors. So why won’t this Premier 
even sit down and have a humble and straightforward 
discussion with FSIN about how to give some meaning to the 
apology that he promised so long ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question. It’s a serious matter, and the 
member is quite right. I extended an apology outside any sort of 
formal institution such as the Legislative Assembly some time 
ago now and indicated that we would be wanting to work with 
both the FSIN and the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan to 
formalize that apology, Mr. Speaker, and that offer stands. And 
we have certainly reached out to both groups to try to organize 
the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were various reasons for the event not going 
ahead. I would offer up to members of the House that none of 
them were related to the government’s position. We are 
prepared to offer the apology in a setting of the choosing of the 
two groups, Métis Nation and FSIN, at their request, a choice to 
be made by them, and we would honour that choice, Mr. 
Speaker. Though the position of the government is that we’re 
not going to have the apology be contingent on resources or 
some sort of money or compensation that, I understand, that the 
head of the FSIN has now made known in the order of 200 to 
$400 million, I think is roughly the number, some of the 
numbers that Mr. Cameron has put forward from the FSIN. It’s 
the position of the government that this is an apology and it’s 
meant sincerely, and it won’t be contingent on financial 
compensation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government has 
agreed that compensation is necessary. The Ontario courts have 
sided with the survivors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, indigenous people in this land have dealt with a 
lot. From the Sixties Scoop to residential schools, the actions of 
both levels of government, federal and provincial, have torn 
families apart and have caused generational damage and 
trauma. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much more work that we all have to do, 
but the Premier’s promised apology would be a good start. And 
the FSIN and the Métis Nation have both said they’re willing to 
engage with the Premier and the government on this. But we 
hear today that the Premier won’t even apologize because he’s 
afraid to admit that compensation might be required for the 
damage done. And I say, shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this Premier is serious about reconciliation and really deal 
with the issues around the Sixties Scoop and many other 
traumas suffered by the indigenous people of this great land . . . 
Or does he just want a nice photo op on his way out the door? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I regret 
that the hon. member doubts the sincerity, my own sincerity or 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

that of the members on this side of the House. In fact I would 
point out to the member that when I indicated, I was actually 
. . . After listening to a story by Mr. Doucette in the media — I 
think it was on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], 
where he described his own experience as a result of the scoop 
— shortly thereafter I travelled to Saskatoon and met with the 
media indicating that I think it was time, I believe it’s time for 
the province to formally apologize. I did so at the time actually. 
I offered it certainly not in an informal way but as a part of the 
announcement that we would work with FSIN and the Métis 
Nation to offer an apology on behalf of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] government of 
Manitoba under Premier Selinger moved ahead with an 
apology. There wasn’t, I don’t think, a demand. Certainly there 
wasn’t the proffering of any compensation. The apology just 
happened sincerely on behalf of the government that represents 
the people of Manitoba. And we have made every effort to 
ensure that both the Métis Nation and the FSIN know that we 
are ready whenever and wherever they wish this to proceed. 
That stands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would offer to my hon. friend, who I know feels strongly 
about this issue, that he ought not to attach motives to the time 
that it’s been delayed. I would ask him respectfully to not 
question the sincerity of members on this side of the House 
when it comes to an apology, and to resist the urge to make 
some sort of political points off of this. Our offer is current and 
we stand ready to make the apology, but there will be no 
compensation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has recently turned 
their backs on producers in the Southwest as well. Last month, 
wildfires decimated over 34 000 hectares of land and killed 
over 700 cattle. Mr. Speaker, along with producers, we had 
hoped that the provincial contingency fund would help these 
producers in this time of need. But the Sask Party spent it fixing 
their own mistakes instead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unlike the Sask Party, the government in BC didn’t wash their 
hands and leave the situation to the insurance companies to 
figure out. The Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan says, “The situation is serious enough to warrant 
the same level of response as in BC earlier this year.” So, Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister follow BC’s lead, work with federal 
government, and get some help for these Saskatchewan 
producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Agriculture minister has been working on this 
issue, as has the Minister of Government Relations. Mr. 
Speaker, there is a prospect for some elements of the 
AgriStability program to kick in, depending on the recovery of 
pastures, certainly my understanding. And moreover, we’re 
grateful that the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association have 
come forward with an initiative to raise some money and some 

in-kind donations for those who are impacted by these fires. I 
can share with members that obviously, being from Swift 
Current, we’re very aware of how severe that fire was and the 
damages that occurred. 
 
I want to share with members opposite that, later this day or 
perhaps it’s already happened, we’ll be announcing matching 
dollars for the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. We’ll 
also be extending that, by the way, to other natural disaster 
events where agricultural groups, perhaps the Stock Growers or 
other groups, wish to come forward and assist producers. The 
government will provide matching dollars to help with that in 
the order of $100,000, Mr. Speaker. And we’re also looking at 
what’s possible, certainly with respect to the grass that’s 
involved, the pasture, on the AgriStability program as well. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I thank the Premier for the update. I’m not sure 
that that $100,000 is exactly what producers are looking for. 
But we do have some ideas. We have a federal minister who 
lives here in Regina, and today he’s here talking about a 
response for flooding. So why is this government not talking to 
him about help for producers affected by these wildfires? 
 
We need a joint federal and provincial response. APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] has 
called for it. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] has called for it. And all it would take is dipping 
into the contingency fund, as promised by the former Finance 
minister, and working with the federal government. So why are 
they refusing to commit to this desperately needed assistance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 
member, we do take these situations, these incidents very 
seriously. And we have talked with Duane McKay, the 
commissioner, on grass fire fighting and, going forward, on 
possible courses to help local residents, local volunteer 
firefighters in fighting these grass fires . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Pay attention. And that being said, we have 
also talked with Mr. Goodale, and we will be moving forward 
in the future here on support for our volunteer firefighters for 
these incidents. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Expansion of the Provincial Sales Tax 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last month retail sales in 
Saskatchewan fell 2 per cent, and StatsCan attributes the 
decline directly to lower sales at food and beverage stores and 
the expansion of the PST. Now, Mr. Speaker, my memory may 
not be perfect but I think I would have remembered if, during 
the last election, the Sask Party had promised to slap a billion 
dollars of new taxes on families and small businesses. See, what 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

I remember is that they actually claimed the opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. They promised to keep taxes low and make life more 
affordable for families. But in their first budget, there it was — 
a huge tax grab. 
 
Small businesses and the restaurant industry raised the alarm 
about how the PST expansion would move Saskatchewan 
backwards, and now there are close to 2,000 fewer food service 
and accommodation jobs. So why hasn’t the minister taken a 
second look at the PST expansion and how it’s hurting our 
already struggling economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
welcome that question from a member who supports a party 
that had a PST, I believe, that went as high as 9 per cent when 
her party was in government, Mr. Speaker. They raised taxes 
more times than we can even count in this House, Mr. Speaker, 
but it was okay back then. But it’s not okay now, Mr. Speaker. 
She is well aware that there is a shortfall in resource revenue in 
this province, and yet she doesn’t want debt to rise. She doesn’t 
want taxes to rise. They want to spend money in education. 
They want to spend money in health care. They want to spend 
money everywhere, but they have no plan whatsoever, no offer, 
no suggestion as to where the money’s going to come from, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We took a balanced approach on how to address the problem. 
We do not want to stay in deficits like other provinces have 
chosen to do. It’s great for her to criticize, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re not going back to the NDP days where their idea of how 
to address a problem is to close schools, close health care 
facilities, fire teachers, fire health care workers, and to neglect 
the highways so we couldn’t even get around in this province. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 97, 
The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 97. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 

The Speaker: — When will we read the bill a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse 

(résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
that once again I am moving a bill to go forward rather than 
standing it. I move that Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 98 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make 
a motion by leave to adjust the hours on November 20th. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Sitting Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion 
reads: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
on Monday, November 20th, 2017 this Assembly shall 
meet at 9:30 a.m.; and 
 
 



2958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

That the daily routine proceedings shall be limited to 
question period; and further 
 
That the Assembly shall adjourn at the conclusion of 
question period. 

 
So moved. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
the following motion that . . . We will take the motion as read. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 42 and 43. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled the responses to 
questions 42 and 43. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

National Energy Board’s Assessment and 
Regulation of Pipelines 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand before 
you and will be moving the following motion at the end of my 
speech: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada 
to amend the National Energy Board Act in order to stop 
the National Energy Board from including upstream and 
downstream emissions in pipeline approval assessments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to speak to this motion that I will 
be making. I should be able to just say that it’s self-explanatory 
and doesn’t need an explanation, but it would seem that our 
opposition would like to see that all things energy-related 
should be regulated and taxed to the point where any projects 
that would promote our economy moving forward to come to a 
complete halt. So here I stand having to explain why we need to 
make this request to the National Energy Board from including 
upstream and downstream emissions in pipeline approval 
assessments. 
 
Before I get started, I believe a definition of upstream and 
downstream emissions might be in order. Upstream emissions 
are the greenhouse gasses given off by finding and producing 

oil, bitumen, and natural gas before they even get into a 
pipeline, and downstream emissions are the ones produced by 
the refining and burning of petroleum after it leaves the 
pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to start with a quote from our 
Premier: 
 

Today is not a good day for Canada. It is not a good day 
for the federation. It is a very bad day for the West. 
TransCanada made the decision to cancel Energy East, but 
make no mistake. The reason for it falls at the feet of Prime 
Minister Justin Trudeau and the federal government. They 
have been, at best, ambivalent about the project and then 
moved the goalposts at the last moment by asking the 
regulator to consider the impact of upstream greenhouse 
gas emissions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is our job, whether we are in power or 
sitting in opposition, to fight for what is right for our province, 
what is in the best interest of our economic future. Let’s face it: 
if our economy is not doing well, the people of this province 
will suffer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy relies strongly on the 
production of commodity resources that require transportation 
to get to market. The national government reviews have grown 
to involve considerations well beyond safety and marketplace 
needs for capacity. Under the new government, the transition 
systems reviews will now grow to involve the consideration of 
upstream and downstream emissions from the usage of products 
being transported, including products such as crude oil, natural 
gas, and refined petroleum products. 
 
Now let’s just think about this for a minute. No other industry is 
asked to consider upstream and downstream emissions for the 
goods that need to be transported. Let me give you an example. 
Ontario and Quebec’s economies rely strongly on production of 
manufactured goods, and these goods also require 
transportation to get to market. What kind of goods, you may 
ask? Well let’s use cars and car parts that are manufactured in 
Ontario and Quebec. So the next logical question might be, how 
are they transported. These goods are transported via rail and 
road. If these goods were put under the same scrutiny before 
they were transported — such as crude oil, natural gas, or 
refined petroleum products are going to be — that would be a 
game changer for the car and car part industry.  
 
When I say a game changer, I do not mean in a positive manner 
either. It would be detrimental to that industry just as it is 
detrimental to our oil and gas industry. Any time a road or rail 
was repaved, rebuilt, or expanded, we would have to consider 
the upstream and downstream emissions from the usage of the 
goods carried on the road. We would have to examine whether 
the cars or car parts being manufactured and carried on the road 
would lead to more greenhouse gas emissions. But wait. That 
question is not being asked of cars or car parts. It’s not being 
asked of planes or plane parts. It’s only being asked of crude 
oil, natural gas, or refined petroleum products. Why? Why is 
our federal government picking winners and losers? 
 
I have heard on more than one occasion people who are a 
generation older than myself, my parents, my grandparents, talk 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

about the first Prime Minister Trudeau. They would always talk 
about the negative impact his prime ministership had on the 
West. Could history be repeating itself? 
 
We live in this great, vast country we all call Canada, and each 
province in this country brings something different to the plate 
from an economic standpoint. I truly believe that we should all 
have a fair chance to get our products to market on a fair 
playing field. And the way things are set up right now, it is not 
a fair playing field. So the real question to be asked is why, for 
goodness sakes, are the same things produced and carried 
across Canada from Alberta and Saskatchewan facing the 
question of if these products will cause more emission and 
being penalized for it. But those from Ontario and Quebec, cars 
and planes, are not even facing these questions in the first place. 
 
Now more than ever, we need to stand up for our province and 
stand up for the West. And we need to be doing this in an 
unified front. Like I stated earlier, whether we are in 
governments or opposition, we need to stand for the economy 
of this province and the West. But instead of standing up for the 
right thing, what does the interim Leader of the Opposition have 
to say about the strong fight that our Premier is putting up? 
Well she says, and I quote: 
 

Once again, the Sask Party has proven that their 
unbalanced approach, rhetoric, and grandstanding have 
failed to get pipelines to tidewater built and hurt the 
Saskatchewan economy at a time when 40,000 people in 
this province are unemployed and looking for work. 

 
Instead of mocking our Premier’s efforts, she should be joining 
in the battle. And there was an article I read: It was entitled 
“WIN! National Energy Board review of Energy East to include 
upstream and downstream emissions.” In this article there is a 
group called the Council of Canadians that is celebrating this 
decision. So I went to their website to see what they were all 
about, and it was quite enlightening, to say the least. What I 
learned while I was perusing their site was that they are a social 
action organization. I read lines such as “Humanity is at a 
crossroads.” “We are the only species capable of profoundly 
altering the biosphere.” 
 
[11:00] 
 
But what I found most interesting was what I saw in their 
events calendar. Now this might be a little bit of free 
advertising for them, but on November 18th, Mr. Speaker, in 
Windsor, Ontario, they’re holding a panel discussion of the 
Leap Manifesto. Well I certainly found that intriguing. For 
those of you who may not be aware, the Leap Manifesto is a 
document supported by the NDP, and I would argue its ideas 
are supported by the members opposite. And after you hear the 
highlights of the Leap Manifesto, I would think we should all 
be afraid of this type of philosophy. The document is pretty 
much a war on the West, and truly our economic future.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reading a Globe and Mail article that 
pointed out some interesting facts about the Leap Manifesto, so 
I will just briefly go over what was contained in there. The first 
point was they will be shifting away from fossil fuels so that 
Canada gets to 100 per cent of its electricity from renewable 
resources, and then entirely weaned off of fossil fuels by 2050. 

I would argue that, while it is important to have a renewable 
energy mix as part of our platform, we need to think of where 
we actually live, and is what the NDP proposing actually a 
reasonable expectation? I would argue not. We need to have a 
reliable backup, or something we like to call baseload, for when 
other options are not working or available. And that baseload 
comes to us from coal or gas.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they say they would like us to be weaned 
entirely off fossil fuels by 2050. What is their plan? To go back 
to the horse-and-buggy days or maybe even further back in time 
than that? If they want no fossil fuel usage by 2050, caveman 
days maybe. Is that what they’re shooting for? 
 
Secondly, they want no new infrastructure projects aimed at 
increasing extraction of non-renewable resources, including 
pipelines. So in essence they want to completely shut down our 
oil and gas sector here in Saskatchewan. I don’t know if they 
are aware, but this sector accounts for an estimated 35,000 
direct and indirect jobs for 2017. The NDP is continually going 
on about the fact that our unemployment numbers are not 
improving fast enough. Well if we follow this philosophy, we 
will have the highest unemployment rate in all of Canada. 
 
Our oil and gas industry contribute 15 per cent to 
Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product. And let’s not forget the 
600 million it contributed to our province’s revenue last year — 
revenues which fund things such as health care, education, and 
infrastructure for our province. Our opposition are always 
wanting us to spend more, more, and more, always telling us we 
do not do enough. What do they think will happen if these funds 
go away? 
 
Third, the Leap Manifesto wants us to expand low-carbon 
sectors of the economy such as caregiving, teaching, social 
work, the arts, and public interest media. I don’t know how they 
can expect this to happen when they are trying to reduce the 
income that comes into the General Revenue Fund because they 
are opposed to extracting non-renewable resources. 
 
Fourth, the Leap Manifesto declares that: 
 

“Austerity” — which has systematically attacked 
low-carbon sectors like education and healthcare, while 
starving public transit and forcing reckless energy 
privatizations — is a fossilized form of thinking that has 
become a threat to life on earth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have no words for this bullet point. It is simply 
unbelievable. 
 
And lastly, a little earlier I asked how they were going to pay 
for some of these proposals. Well they actually answer that in 
the Leap Manifesto. They will be paying for it all by ending 
fossil fuel subsidies, imposing financial transaction taxes, 
increasing resource royalties, hiking taxes on corporations and 
the wealthy, introducing a progressive carbon tax, and cutting 
military spending. 
 
Oh, but I guess I digress a little, Mr. Speaker. Okay, well maybe 
I digressed a lot. But I think it is important to put it all into 
context and make it clear who is fighting for this province and 
its economic future, and who is working for the ultimate 



2960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

demise. 
 
So let’s get back to the issue of pipelines and the regulations 
that are making it economically unfeasible to get a project 
started, let alone get it finished. The fact is that our world is 
growing and the population is rising, and the demands of the 
consumer are going to increase and we will need these products. 
 
The National Energy Board, the same people that have put these 
regulations in place, are predicting that by 2040, crude oil 
production is going to grow by 43 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, if 
we think rationally about what is going to happen, this oil is 
going to be transported but it’s going to be transported by truck 
or rail. This is going to put a huge strain on our existing 
infrastructure which in turn will cost more in maintenance and 
repairs. 
 
I might also add that this is not the safest way to transport 
goods. I don’t know how many of you remember the incident 
that took place in a community called Lac-Mégantic, Quebec. 
Well the reality is that if the oil is moved by pipeline, the odds 
of this incident happening would have gone down greatly. Mr. 
Speaker, according to a Fraser Institute study, when you move 
oil by rail you are 4.5 more times likely to have a spill. I really 
don’t like the odds of that. And one other fact that I don’t feel is 
out in the public enough is the fact that Canada’s pipeline 
companies deliver 99.999 — almost 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker 
— of oil and gas they move without incident. It only makes 
sense that we would be moving these products by pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would truly hope that the Government of Canada 
looks at the safety aspect of what a pipeline can do for our 
country. So I would pray that they do the right thing and stop 
National Energy Board from imposing these regulations. All we 
are asking is for a level playing field, and the oil and gas 
industry is not getting one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to highlight what I’ve spoken about today, we 
have a Premier who is fighting for Saskatchewan and fighting 
for the West. We have an opposition that is not fighting for our 
province. It would appear as though the commodities in the 
West are being treated differently than those products in the 
East. We have an opposition that is tied to the Leap Manifesto, 
and if that doesn’t scare you, it should. Pipelines are safer than 
rail or road. 
 
And lastly, all we are asking for is a level playing field. So, Mr. 
Speaker, that brings me to the motion we are here to do today. I 
would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada 
to amend the National Energy Board Act in order to stop 
the National Energy Board from including upstream and 
downstream emissions in pipeline approval assessments. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Estevan has moved: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada 
to amend the National Energy Board Act in order to stop 
the NEB (National Energy Board) from including upstream 
and downstream emissions in pipeline approval 

assessments. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and as 
always it’s great fun to wade into the 75-minute debate. I have 
to say that was one of the most meandering speeches I’ve ever 
heard. We kind of covered a lot of ground there, but again, 
unequivocally, the official opposition supports the development 
of pipelines in Saskatchewan. We’ve always been on the record 
for that, and so that’s really not part of the discussion. 
 
Now I am in agreement with a lot of what the member said — 
not all of it for sure, but definitely some of the points that she 
made are really pertinent to Saskatchewan. I think it’s important 
that we continue to fight for the West as a province and to 
ensure that our resources are able to get to tidewater. I mean 
that’s been clear from . . . since I’ve been elected, and I think 
before that, Mr. Speaker. So there’s no question about that, 
despite the fact that the hon. member opposite raised some 
question about that. I don’t know whether she’s just not been 
paying attention or perhaps hasn’t really understood what it is 
that our leader has said, and our previous leaders, and certainly 
other members of the caucus and myself. 
 
Now my problem with this motion, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s 
actually flawed. And I’m kind of concerned that whoever wrote 
it didn’t do their homework because we need to understand that 
this is not an amendment of the National Energy Board Act. 
That won’t help at all what this member spoke about. And so I 
thought I’d just take a couple of minutes to clarify exactly what 
the legal situation is and where this motion is actually critically 
flawed, and should probably be redrafted and maybe 
re-presented in the House. 
 
So first of all, who is the National Energy Board? I’m just 
reading from their web page because I think it’s important for 
the public to understand exactly what this board is. Here’s the 
legal responsibilities of the energy board — I’m quoting from 
their web page: 
 

We regulate pipelines, energy development and trade in the 
Canadian public interest. Before we make a decision or 
recommendation, we factor in economic, environmental, 
and social considerations. 
 
By considering all the evidence with these things in mind, 
we are able to make decisions and recommendations that 
represent the ever-changing interests and concerns of 
Canadians. This is key to achieving our vision of being 
active and effective in Canada’s pursuit of a sustainable 
energy future. 

 
And they go on a little bit more on their web page, but that’s 
their responsibilities. 
 
Now what laws are they governed by? There’s a whole list of 
laws that they have to follow and that their mandate is 
established under. But the most important one, Mr. Speaker, is 
the National Energy Board Act and the regulations under there. 
There is also the Canadian oil and gas operations Act, Canadian 
petroleum resources Act, oil and gas operations Act, and 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2961 

petroleum resources Act. And then there’s a long list of other 
Acts that relate to pipelines and resource development here in 
Canada. 
 
So that’s sort of the overall, and a very brief view of what the 
NEB does. Now let’s look at the legislation that the member is 
suggesting be changed. I think she’s referring to section 11 
which is the powers of the board. And there’s a few things that 
is listed under as their powers. 
 
But then section 12, I think, is the problem for the member, and 
I don’t think she’s properly understood what that section really 
does. So here I’ll read it for the record. Section 12 of the 
National Energy Board Act: 
 

Jurisdiction 
 

The Board has full and exclusive jurisdiction to inquire 
into, hear, and determine . . . [and I’m going to skip to 
section (b)] 
 
where it appears to the Board that the circumstances may 
require the Board, in the public interest, to make any order 
or give any direction, leave, sanction or approval that by 
law it is authorized to make or give, or with respect to any 
matter, act or thing that by this Act or any such regulation, 
certificate, licence, permit, order or direction is prohibited, 
sanctioned or required to be done. 

 
So the key phrase there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of their 
jurisdiction is “the public interest.” Now that’s not defined in 
the Act. That is actually something that is defined by the 
Government of Canada. And so that’s where this resolution 
really falls short, because there’s nothing in the National 
Energy Board Act that could be amended to fix the issue that 
the member’s identified. 
 
They have a page on their website, Mr. Speaker, that’s called 
“Regulating in the public interest.” And it’s really an interesting 
read. So they tell us on their web page: 
 

One of the National Energy Board’s . . . primary roles is to 
review applications to build and operate energy pipelines 
and make a decision or recommendation to the Federal 
Government about whether or not these projects are in the 
“present or future public convenience and necessity.” In 
other words, are these projects in the Canadian public 
interest? 

 
And then it goes on to give a definition according to them of 
what the Canadian public interest is. For example: 
 

The Canadian public interest encompasses local, regional, 
and national interests. The people living closest to the 
project and those having direct economic interests are more 
likely to experience larger burdens, benefits, or both. Other 
burdens and benefits may be spread through the regional or 
national environment, economy, and Canadian society. 
Still, the NEB must make its decision or recommendation 
based on the overall Canadian, public interest. 
 
To make things even more challenging, the public interest 
can change over time. To understand these changes, it’s 

critical for the NEB to listen to what Canadians have to say 
about their interests and values, and how they may be 
impacted by the development and operation of energy 
infrastructure. 
 
One of the ways we hear from Canadians is through our 
application assessment process. The NEB has a number of 
options for assessing an application. They include 
non-hearing application assessments as well as written 
public hearings and oral public hearings. 

 
And it goes on to talk more about that, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t 
have enough time today to get into all the details. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Now what happened though . . . And I think the member 
opposite needs to sort of comment more on that. What 
happened was that in January of 2016, the Government of 
Canada didn’t change the law. What they did do is bring in 
interim measures for pipeline reviews. So what they did is they 
introduced five principles that will guide the Government of 
Canada’s decision making on major natural resource projects 
while the government undertakes a review of the environmental 
assessment processes. And they were talking specifically about 
the Trans Mountain expansion or the Kinder Morgan project 
and the Energy East pipeline project. So those were the two 
projects that the Government of Canada announced last 
January, a year ago in January — almost two years ago — that 
they would assess the upstream greenhouse gas emissions 
associated with the project. 
 
So part of the new principles that the government introduced 
was this assessment of upstream greenhouse gas emissions. 
That was a decision on a policy level by the Government of 
Canada. And that’s why this motion is flawed because that’s 
what really needs to be changed, Mr. Speaker, is this obligation 
that the government has imposed upon . . . the principles that 
they’ve imposed upon it. 
 
In fact, there is an article from Lawson Lundell LLP called 
Project Law Blog, and on January 27th of 2016, what they said 
is . . . And this was the Government of Canada’s new approach. 
“. . . today’s announcements do not change any of the 
regulations or legislation governing environmental assessments 
currently being conducted.” So this is not about changing the 
National Energy Board Act at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it is about making sure that all of these public interest 
items are being considered. I did pull the list of issues for 
Energy East that was released on August 23rd, 2017, and there 
are nine pages of issues that the National Energy Board would 
take into consideration. The whole first page is project 
justification; economic, commercial considerations; financial 
considerations; asset transfers; tolling matters; technical, safety, 
and security considerations; accidents and malfunction 
considerations; indigenous considerations; landowner, land use, 
and waterway use considerations; routing considerations; 
municipal and local community considerations; environmental 
and socio-economic considerations, which are quite long; and 
then finally this new clause, indirect greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that when the National 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

Energy Board issued this list of issues, they went further than 
even what the federal government had been suggesting, and not 
just the upstream oil production but they also looked at 
downstream refining. So they went broader, more broad than 
the Government of Canada had asked at the time. Obviously 
this had a significant impact on Energy East’s decision whether 
or not to go forward with the application and, Mr. Speaker, we 
know the results of what happened. It’s unfortunate and 
certainly it’s something that I think the National Energy Board 
needs to reconsider when they look at the extent of the issues 
that they put in place for that particular project. 
 
I haven’t been able to locate a new list for Kinder Morgan, and 
so it will be interesting to see how that list of issues will be 
presented because it will have a significant impact on that 
project as well. And so I think, you know, when we talk about 
public interest, yes, it’s very important for the public interest to 
be considered. Unfortunately it’s a subjective thing for many 
people, Mr. Speaker. And so unfortunately this motion does not 
attack the real issue, and I think it really requires some 
amendment for it to be a motion that makes any sense. So it’s 
unfortunate we aren’t able to debate a sensible, logical motion 
but that’s the situation we’re in. 
 
So I’ve appreciated this brief opportunity to comment and I 
look forward to the rest of the debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our province is rich 
with many resources and oil is among the many. It is a 
relied-upon industry that provides many jobs, helps families put 
food on the table, and helps them to enjoy a quality of life in 
this province. The oil industry has also contributed significant 
revenues to the government. Its revenues have helped us invest 
in highways, hospitals, schools, long-term care homes for 
seniors, group homes for individuals, and many other 
infrastructure needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know the oil and gas sector has been hit 
hard over the past few years and continues to struggle to regain 
their positions within the markets. My constituency of 
Lloydminster had been the second-largest contributor to the oil 
and gas sector with revenues in the millions of dollars annually, 
but has been struggling since oil prices started declining in 
2013. Some oil companies closed their doors and many laid off 
employees. We lost hundreds of working people and families 
from our community within a matter of months. Many moved to 
find employment, some taking up even a second mortgage on 
another home or renting another home elsewhere. Some still 
haven’t been able to sell their home in Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lakeland College in Lloydminster educates and 
trains a number of students each year in its oil and gas courses 
as well as steam ticketing. It just opened its expansive energy 
park where industry has partnered to provide hands-on training 
to students. Last Tuesday our Minister of Economy attended an 
event put on by the Regina District Industry Education Council 
recognizing Skilled Trades and Technology Week, which gave 
students attending the opportunity to take part in sessions on 
pipefitting and boiler-making activities. All these students, 
along with many graduating from engineering at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], will be looking for future 
employment in the energy sector. We want these students to 
find that employment right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today there is some optimism in the energy sector 
as we see oil prices slowly rebounding, and companies are 
rehiring and continuing to invest in our province. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people who work in the energy sector are 
devastated each time they hear in the news that our national 
government, through the National Energy Board, has stopped 
the development of another pipeline. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our energy sector is one of Canada’s and 
our province’s greatest strength, yet its economic potential is 
being hamstrung by our own national government, even as 
Canada continues to rely on and import thousands of barrels of 
oil every day from other countries, countries with abysmal 
human rights and environmental records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again our Premier and our 
government has stood up for the people of this province and the 
oil industry. Pipelines serve the nation and I, for one, will 
continue to stand up and support these companies, individuals, 
and families who work in the energy sector. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy relies strongly 
on production of commodity resources that requires 
transportation to get to markets. Ontario and Quebec’s 
economies rely strongly on production of manufactured goods, 
and these also require transportation to get to markets. The 
difference is Ontario and Quebec’s produced manufactured 
goods get transported on rails and roads, not specialized 
transmission systems like oil and gas pipelines that have to face 
hearings organized by the national government for capacity 
expansions. 
 
Worse yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these national government 
reviews have grown to involve considerations well beyond 
safety and marketplace needs for the capacity, which is what the 
National Energy Board was given a regulatory oversight to do. 
Now under this new national government, these transmission 
system reviews will grow to involve the consideration of 
upstream and downstream emissions from the usage of products 
such as crude oil, natural gas, refined petroleum products all 
being transported. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we did the same to Ontario and 
Quebec’s economies, then any time a road or rail was repaved, 
rebuilt, or expanded, we would definitely have to consider the 
upstream and downstream emissions from the usage of the 
goods carried on the road, don’t you think? We would have to 
examine whether the cars and car parts being manufactured and 
carried on the road would lead to more greenhouse gas 
emissions, don’t you think? If asked, the only answer would be 
yes. 
 
But guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The question is not 
asked. I think we would have to consider the same for planes 
and plane parts. The question of whether these would lead to 
more greenhouse gas emissions when used could only be 
answered with a yes as well. But once again, the question is not 
asked. 
 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

So the real question to be asked is, why for goodness sake are 
the things being produced and carried across Canada from 
Alberta and Saskatchewan facing the question of these products 
possibly causing more emissions and being penalized for it, but 
those from Ontario and Quebec — cars and planes — are not 
even facing these questions in the first place? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Energy East pipeline project was 
conceived and developed as an all-Canadian route alternative to 
access not only domestic crude oil markets in Eastern Canada, 
but also to gain tidewater access to other global markets for 
Canadian oil sands. Energy East would have moved 1.1 million 
barrels of crude oil a day from Alberta and Saskatchewan as far 
east as Saint John, New Brunswick. It would have created 
14,000 jobs during construction. It would have supported nearly 
1,000 full-time direct and spinoff jobs in Saskatchewan during 
each of the nine years it takes to develop and build the pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former head of TransCanada’s pipeline 
strategy, Dennis McConaghy, helped plan Energy East and 
knows the federal government’s excuses for cancelling the 
pipeline are bunk. From when TransCanada first conceived this 
project internally in late 2011, accumulated development costs 
have exceeded 1 billion with the vast majority going to the 
NEB’s convoluted regulatory exercises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, neither upstream or downstream emissions have 
anything to do directly with the construction or operation of a 
pipeline. We have a company who committed more than a 
billion dollars to a project and made earnest efforts to address 
the concerns of the public regulators, a company that made 700 
changes to its plans as part of that response. 
 
Make no mistake, other companies’ decisions to invest in 
Canada have been watching and will be well informed about 
our federal government’s debacle. Mr. Speaker, one can only 
assume from all of this that our own federal government was 
hostile to the Energy East pipeline in the first place and did 
everything it could to frustrate and stop TransCanada’s 
application. The Energy East pipeline would have contributed 
55 billion to Canada’s GDP [gross domestic product] and 10 
billion in provincial and federal payments. I guess Ontario and 
Quebec don’t need or want any more of our western 
equalization payments. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again we hear the demise 
of possibly another pipeline, as a municipality in Burnaby, BC 
thinks they have the oversight to stop the Trans Mountain 
pipeline. Burnaby has refused to issue the required permits to 
allow the development of the pipeline to begin, resulting in 
unreasonable delays to the project. This pipeline is clearly an 
interprovincial work that falls under federal jurisdiction by 
virtue of the Constitution Act, 1867 and no municipal body 
should be standing in its way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, crude oil production in this country is 
expected to grow by 43 per cent by 2040, from 4 million barrels 
a day to 5.7 million barrels per day. Mr. Speaker, Canada’s 
pipeline companies deliver 99.99 per cent of the oil and gas 
they move without incident. Mr. Speaker, without new pipelines 
and pipelines expansion, more oil will travel by rail, which 
means more spills and a higher possibility of another 
Lac-Mégantic, and it could be four and a half times more likely 

to have a spill again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic impact of our oil industry in 
Saskatchewan accounted for an estimated forecast of 35,400 
direct and indirect person-years of employment in 2017 and 
contributes a whopping 15 per cent to Saskatchewan’s GDP 
alone. The combined value of oil and gas production in 2017 is 
an estimated forecast of 9.1 billion. In total the oil and gas 
industry contributed 600 million towards Saskatchewan’s 
revenue last year and an estimated 700 million this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning, this revenue is critical to 
providing improved health care, education, social services, 
highways, and other infrastructure needs in our province. And 
more importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it supports families. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the motion that was put forward by the 
member from Estevan, I will be supporting. And I will not be 
supporting any amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to participate in this very 
important debate, Mr. Speaker. I would say to the people of 
Saskatchewan that when it comes to the oil and gas sector, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party has clearly dropped the 
ball on many fronts. When they assumed government, Mr. 
Speaker, when they assumed government, we, the former 
administration, alongside the people of Saskatchewan, put in a 
royalty regime that attracted record investment into the province 
of Saskatchewan from the oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that’s really, really important, Mr. 
Speaker, at the time, the then leader and the premier of 
Saskatchewan was a gentleman by the name of Lorne Calvert. 
Lorne Calvert made it very clear that he wanted to stop our 
young people from going to Alberta to seek employment and 
opportunity in the oil and gas sector, so he wanted to bring the 
oil and gas sector to Saskatchewan. And what the conservatives 
across the way seem to forget, Mr. Speaker, is it was one of 
their very own, the Conservative premier of Alberta, Premier 
Stelmach, that actually scared away investment from Alberta, 
and of course Saskatchewan was there to jump on the 
opportunity and bring a very robust investment in our oil and 
gas sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:30] 
 
It’s important to note the history, Mr. Speaker. So here we have 
a Conservative premier in Alberta scaring off investment, and 
that premier being Stelmach, and an NDP premier of 
Saskatchewan attracting that investment. And, Mr. Speaker, you 
can see some of the incredible job opportunities, and certainly 
the investment and the benefits for Saskatchewan overall 
occurred during that time when Premier Calvert led this 
province. Now we told the incoming Saskatchewan Party not to 
mess with the royalty regime, not to mess with the investment 
climate that the NDP created, Mr. Speaker, and to just simply 
follow the game plan that was laid out before them in the hopes 
that we can continue building a burgeoning and successful oil 
and gas sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

I want to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, during a lot of our 
discussions in cabinet there was very, very strong advocates for 
the oil and gas sector, and I being one of them. Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you that at the time, and continuing to this day, it’s 
important to protect the 30,000 people that are working in this 
oil and gas sector. It is very important that we do all we can to 
protect that industry. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in 
our minds, as the government at the time, and I would suggest 
to the Saskatchewan Party government that in order to be a 
successful government, you must be robust in your approach 
when it comes to attracting investment in oil and gas and 
certainly other resource industries such as uranium, forestry, 
gold, and the list goes on. We are a blessed province, and we 
are resource rich. So it’s important that people out in 
Saskatchewanland know very well that they have to have a 
government that is not only attractive for companies to invest in 
our province, but to also work closely with those companies on 
other issues that affect their industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think every oil and gas company across the 
country obviously have a very strong environmental regime. 
They obviously know that the public in general want to have a 
company that’s not only investing but being responsible in 
many other ways. And I think certainly our oil and gas sector 
has shown that in spades time and time again. 
 
On the issue of the pipeline, Mr. Speaker, I would add to all the 
members that are making comments today that when we were 
first speaking as an opposition about the importance of the 
safety of pipelines, of the importance of the oil and gas sector to 
our economies, we also included the Kinder Morgan pipeline, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the Kinder Morgan pipeline 
wasn’t even on the Sask Party’s radar at that time. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we tried to amend, as an NDP opposition, tried to 
amend a motion to include support for Kinder Morgan, and of 
course, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party didn’t support it 
then as they don’t . . . as they pretend to support it today. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I would tell the people of 
Saskatchewanland this: that many people assume that the 
Saskatchewan Party or the conservatives are trying to attract 
investment. Mr. Speaker, they are not. In their history they have 
shown that they failed miserably on that front. And I would tell 
people out there to have a very, very good conversation with 
their MLAs. And I would also encourage the Saskatchewan 
Party to have a more robust, mature look at how the oil and gas 
sector industry can actually benefit our province for years and 
years to come. 
 
And when I say mature and robust, Mr. Speaker, we must 
incorporate all aspects of developing a solid energy oil and gas 
sector in our province for years to come. And they themselves, 
the oil and gas sector, will certainly say that environmental 
stewardship is highly valuable for them from a corporate 
perspective, and it also lends itself to what the public of 
Saskatchewan want, a good balance between our economy and 
our environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as you look at some of the success . . . And I would point 
out to the people of Saskatchewan once again that when this 
whole notion of pipelines came forward, in order to facilitate 
the development and continual development of our oil and gas 
sector in the province of Saskatchewan, one of the manner in 

which we would transport the oil and gas product to markets, 
Mr. Speaker, was the issue around pipelines. We wanted to 
include Kinder Morgan in the debate. Obviously the 
Saskatchewan Party did not want to do that. 
 
But I would say this as an attestation to what I believe is a 
failure on the Saskatchewan Party to really capture the 
imagination of this industry and do the right things in many 
ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today you asked a question: at the time when they 
had a Conservative premier in Alberta, you had a Conservative 
prime minister in Stephen Harper, Mr. Speaker, you had a 
conservative . . . well Saskatchewan Party Premier here in 
Saskatchewan. And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
not 1 kilometre of pipeline was built during those conservative 
power days, Mr. Speaker. Not 1 kilometre was achieved. And 
now we sit here today and we listen to some of the rhetoric and 
some of the issues that they forgot about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would say to the people in the oil and gas sector, from the 
NDP opposition perspective, we have seen the value of your 
investment. We have also saw the vision that you shared with 
us on many occasions in which you also want to be good 
corporate citizens for the people of Saskatchewan and include 
robust discussions around the environmental protection. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to pipelines, perhaps that is the 
safest way to transport oil and gas. And we have to find the 
ways and means in which we would have good discussion with 
the industry, side by side with government and consulting with 
the people. That’s so very important for us to do. 
 
We’ve always maintained that when we’re in government . . . 
And I will continue saying to the people of Saskatchewan that 
the conservatives are more about temper tantrums, more about 
pretending to care about this particular industry, and have done 
much harm to the industry over time. They have done much 
harm to industry over time because to them it’s all about petty 
politics. It is not about progressive thinking. It is not about 
mature, robust discussions in how we as a government and we 
as a people can embrace the oil and gas sector on making sure 
that their industry is strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would end on this note, Mr. Speaker, that it was not one 
conservative leader in Saskatchewan or Alberta or nationally, 
Mr. Speaker, that built 1 kilometre of pipeline. Who actually 
built the pipeline, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP Premier of Alberta 
alongside of the Liberal Prime Minister of Canada. And yet we 
still sit here and listen to the rhetoric from the Saskatchewan 
Party or the conservatives. 
 
And I would say to the people of Saskatchewan this: the 
Saskatchewan Party and the conservative parties in Western 
Canada have done a great disservice to the oil and gas sector by 
playing petty politics with really important issues that affect 
30,000 people’s jobs, Mr. Speaker. We needed to protect those 
jobs. We needed to enhance those jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, yes, you can indeed balance the economy 
with the environment. There is opportunity in the green sector. 
Even the oil and gas companies know that, Mr. Speaker. So let 
us engage the oil and gas sector in a very good, intelligent 
discussion so they will continue investing here, that we can 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

continue building their industry alongside of them so that 
people could have good, mortgage-paying jobs. We understand 
that. 
 
So I will close on this point, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s high time 
people know that the politics being played by the Saskatchewan 
Party with the oil and gas sector is disrespectful to them. It 
doesn’t serve Saskatchewan in the long run, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s time that they wake up to that fact, that they cannot attract 
investment when it comes to the oil and gas sector. We have 
proven time and time again that we, as an opposition, can do so. 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that I end my comments on that 
note. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
always a pleasure to follow the revisionist history of the 
member for Athabasca. You know, he was talking about all the 
oil and gas development in Saskatchewan under the NDP, that 
they did that to keep the young people of Saskatchewan here in 
this province. Well what they actually did, Mr. Speaker, under 
Lorne Calvert and that member when he was the minister of 
Highways, is not fix the highways, so they were full of potholes 
and ruts and impassable so the children of Saskatchewan 
couldn’t leave, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of the NDP 
opposite. 
 
And then he goes and says that it was the NDP Premier of 
Alberta and the Liberal Prime Minister of Canada that’s getting 
the pipelines built. Name one pipeline that they’ve got built. 
There isn’t any, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There were four pipelines being proposed. Keystone XL to the 
US — the line’s in the ground except for that 20 feet that needs 
to cross the border. That’s been approved now by President 
Trump. On Monday there will be a vote in the Nebraska State 
Legislature to approve Keystone XL through Nebraska, and the 
line will then be completed. And we will have one new pipeline 
out of Western Canada. 
 
You know, you look at the other ones. Trans Mountain, as my 
colleague mentioned, Burnaby is holding it up, and the NDP 
Premier in Alberta says they will do everything they can to 
prevent that pipeline from going forward. Keystone . . . Not 
Keystone, sorry. East . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . She’s 
working on that, is she? The one from . . . the BC NDP Premier 
is working on Keystone. I rather doubt that. You know, you 
look at the Trans Mountain, I mentioned that. Burnaby’s 
holding it up. The Prince Rupert Transmission Gas line ended 
— stopped. The Energy East Pipeline, held up going through 
Quebec because Quebec doesn’t approve it. Not that they 
necessarily get a say-so, but they took a say and it’s now 
cancelled. 
 
You know, this motion by my colleague about the upstream and 
downstream emissions process for approval of a pipeline really 
points out the inequities of the Canadian system. As my 
colleague has mentioned, the oil and gas coming in from 
offshore is not given any consideration for this. You just simply 
buy it and regardless of any emissions that may or not be 
involved in it. 

The same with all the manufactured processes that take place in 
Ontario and Quebec, completely ignored. If you really want to 
do something about pollution and CO2 emissions . . . Because 
CO2 is not a pollutant. Plants need it. We need it in this country. 
So what the arguments for CO2 emissions are is really all about 
grabbing taxes. It’s not about reducing emissions because if you 
did that, then the federal government, the governments of 
Ontario and Quebec, the Government of BC wouldn’t be able to 
collect their tax monies if that wasn’t being emitted, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s really all about the tax grab. It’s not about 
reducing emissions. 
 
But if you included all the up and downstream emissions for all 
manufactured goods, but continued to ignore the emissions for 
all products produced outside of Canada, that would have a very 
serious dramatic negative impact on production of everything in 
this country, Mr. Speaker. But the supporters opposite of the 
federal government — because the member from Athabasca 
was praising the Liberal Prime Minister just now — must agree 
with that. 
 
You know, the member for Nutana, Saskatoon Nutana in her 
address just now commented how the NDP were supporting the 
oil and gas industry. So I have to ask her, has she talked to the 
new federal leader? Because I know that every NDP member 
holds a federal NDP membership because there is only one 
NDP membership. It covers both federal and provincial. So 
their new leader has said, no pipelines. So has she talked to 
their new federal leader who wants to stop the movement of all 
oil in Canada? 
 
You know, it might be worthwhile in my constituency, which is 
a large oil producer, to not build any new pipelines because we 
have businesses that are benefiting from shipping oil by truck 
and by rail, but it’s not the safest way to do it. It’s better in a 
pipeline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
You know, when I look at the situation through Quebec, 
Quebec gets their oil in large part by tanker or by pipeline from 
the US. So if it’s acceptable to run tankers through to the Port 
of Montreal, up the St. Lawrence, you know, maybe we need to 
stop and think about that. Maybe what we need to do is a new 
national project. Extend the St. Lawrence Seaway to the Rocky 
Mountains and we can ship our oil with tankers because that 
seems to be acceptable. Doesn’t make any sense, but neither 
does the Liberal policy make any sense. 
 
But it would be another grand vision for Canada, just like the 
building of the CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] or the St. 
Lawrence Seaway. So we could ship our oil down to the East 
Coast by tanker from Calgary, Mr. Speaker. You know, when 
you look at some of the arguments being put forward by those 
who oppose pipelines, that concept makes as much sense. 
 
So you know, when you look at the issues that have taken place 
in the oil patch over the years, there have been many attempts to 
shut down oil production in Western Canada. The CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and Tommy Douglas 
tried it in the early 1950s and drove most of the drilling rigs out 
of Saskatchewan. And they drilled, one of those rigs drilled 
Leduc no. 1, which started the big boom in Alberta. 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

In the 1970s, and I was personally affected by this, Allan 
Blakeney tried shutting down the oil patch in Saskatchewan. 
And we were down to 30 per cent of production at that time 
because of Bill 42 here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where 
the NDP wanted to nationalize the oil industry actually, you 
know. So we have this latest episode from the Liberals and 
Trudeau the second, you know. Trudeau the first did the same 
thing in the 1980s with his NEB programs. Now Trudeau the 
second is doing the same thing with the emissions count up and 
downstream. And lastly we have the new NDP leader, Mr. 
Singh, who just wants to shut down the oil patch, period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this motion I think needs to be debated. We need to defend 
the interests of Saskatchewan and Western Canada and our 
partners to the east, Newfoundland and Labrador, who will 
suffer these same consequences, Mr. Speaker. Now perhaps 
they ship some of their oil out on tankers already, so they 
should be able to get it to Montreal. But in the main, what goes 
to Montreal is Venezuela, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia. 
 
So every manufactured product in Canada, every production 
needs to be able to operate under the same rules. We need to 
move away from the disdain that the Liberal government has 
for Western Canada in general, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
include the emissions of offshore products if those kinds of 
emissions are going to be used here in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the same rules for everyone: oil and gas, vehicle production, 
steel production, etc., Mr. Speaker. But the liberal government 
is true to its Trudeau name — disdain for Western Canada. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today to enter into this debate. And as I 
will say, my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana I think really put 
it well when she said we should aim for a sensible, logical 
solution to this issue on both sides of the House. We very much 
agree to the fact that we are a resource-based economy and we 
need to have solutions. We need to have well-thought-out 
solutions as opposed to the revved-up rhetoric that comes out of 
some people. 
 
And I have to say that the person right before me just 
underlined it, if you just tuned in five minutes ago. Talk about 
revisionist history. We just only have to listen to the member 
from Cannington for his variation on history according to that 
date, you know, and so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There 
you go. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, right off the bat, correct the 
members opposite and read into the record the statement from 
our Leader of the Official Opposition on the decision on the 
TransCanada not to proceed with Energy East. So they know, 
while they’re busy doing their research about everybody else, 
they should actually check our press releases. And this is 
October 5th, 2017: 
 

As the Official Opposition, we are disappointed to learn of 
TransCanada’s decision to terminate their Energy East and 
Eastern Mainline pipelines. 

Once again, the Sask Party has proven that their 
unbalanced approach, rhetoric, and grandstanding have 
failed to get pipelines to tidewater built and [they] hurt the 
Saskatchewan economy at a time when 40,000 people in 
the province are unemployed and looking for work. 

 
She goes on to say: 
 

Properly regulated pipelines are the safest way to transport 
oil and we remain committed to getting our resources to 
market. We have long supported the Energy East project as 
part of a balanced approach to grow the Saskatchewan 
economy. Thousands of jobs . . . have been created by this 
project, over $4 billion in economic activity would have 
been generated in Saskatchewan, and the dependence on 
imported oil from overseas and the United States could 
have been reduced. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan as well as those who invest in 
our natural resources and our energy economy need a 
government that will put the bluster aside and, instead, 
provide clarity, long-term planning, and a responsible plan 
to protect the air we breathe, water we drink, and the land 
we live on. 

 
So that’s our position, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think it is 
very, very clear. And while these folks . . . And they rev it up, 
they rev it up, and the Premier’s the one that we can see right in 
the front of the parade. But talking about the TransCanada 
pipeline, this is the one . . . These are some of the comments 
that was made post-decision by TransCanada to halt the 
pipeline. And we wish it had gone forward, but essentially . . . 
And this is from The Globe and Mail, October 5th, 
“TransCanada Corp. killed its controversial $15.7-billion 
Energy East pipeline proposal Thursday, provoking a bitter 
regional battle over the Liberal government’s energy and 
environment policies.” 
 
But it goes on to say that they had telegraphed their energy 
decision earlier when they had these new regulations. But this 
writer talks about, “Despite the political fireworks, many 
industry analysts were anticipating the Energy East 
cancellation.” 
 
In fact, Dirk Lever had said, “‘I don’t think really anybody in 
Calgary thought Energy East was actually going . . . ahead,’ he 
said. ‘It was a Plan B.’” 
 
He goes on, and he talks about the various reasons for it, 
whether it was price of oil at the time. Because when they 
started, the price of oil was $90 a barrel; now it’s floating 
around $55 a barrel today. So there were other pressures that 
were happening. But regardless, we do have to be part at the 
table talking about how NEB makes those decisions. But there’s 
lots to it, but grandstanding isn’t the solution. 
 
And I do want to, you know, just take back to when we were 
debating this in 2016, and this is what the member from Wood 
River had said at that day. And it was actually June 23rd, 2016. 
We were sitting late because of the spring election. And I quote: 
 

Pipelines are the most efficient and safest method of 
transporting large volumes of crude oil long distances in 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

North America. There are stringent regulatory processes 
and requirements for pipelines in both United States and 
Canada. 

 
And he goes on to talk about: 
 

And if I could give an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
technology today to detect a spill is extremely fast, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I know even in the Weyburn and Estevan 
area they can detect a spill on an oil well within a matter of 
minutes and can [shut down] that well . . . with the push of 
a button on a control panel, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Now if the member from Wood River would remember, that in 
less than a month after that we had our biggest environmental 
disaster here in Saskatchewan with the Husky oil spill. And 
so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So what are you saying? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — The Premier would like to know what I’m 
saying. We do need to do these things carefully and not 
grandstanding, not grandstanding. Do this carefully. Do it with 
common sense. Do it sensibly, and don’t put things at risk when 
you think everything is A-okay, absolutely everything is 
A-okay. They’re not. We have to be very, very careful about 
this. I could go on about what happened that summer in July in 
Saskatchewan and in Prince Albert along the North 
Saskatchewan and how it affected Melfort, Prince Albert, 
Prince Albert in a big way. 
 
And so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, we seem to have hit 
a nerve over there. Somehow they didn’t want to raise this in 
this debate. Clearly when we’re talking about pipelines, we 
have to make sure that they’re operating safely and with 
regulations and that the Ministry of Environment is fully 
transparent and accountable. It’s something that we’re not 
seeing today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length about that, but one of 
the things I did want to raise because over here, when we 
prepare for 75-minute debates, we actually do a little research. 
And I would like the members opposite over there, other than 
just reading their lines . . . This is what Troy Vettese, a doctoral 
student at New York University, when he was talking about 
what’s happening in pipelines . . . He may be a Canadian; 
maybe he’s American, I don’t know. But he’s studying at an 
American university. He talks about, and I quote, “Today, [one] 
of the four pipelines that bring petroleum out from western 
Canada, only one, the Enbridge Mainline, remains a 
common-carrier.” And he thinks that’s something we should be 
talking about. 
 
Now the member from Cannington wants to extend the St. 
Lawrence Seaway out to Western Canada. But maybe we 
should be talking about this issue too. Only four of the main 
pipelines is a common carrier. The other three are owned by 
monopolies. And this is causing some problems that people 
don’t really want to talk about too much. I think that’s very 
interesting. Now maybe the member here knows more about 
that, and if he can correct me, that would be fine. But I think we 
need to be talking about the issue. 
 

That’s another issue that we need to be talking about, the issue 
of common carriers and that people can get, companies can get 
their product to tidewater and not have to worry about 
monopoly-owned pipelines that we have in Canada. And we see 
that as something that’s happening in other resource-based 
economies such as in agriculture. We’ve seen issues like that 
when just a few short years ago CP [Canadian Pacific Railway] 
wasn’t stepping up to the plate because of a terrible winter. 
What was the outcome of that? 
 
So there’s many issues here we need to be talking about, but I 
don’t think the grandstanding, the temper tantrums that we see 
from the other side are constructive. 
 
Today we had a great question in question period about what 
they did when they rushed out and raised the PST on restaurant 
meals. Now we see that there are 2,000 fewer people working in 
that industry. That’s something that they did when they raised 
the PST, and the impact of that. And we’re seeing now that we 
have some 30, 40,000 people looking for work, more than 
before, and it’s because of some of their ill-thought-out policies 
that have come forward because they haven’t really thought of 
what would happen. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We heard the member from Cannington echo some of the words 
of his chosen leadership candidate who’s not here in the House 
to support that position, but it’s the idea that carbon is not the 
bad guy. So I want him to tell the Assembly, does he think that 
carbon is not causing a problem in our environment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
carbon, CO2, is an essential element in the world’s existence, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember being at an environment meeting back a number of 
years ago, and we had Malcolm Wilson there doing a 
presentation. And one of the questions I asked him is, what is 
the chemical difference between CO2 emitted by wood burning, 
or biomass, versus the CO2 emitted by coal burning, so thermal 
power, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, his answer was, and this is a 
Nobel winner, that there was no difference whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker. So we need carbon to exist. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The BC NDP 
have been pretty vocal about their aversion to pipelines. In fact, 
the BC NDP is fighting to block the Kinder Morgan pipeline 
expansion, and has pledged to use every tool available to try 
and stop the project. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
from Athabasca. Why didn’t you and your party publicly stand 
up for pipelines when Mike Farnworth from the BC NDP spoke 
at your convention last month? 
 
[12:00] 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that as a 
former government of Saskatchewan that we’re very proud of 
our history of attracting investment into our province. There’s 
no question as we look and ponder some of the challenges 
facing the oil and gas sector, that as indicated in my response to 
this debate, that every party in this province needs to have a 
meaningful, mature, and robust discussion with the oil and gas 
sector so we can together sell the values of this industry and 
protect those 30,000 jobs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member from Lloydminster: why couldn’t the Premier get a 
single pipeline to tidewater in the 10 years he was Premier? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have stood up for 
the people in the energy sector in this province time and time 
again. The National Energy Board keeps changing their 
regulations and the way they want to address pipelines in this 
province. They have now added upstream and downstream 
admission regulations. They’ve changed the board a number of 
times as well and have had to start over.  
 
Companies are frustrated. They have put applications in and 
spent billions of dollars, and our national government refuses to 
work with them on ensuring that they can go ahead with it. Our 
province will continue and our Premier and our members will 
continue to stand up for the energy sector in this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even the NDP Premier 
of Alberta, Rachel Notley, was able to call out the federal NDP 
leader, Jagmeet Singh, when he celebrated the cancellation of 
Energy East. She publicly called his position against pipeline 
“dead wrong” and “irrelevant.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Athabasca: 
when the federal NDP leader came to Saskatchewan to speak at 
your convention last month, why did not you or either your 
leadership candidate speak out against his damaging stance on 
the pipeline? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll rest my case on this point. 
When the Premier and the Saskatchewan Party assumed 
government in 2007, they found a lot of money in the bank, Mr. 
Speaker. They inherited a booming economy. They inherited a 
growing population. And, Mr. Speaker, they inherited a 
burgeoning and building and strong oil and gas sector in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They didn’t do any of that work, Mr. 
Speaker. It was the previous NDP government alongside the 

people of Saskatchewan that built that opportunity. We’ll take 
no lessons from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I note 
with great interest the way that this government has a big 
fixation with what’s happening with the federal government 
these days. And you know, it comes through in a lot of different 
fronts, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s today’s motion on the NEB, as 
misplaced as it might be in terms of the technicalities of what’s 
in the Act, or I had noted with interest the fact that the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest is going to bring forward a lawsuit 
for the federal government so that Saskatchewan gets fair 
treatment for its natural resources under equalization. And I cast 
my mind back over the years, Mr. Speaker, and I think, I 
wonder if he’s going to use the same lawsuit that the Premier 
sold out to his friend Stephen Harper? Is that the lawsuit they’re 
going to be using, Mr. Speaker? Perhaps the member from 
Cannington could clear that up for us. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the former administration was attempting to sue the federal 
government, unsuccessfully I might add, to try and gain a 
change to equalization. Equalization is renegotiated on a regular 
basis. In fact it was their government when it was in power that 
selected potash to be the exempted resource when it come to 
equalization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The oil and gas industry has been a boon to Saskatchewan. The 
boom started during the Devine years, dropped off, and has 
come back again now, and dropped again, Mr. Speaker. But that 
is what has been paying the money into equalization that 
supports Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritimes. And Quebec . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP provincial 
convention took place on the weekend of October 27th, and 
they welcomed a special guest, the federal leader of the NDP, 
Jagmeet Singh. Now Mr. Singh has been public about his 
opposition to pipelines, despite their economic value to 
Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. Why didn’t any of the members opposite stand up 
publicly for the people of Saskatchewan and challenge Mr. 
Singh for his views on pipelines? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what the government opposite 
fails to recognize is that we believe in constructive dialogue 
rather than temper tantrums, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we have a Premier and an Environment minister . . . I 
don’t know where he is now. We’ve had so many Environment 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

ministers, I can’t keep track. We have Environment ministers 
walking out of meetings, and that somehow is meant to be 
constructive and helpful to the people of Saskatchewan? It’s 
not, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame when we see our leadership over 
there, cabinet members walking out of meetings instead of 
being constructive. 
 
So we will continue to be constructive on this side of the House. 
We will continue to work in a fashion like the Alberta 
government where they’re putting their foot down when 
necessary, but they’re also working with the feds when 
necessary in order to get things done and to get our resources to 
tidewater. That’s what’s needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To be 
the Saskatchewan Party . . . the biggest problem that you have is 
your disdain for other parties that blinded your judgment and 
masks your own inabilities. 
 
So the question to the member from Cannington: who has a 
greater influence on setting the price of oil worldwide? Is it 
OPEC [Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries] or 
is it the Premier of Alberta? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The price of oil for Western Canada and 
central North America is set by the West Texas Intermediate 
price. That’s where that price is set. And then oil is discounted 
because we can’t get our oil to market because you opposed the 
pipelines. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time has expired for the 
75-minute debate, and we will move on to private members’ 
public bills and orders. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 
Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege and my honour to rise today to talk about our private 
member’s bill, Bill 605, which is drafted to provide very 
important employment supports for survivors of interpersonal 
violence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important to talk a little bit about the history of this 
bill. It’s the third time we have now brought this to the attention 
of government in the form of a private member’s bill. 
Originally we tabled a bill which contained this provision as 
well as . . . or these two provisions frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, along with a third provision which provided for the 
allowance for individuals fleeing situations of interpersonal 

violence to be able to break their leases without financial 
penalty. 
 
We were happy to see, and applaud the government for taking 
on that piece of our private member’s bill, the piece with 
respect to breaking leases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a very 
good step. It was a very positive step. But it was frankly a 
missed opportunity because we are hearing from stakeholders 
that the other two pieces are just as important as the one that 
government had passed. 
 
It’s extremely important, first of all, for survivors of 
interpersonal violence to be able to know that they can deal 
with whatever situation befalls them as a result of the violence 
that they’re experiencing while being able to maintain their 
employment, their ability to earn an income, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, which we hear time and time again. And I know the 
member from Regina Lakeview knows very well, as she used to 
work in a domestic violence shelter in Regina, that often 
women . . . And I’m going to speak mostly about women. This 
could also benefit and would also benefit men who are trying to 
leave interpersonal violence, but we do know the statistics, that 
overwhelmingly it’s women who experience these situations. 
So when I’m speaking and I’m speaking about women, I do 
mean men as well, but we have to accept the reality that this 
does impact women more frequently than it impacts men. 
 
We’re calling on all members on both sides to do the right 
thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like I said, this is the third time 
now that we’re presenting these provisions. After the 
government took on one-third of our original private member’s 
bill, we tabled this legislation last session. Unfortunately it died 
on the order paper at the close of session, so we’re bringing it 
forward again because we do hear about what an important 
issue this is and how necessary these provisions are. 
 
So I’m calling on all members, especially members on the 
government side because unfortunately we have a few less on 
this side than on that side, to take this on. And they don’t have 
to pass it as a private member’s bill. Doesn’t have to be an 
opposition bill; happy for it to be a government bill. It doesn’t 
matter to me. It doesn’t matter to us. We just want to see these 
provisions put into place and these supports provided to 
survivors. 
 
I do want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the many 
employers who do the right thing and do provide supports for 
their employees and do provide days off, paid, if an employee 
needs to, for example, help their children switch schools or 
attend doctor’s appointments or attend psychologist 
appointments, or take time off to be able to move from location 
to location when they’re moving out of their home. 
 
But this bill is necessary to protect against the small minority of 
businesses who do not provide those supports. And it’s also 
there to let employees know that they can approach an employer 
without fear of repercussion or without fear of consequence 
negatively against them should they need this. Employees 
shouldn’t have to be afraid to ask for these supports, to be able 
to ask for some time off because of this sort of situation, 
because they’re afraid about whether or not they will lose their 
job. 
 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

And we are hearing from stakeholders. We are hearing from 
people that this is a situation that does happen, that people have 
had to leave their jobs or have been fired because of this 
specific situation. So although it’s the intention of this 
legislation that it would be used likely infrequently, those who 
would need it, need it desperately, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to take the time to acknowledge the many 
stakeholders who have approached us and worked on this bill, 
all three iterations of this bill now, and who have been strong 
advocates for supporting survivors of interpersonal violence. 
And those include SEIU-West [Service Employees 
International Union-West]; Canadian Labour Congress; PATHS 
[Provincial Association of Transition Houses and Services of 
Saskatchewan], which is the umbrella organization for 
transition houses in Saskatchewan; the SFL [Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour]; the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] of Regina; the University of Regina; and also my 
colleague for Saskatoon Centre, who has done a lot of work on 
the labour side of this bill. It’s a bit of a labour-justice hybrid 
bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I also want to thank all of the other people who have come 
out and come to us and come to our stakeholders and shared 
their personal stories of how this bill would have benefited 
them had it been in place when they were going through their 
situation, many of whom, understandably so, don’t want to be 
in the media, don’t want to come out publicly and talk about it, 
but have shared their stories privately with us. And I do want to 
take the opportunity to thank them. 
 
[12:15] 
 
There’s a lot of great work happening in this province to 
support those who are suffering from interpersonal violence, 
and that needs to happen because, frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we have the highest rates of interpersonal violence amongst 
provinces in Canada, and that’s an embarrassment to this great 
province. And there are a lot of good people in Saskatchewan 
who want to see that change and, in the meantime, want to do 
everything we can — and we should be striving to do 
everything we can — to support survivors of interpersonal 
violence. 
 
I also want to thank the SFL and Lori Johb in particular at the 
SFL. I’m wearing my red Hillberg & Berk earrings today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because the SFL partnered with Hillberg & 
Berk on a fundraising campaign to support survivors of 
domestic violence. And all the proceeds of the red earrings that 
were made specifically for this campaign go to PATHS, which 
does incredible work throughout this province supporting 
survivors of interpersonal violence, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
 
And as I’ve said, we’ve heard anecdotally how desperately 
these provisions are needed, but the data also shows it as well. 
PATHS very recently, a few weeks ago I believe, put out a 
report that they’d been working on for a few years now called 
Intimate Partner Violence & the Workplace: Results of a 
Saskatchewan Study. 
 
They looked and did a survey on this specific issue in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and made several 
recommendations for what different levels of government can 

do, as well as employers can do, to help survivors of 
interpersonal violence. And these provisions in this legislation 
is one of those recommendations that they made. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the findings of their study . . . And I do 
want to talk, spend a good chunk of the rest of my time today 
talking about this study because it’s a very important study and 
it’s very, very well researched, Mr. Deputy Speaker. PATHS 
reports in their study that these high rates of interpersonal 
violence affect the well-being of Saskatchewan citizens, 
businesses, and communities and generates high cost to human 
service systems, workplaces, individuals, and families, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And they quote another study which estimated 
the total economic cost of spousal violence in Canada to be $7.4 
billion in 2009, equivalent to $8.4 billion in 2017. And the total 
losses to employers totalled $77.9 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So there’s actually an economic argument to be made for why 
these are important provisions to be had and to be introduced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re calling for five days’ paid leave to 
be provided. This is something that has been in place for a long 
time in Australia, for paid leave to be provided in Australia. 
And what they’ve found, the Australian government has found, 
is that largely those who do need this legislation and who do 
utilize this legislation, typically only actually require about one 
day before they’re not needing to use it any more. They need it, 
but they only use about one day. 
 
So it’s not an onerous burden on employers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In fact if you read the studies, the financial hardships 
on employers is actually in the situation that we have today 
when we talk about turnover and we talk about recruitment and 
we talk about training, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They also talk about in this study, and it’s something we know 
and it’s something we’ve talked about several times when 
we’ve discussed this bill in the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that this isn’t a reinvention of the wheel. It’s actually catching 
us up with legislation that we see in other provinces, legislation 
addressing . . . This issue has already been implemented, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta. In fact, in 
2009 Ontario passed Bill 168, which is the Occupational Health 
and Safety Amendment Act (Violence and Harassment in the 
Workplace) which states that: 
 

If an employer becomes aware, or ought reasonably to be 
aware, that domestic violence that would likely expose a 
worker to physical injury may occur in the workplace, the 
employer shall take every precaution reasonable in the 
circumstances for the protection of the worker. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve already mentioned the paid 
leave provision in our bill, but there’s also a provision in our 
bill that amends The Occupational Health and Safety Act that, 
similar to the Ontario legislation, provides a requirement for a 
company to accommodate an employee if they are aware of a 
situation of interpersonal violence. And that accommodation 
typically looks like something like changing somebody’s work 
schedule or changing somebody’s parking spot because often, 
and the studies show, that violence will follow somebody to 
their workplace. And if the perpetrator knows the victim’s 
schedule, then it’s easier for that person to harass them in the 
workplace. 



November 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

So what the duty to accommodate would provide would be for 
that situation specifically where an employer would then have 
to . . . and then would be able to work with the employee to, 
like I said, for example, change an employee’s work schedule 
around or change an employee’s start time or parking spot so 
that they can go to work and be safe and not feel like they’re 
going to be harassed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba passed Bill 8, The Employment 
Standards Code Amendment Act (Leave For Victims of 
Domestic Violence, Leave For Serious Injury Or Illness And 
Extension Of Compassionate Care Leave) in 2016. And that 
Act provides a survivor of interpersonal violence with up to 10 
days of workplace leave, five of which can be paid or sick days 
used, and up to five more unpaid days. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly what we’re asking for in our bill as well. 
 
So again, neither of these provisions are reinventions of the 
wheel, simply catching us up. And I think at a very base 
minimum, that’s what should we be doing in this province. We 
should be striving to do much more, but let’s at least catch up to 
the other provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In August 2017, Alberta also passed Bill 17, the Fair and 
Family-friendly Workplaces Act, which states that employees 
who have experienced domestic violence can take up to 10 days 
of unpaid domestic leave per year. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my time is limited today, and 
I have a lot of other colleagues who want to weigh in on this 
very important issue at some point in the future. I do want to 
take this time to talk a little bit about the findings that were in a 
study though, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this study found . . . 
What they did is they did an online survey, focus groups, and 
interviews conducted, they were conducted in Saskatchewan 
between April 2016 and January 2017. They had 437 people 
respond, and what they found was 50 per cent of Saskatchewan 
survey respondents reported experiencing abuse, which is 
compared to 33 per cent in a pan-Canadian study. And 83 per 
cent of those people who experienced interpersonal violence 
said that the abuse impacted them at work as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They found that a theme that was repeated through the research 
that they did was the lack of awareness in workplaces. Workers 
cited a lack of awareness about the dynamics and signs of 
interpersonal violence, how to respond, and the policies at their 
workplaces. So a piece that’s not in this bill that we do think is 
important is education and training of employers. And we know 
PATHS has done a lot of work in creating those seminars, and I 
do want to acknowledge the Sask Chamber for their work in 
encouraging their members to do that training and facilitating 
some of that training. And we do hope to see that movement 
grow and more employers receive that much needed training. 
 
They also found in their study that the women who have 
experienced violence have more disrupted work histories and 
lower personal incomes than those who have not experienced 
violence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Their research showed that those 
experiencing violence are more than twice as likely to talk to 
co-workers, as managers, which further illustrates that 
interpersonal violence in the workplace is everyone’s business 
and that all workers must have access to a basic level of 

training. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the recommendations that is in 
here is for employers to take training. We do think that’s a very 
important piece that’s a part of this, but as legislators we do 
need to do everything we can, from a legislative standpoint, to 
provide supports for survivors of interpersonal violence. 
 
This isn’t going to solve the crisis. We can’t solve the crisis 
with legislation. But what this will do is provide at least 
something in terms of a support that we hear and we know from 
the studies that those who are experiencing this very, very 
devastating situation desperately need. So it’s one small piece. 
It’s not going to change this crisis, but for someone out there it 
will change their specific situation. And that’s, as legislators, 
what we should be striving to do, at the very least, in terms of 
what is essentially an epidemic, considering we have the 
highest rates of domestic violence in the country, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will move that Bill No. 605 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 
moved that Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’ll not be taking long to say this, but in order to satisfy the 
procedure of how to both move this bill and then of course 
proceed to a place where we can adjourn it and then carry on 
through the process, I’m rising today. But I’m also rising 
because I couldn’t support this legislation more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I just want to say that we in Saskatchewan, there 
are so many things that we have wonderful, so many blessings 
that this province has, but one of the problems that we face and 
we need to face together, Mr. Speaker, is the problem of leading 
the country in domestic abuse rates. 
 
And as my colleague, the leader, from Douglas Park, has stated, 
this is not going to in and of itself solve this huge problem that 
we face as a province, Mr. Speaker. But it is one helpful step 
building on the research that’s been marshalled by the 
Provincial Association of Transition Houses, by the experience 
of other jusrisdictions, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Alberta, 
Ontario, Manitoba, where there is . . . This is one helpful way to 
address the situation of folks that find themselves in a domestic 
abuse situation. 
 
So I know, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people interested in 
this legislation, and it is our hope as well that, as has happened 
in other parts of the front here, Mr. Speaker, we’d freely invite 
the government to make this happen and make it happen fast so 
that this helpful tool will be there for those that need it in the 
days ahead, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to be watching very 
closely to see what sort of statements come forth from the 
government.  
 
But again, just on behalf of the official opposition members, 
we’re very proud of our leader, the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, and her work on this front, and we couldn’t 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2017 

support it more, Mr. Speaker. On that note, I’d move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 605. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 605. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to an order made 
earlier in this sitting, this House stands adjourned until Monday, 
November the 20th, at 9:30 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:29.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2950 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2949 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Louis Riel Memorial Day 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2951 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2951 
 Thunderchild First Nation Resident Wins Indspire Award 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2951 
 Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan Holds Grand Opening 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2951 
 Donation to Children’s Hospital 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2952 
 Junior Squash Player Rising in National Ranks 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2952 
 National Nurse Practitioner Week 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2952 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 
 Education Curriculum 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2954 
 Education Curriculum Review 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2955 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2955 
 Government Response to First Nations and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2955 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2955 
 Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 
 Expansion of the Provincial Sales Tax 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2957 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2957 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2957 
MOTIONS 
 Sitting Hours 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2957 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2958 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 National Energy Board’s Assessment and Regulation of Pipelines 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2958 



 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2960, 2967 
  Young ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2962, 2968 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2963, 2968 
  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 2965, 2967 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2966, 2968 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2967 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2968 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2968 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2968 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2969 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2971 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


