






















































Hansard: March 30, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 67A  THURSDAY, MARCH 30, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2033 
 March 30, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce in your gallery, and thank, Dr. Louise Greenberg, 
deputy minister of Advanced Education. Louise is retiring after 
a 32-year career in the public service. She came to 
Saskatchewan from Montreal to do her Ph.D. [Doctor of 
Philosophy] at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. And 
after obtaining her doctorate, she began her career in 1985 with 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food working as a provincial 
swine specialist. She then worked in various expert capacities in 
government including in Executive Council, as an 
intergovernmental officer, and policy adviser in the cabinet 
planning unit. 
 
Louise returned to the Ministry of Agriculture and became a 
regular on CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] As It 
Happens during the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] 
crisis. She was appointed assistant deputy minister and then 
deputy minister for Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development in 2005, and would go on to become associate 
deputy minister in both Health and Social Services before 
becoming deputy minister for Advanced Education in 2012. 
 
Several colleagues and I have had the pleasure to work with 
Louise and have appreciated her thoughtfulness, her warmth, 
and generosity as a leader and as a colleague. Now in 
retirement, we expect Louise will spend more of her time on the 
things she loves to do when she isn’t working and multi-tasking 
such as reading, exercising, and making gourmet food. She’ll 
also be spending more time with her husband, Earl. 
 
Louise, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, thank 
you for your service to the people of this province. We would 
like to wish you a happy, healthy, and enjoyable retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add my voice in thanks 
and congratulations to Dr. Greenberg for her service to the 
province over these many years. The work that leaders in the 
public service and leaders in the education field provide for this 
province is extremely important for our future, and I’m very 

thankful to you, and wish Dr. Greenberg the best in her 
retirement. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to you and 
through you to all members of the legislature, I would like to 
join with others here in congratulating Dr. Greenberg on a 
successful career here with the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also would like to add my thank you to her as I had the 
opportunity to work with her and her team in the Ministry of 
Advanced Education for a short while. And I always 
appreciated the relationship that she had with her team in the 
Ministry of Advanced Education, and the relationship that she 
had with our post-secondary partners across the province, our 
colleagues across the nation, and the very sophisticated and 
great way that she brought the information to our office. It was 
always appreciated. 
 
And anyone that knows Louise knows that she’s a very good 
cook, and she emails some pictures of food from time to time 
which, by sheer guilt, I compare those pictures to what’s on my 
plate, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to tell her that they are getting 
closer. And so just by sheer guilt I am eating better due to my 
time with Louise. 
 
But I do want to congratulate her on a successful career and 
wish her all the best as she has some more time to spend with 
Earl and others into the future. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
in with the Minister of Advanced Education, the Minister of the 
Environment, the critic for Advanced Ed in congratulating 
Louise on her outstanding career. 
 
I was Minister of Advanced Education at one time, and Louise 
was my deputy minister. And my first interaction with her, Mr. 
Speaker, was she actually dropped off briefing books at my 
house. She doesn’t live far from me here in Regina, so she 
brought them over to my house when I was appointed Minister 
of Advanced Education. 
 
And we had a brief conversation, and she said to me, “What do 
you think about my shoes?” And I said, “Well I guess they’re 
lovely. I don’t know.” And several interactions later in my 
office, she kept saying, “Well what about these shoes, Kevin? 
What do you think about these shoes?” And I finally said, 
“Why do you keep asking me about your shoes?” And she said, 
“Someone told me you’re a shoe aficionado, and I shop for a lot 
of shoes.” And I went, “No, I’m not. And stop asking me to 
comment on your shoes, please.” 
 
We had a wonderful working relationship, Mr. Speaker. She is a 
cooking aficionado, as others have mentioned, and still sends 
out pictures of meals that she prepares for . . . her and Earl 
prepare for their weekend dinners, and I hope we continue to 
receive those pictures. And I just want to wish Louise and her 
husband Earl all the best in retirement, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, seated in your gallery, two friends of 
mine. We have Mary-Jane Duncan Eger and Katelyn Duncan. 
These two young women are absolute leaders in our 
community. Mary-Jane is a new mom, eight-month-old 
Jameson. 
 
And Katelyn has the opportunity . . . She works for the Ministry 
of Agriculture as a agricultural awareness specialist. Katelyn 
also had the opportunity to speak at We Day. So she spoke to 
over 14,000 young students about what inspires her. And I’ll 
speak more later about these two fine young women. So please, 
everyone, join with me in welcoming these two fine leaders in 
our community to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to very 
quickly get on the record with other of my colleagues in terms 
of saluting and saying a big word of thanks to Dr. Louise 
Greenberg for 32 years of public service. And I’m sure she 
sometimes wondered what she had done to spend certain of 
those years in committee estimates with myself as the 
opposition critic. You know, the mind races. But in all 
seriousness, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the service to Dr. 
Greenberg, and best wishes for a retirement that is eminently 
well deserved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
today it’s a pleasure for me to rise and present a petition from 
citizens who are opposed to the federal carbon tax and the 
decision the federal government has made to impose the carbon 
tax on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite won’t support us in 
opposing a federal carbon tax as they voted against the motion 
last year. But I’m wondering if they’d stand with the members 
of the USW [United Steelworkers], the members of the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation, the members of the 
Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association who had a rally 
on March 16th to oppose this very carbon tax. So if they’re not 
going to stand with the government, will they at least stand with 
the people of the province and oppose this carbon tax that is 
going to make life more . . . less affordable for them across 
every aspect of their life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following 
action: to cause the Government of Saskatchewan to take 
the necessary steps to stop the federal government from 
imposing a carbon tax on our province. 

 

And I implore the members opposite to get off their hands and 
support us in this endeavour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with parcel services that serves farms and 
other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap the sell-off of Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition once again to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014, the minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
They point out that on that very same day, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay.” 
 
They point out that this government in the past has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of the hospital emergency rooms and jail cells 
and, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we couldn’t agree 
more. But the petitioners are concerned that the ministers are 
now trying to place the responsibility for repairing budget 
deficits on those experiencing addictions, unemployment, and 
poverty, on those who are living from day to day without proper 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
This petition today is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place under the direction of the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote for someone, anyone to stand up with her in 
the support of a second bridge for Prince Albert. And I’m 
answering that call by presenting the petition requesting a 
second bridge.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has 
never been more clear than it is today. Prince Albert, 
communities north of Prince Albert, and the businesses that 
send people and products through Prince Albert require a 
solution. So therefore:  
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, ask that the Sask 
Party government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and 
refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and to 
begin immediately to plan and then quickly commence the 
construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do every day, Mr. Speaker, we stand up and we 
present petitions from all throughout the province. And on these 
particular three pages that I’m presenting today, the people that 
have signed this petition are primarily from Prince Albert. And 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 
to present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per 
cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people who are signing the 
petition today would like to bring to our attention the following: 
that the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for 
privatization that allows the government to wind down, 
dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown 
corporation without holding a referendum; that in 2015-16 
alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations returned 297.2 
million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and hospitals. 
Those dividends should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not 
private investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan 
people across the province. And under section 149 of the 
Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt 
from corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 per cent of 
the shares are held by a government or province. The Sask 
Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be 
sold without being considered privatized, and this short-sighted 
legislation would then risk sending millions of Crown dividends 
to Ottawa rather than the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition 
today come from Bienfait, Estevan, Midale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of this 
province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. And that research published by the world banks suggest that 
closing the gender wage gap could be worth the equivalent of 
10 per cent of Canada’s GDP [gross domestic product]. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar that 
a man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan, 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Moose Jaw and Maple Creek today. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close 
its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resources 
to people in distress. The daytime closure of Prince Albert 
mobile crisis has put stress on Prince Albert Police Service, 
Victoria Hospital, and many other agencies in the community. 
These people may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the services that mobile crisis 
provides fall under different mandates of the different ministers 
— the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Social Services, and the 
Ministry of Justice — and it would be nice if they could get 
together and come to a conclusion to provide services for Prince 
Albert mobile crisis so that we’ll have crisis services 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week in Prince Albert once again. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across the province realize that this is 
a valuable service that is much needed in Prince Albert, and the 
individuals signing this particular petition are from Shell Lake, 
Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition today 
regarding libraries in the province. Those who’ve signed this 
petition wish to draw our attention to the following: whereas the 
Saskatchewan government has cut funding for regional libraries 
in half or by almost 60 per cent or by 3.5 million and eliminated 
funding for libraries in Regina and Saskatoon. This drastic 
funding cut will have a devastating impact on libraries, 
especially regional libraries and the many people who depend 
upon them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Whereas libraries are about more than just borrowing books: 
meeting rooms are used by groups, staff host educational 
programs and clubs, and the publicly accessible computer 
terminals are essential to many. There are services for seniors, 
for children, employment support, language and reading groups, 
citizenship test preparation, and help for newcomers to build 
their resumés. Whereas these cuts will have disproportionate 
impact on rural communities, and whereas libraries are vital 
community spaces, potential closures or reductions in services 
will severely impact our communities. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Therefore, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
renew its commitment to the invaluable programming, 
education opportunities, and public spaces our libraries 
provide across this province and restore the 4.8 million in 
funding for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been rolling in from around 
the province, as have the emails — almost 1,100 at last count. 
 
This particular petition has been signed by people who reside in 
Regina, Moose Jaw, Maple Creek, Ogema, and Saskatoon. I do 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three 
Canadian workers have experienced domestic violence, and for 
many of them the violence follows them to work. Employers 
lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and indirect 
impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation and 
Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we tabled a private member’s bill that called for 
the enactment of this specific provision along with two other 
provisions. Mr. Speaker, we hope that the government will take 
that call on. 
 
Individuals who signed this particular page of the petition today 
come from Wymark, Lafleche, Mossbank, and Leader. I do so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Purple Day for Epilepsy Awareness 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In one way or 
another, epilepsy affects us all. This past Sunday was Purple 
Day for epilepsy awareness. It was my pleasure to attend a 
fundraiser on Saturday that was the 10th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan epilepsy program. This is the reason that some of 
my colleagues are wearing purple today, so that we can bring 
awareness to this important cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 10,000 people living with epilepsy in our 
province today. Further, as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] we all work with someone who has been affected by 
epilepsy. The Legislative Assembly’s lawyer, Ken Ring, has 
lived with epilepsy for more than 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a growing number of treatment options 
available and Ken recently was able to get a surgery that has 
helped control his seizures. The results have been amazing. He 
has not had a seizure since this life-changing surgery. We are 
thankful that his quality of life has improved due to this 
surgery, and we know that there is world-class research taking 
place around the world and right here in Saskatchewan, where 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

we are seeing earlier diagnosis, management, and treatment of 
epilepsy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like so many things, epilepsy touches us all. And I 
would ask all members to join me to acknowledge Purple Day 
and all the hard work of everyone at the Sask epilepsy program 
at RUH [Royal University Hospital]. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert’s 2017 Citizen of the Year 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 4th, a 
banquet was held to honour Sheryl Kimbley who was Prince 
Albert’s 2017 Citizen of the Year. Sheryl Kimbley is known for 
extensive volunteer work around the city of Prince Albert and 
has dedicated herself to making life better for those of us who 
call it home. 
 
Kimbley volunteers with Relay for Life and Run for the Cure, 
has helped organize Voices of the North since its first year, and 
is a strong advocate for local musical talent. She has also 
assisted with suicide prevention strategies in Prince Albert and 
the North, has welcomed Syrian refugees to our city, and is 
active with feeding the homeless. 
 
Kimbley’s dedication to her volunteerism is matched only by 
the dedication and compassion with which she performs it. She 
is a wonderful mentor for women and for First Nations people 
in Prince Albert. Even more than all of that, Mr. Speaker, 
Sheryl is also a wonderful ambassador for Prince Albert and is 
outspoken in her support of our city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating Sheryl Kimbley, this year’s Citizen of the Year 
in Prince Albert and in thanking the Prince Albert Daily Herald 
and the Prince Albert Kinsmen Club for organizing the Citizen 
of the Year banquet and making this celebration of Sheryl 
Kimbley’s accomplishment possible. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Saskatchewan Communities on List of Top 40 Towns 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to share 
with the Assembly a wonderful article from Country Living 
magazine which outlines the top 40 Canadian towns to visit in 
2017. This list contains two communities from my constituency 
of Saskatchewan Rivers: the tourism destinations of Emma 
Lake and Waskesiu, located near, and in Prince Albert National 
Park respectively. These communities, among many others in 
my constituency, offer precious outdoor activities and 
sightseeing gems. They offer world-class, all-season tourism 
amenities including fishing, boating, beautiful beaches, and 
pristine winter trails. Both Emma Lake and Waskesiu are 
located right next to blue heron provincial park, our province’s 
newest park. 
 
The tourism sector makes up a large segment of the economy 
here in Saskatchewan Rivers — restaurants, hotels, bed and 
breakfasts, outfitters, and water sports businesses. But most 
importantly, the people who make up these communities are 

truly deserving of the recognition outlined in this article. 
 
I might also remind all of my colleagues and anyone watching 
today to take advantage of the free entry to our excellent 
national parks. To commemorate Canada’s 150th birthday, 
national park entry fees will be waived for 2017. 
 
Please join me in congratulating and acknowledging the 
communities of Emma and Waskesiu lakes for preserving and 
promoting Saskatchewan tourism to the world. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Remembering Joseph Auguste Merasty 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly, I want to extend condolences to the 
friends and family of Joseph Auguste Merasty who passed away 
this past February 27th at the age of 87. I didn’t know Mr. 
Merasty personally, but I do know something of his life through 
his family and through reading his book titled The Education of 
Augie Merasty: A Residential School Memoir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a hard story but a very important one. Mr. 
Merasty reminded us that the residential schools weren’t just a 
shameful chapter in this country’s history, but that its victims 
were and are individuals with faces, names, families, hopes and 
dreams whose lives were forever marred by their experience. 
 
It’s for this reason, and I’m sure many more, that the 
Saskatchewan Library Association chose Mr. Merasty’s memoir 
for its first-ever province-wide community reading initiative, 
One Book, One Province, for this month of March 2017. I’d 
like to acknowledge Bruce Walsh, director and publisher of the 
University of Regina Press who recognized the value of Mr. 
Merasty’s work and chose to publish it. And a special hay-hay 
as well to Nickita Longman, an early and faithful champion of 
the work. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, to the book’s co-author, David 
Carpenter, thank you very much. He went above and beyond to 
ensure that this powerful story was told. In the words of 
Carpenter: 
 

From Augie, we get the truth. As far as reconciliation is 
concerned, the more we listen to or read the stories of First 
Nations people, Indigenous people, the closer we are to 
some beginning towards reconciliation. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me today in 
recognizing the accomplishments and the courage of Augie 
Merasty and to extend our condolences to his family and friends 
on his passing. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Hay-hay. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Grenfell Senior Hockey Team Wins Championship 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As each of us here in 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

the legislature know, senior hockey is a major event for many 
small communities here in Saskatchewan, and it’s no different 
for the town of Grenfell in my constituency. 
 
After 30 years the Grenfell Spitfires have finally won the 
Qu’Appelle Valley Hockey League championship which took 
place last Friday at the Grenfell Regional Park Arena. Led by 
the general manager Dale Hardy, head coach Dean Amy, and 
11-year veteran and hometown product Braden Reiger, the 
Spitfires knocked off the Milestone Flyers 6 to 3 this past 
Friday night to win the Qu’Appelle Valley Hockey League 
championship series three games to none. 
 
The Spitfires fell behind early 2-0 in the game before storming 
back to tie it late in the first period. Local Grenfell product TJ 
Reeve netted back-to-back goals early in the third, paving the 
way for the league’s leading scorer, Sanfred King, to tap in the 
empty net goal to win the championship for the home side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this championship is not only for the 
hard-working players and coaches on that team, but the 
community as well. The Grenfell Regional Park Arena was 
filled hours before the puck dropped and celebrations lasted 
well into night after the final buzzer. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members in the Assembly to please join me in congratulating 
the town of Grenfell and the Grenfell Spitfires on a very 
successful season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Rural Women Month 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise in the House today to acknowledge that 
March was proclaimed Rural Women Month. This month 
recognizes the important contribution of Saskatchewan rural 
women to their communities and to the agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one in four farm operators in the province is a 
woman, and 1 in 10 is a sole proprietor. It is a misconception 
that there are few women in the agricultural field, as women 
have been working on the farm and have been involved in 
agricultural business and been business leaders for a very long 
time. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a great example of driven agriculture 
women right here in our gallery. Mary-Jane Duncan Eger and 
Katelyn Duncan grew up on the family farm just south of 
Regina. Even from a young age they were helping out on the 
farm. 
 
In a CBC article, Katelyn said, “I think we were seen as a 
worker – a butt in the seat in the combine – so I think having 
that open mind and opportunity to fill that role on our farming 
operation really gave us a lot of confidence.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is women like these sisters who remind us, and 
the next generation of agriculture women, that farming and 
agricultural businesses is a good choice for women to make. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating March 

as Rural Women Month. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

New Schools Opening in Regina 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand here today to highlight this government’s commitment to 
our education system with the completion of two new schools 
in my constituency. Regina Public’s École Wascana Plains — 
good name — and Regina Catholic’s École St. Elizabeth are the 
two new schools in the Greens on Gardiner. They are both 
wonderful facilities and will be home to 850 students and 90 
child care centre spaces when they open in September. 
 
The Greens on Gardiner is a brand new neighbourhood and is 
full of young families and young children who will benefit from 
increased access to child care and K to 8 [kindergarten to grade 
8] schooling. Other area schools surrounding these two facilities 
will also see benefits from reduced class sizes and less strain on 
resources. This new joint-use school will also benefit the 
community as a whole, with access to fitness and a community 
resource centre. 
 
These facilities will be available to the public after regular 
school hours, providing a real pillar for these growing 
communities. Our proud record is one of opening 40 brand new 
schools, including 21 this year along with 25 major renovations. 
While we know there is still more work to be done, Mr. 
Speaker, we are meeting the challenge to keep Saskatchewan 
strong today and into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with the budget before us, 
a budget that breaks trust with Saskatchewan people, straight 
answers on the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
scandal are essential. Yesterday the Premier did at least take to 
his feet with respect to a question around the investigation into 
this scandal. Today though, can he tell us what he personally 
thought about the land sale when it came back to cabinet and 
was approved, just a year after it had been rejected, of course? 
And did he know at that time that the previous sale for approval 
was with the GTH minister’s landlord? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the members opposite know that the auditor 
has looked into this matter. The auditor did a very thorough job 
of looking through all of the documents that pertained to the 
matter. The auditor spoke to all of the individuals involved with 
whom she wished to speak. 
 
The government obviously co-operated fully with her 
investigation. In fact we asked her to look into this matter, as 
did the Public Accounts Committee. By her own testimony, she 
did a very thorough job in looking into the matter. I would 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

quote the auditor at the conclusion of the audit submission, and 
I quote: 
 

. . . in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red 
flags. Because this is land transactions, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Assets and Services 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really strange that the 
Premier of Saskatchewan can’t take to his feet and answer a 
simple question like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party’s move to scrap STC came as a surprise to 
everyone: the passengers, the drivers, the people who believed 
that their government would follow the Crown protection Act 
and keep their word, even management at STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’ve got some pamphlets that were ready to distribute to 
customers. I’ll just read a little from one of those pamphlets 
here, Mr. Speaker: “Coming soon to STC, 16-passenger 
Mercedes Sprinters. STC will soon be introducing new 
16-passenger vehicles, Mercedes Sprinters, into its fleet.” Then 
it goes on to highlight the many, many communities that these 
Mercedes Sprinters will serve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, they keep saying that they’re not privatizing and that this 
isn’t a sell-off. So I guess the question to the Premier is, what’s 
the plan with all STC’s equipment and their assets? What’s the 
plan for the shiny new Mercedes buses? What’s the plan for the 
$27 million bus depot? It’s past time for that Premier to come 
clean on his STC sell-off scheme. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve mentioned before and the minister has 
highlighted, this was one of the very difficult decisions that was 
part of the budget, to discontinue services at STC. There’s 
unfortunately nothing to privatize as an operation, because the 
company doesn’t make any money. In fact it loses a lot of 
money, as members will know on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current subsidy per passenger from the 
taxpayers to the bus company is $94 per passenger. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out for members opposite that this 
discussion around STC has happened when members opposite 
were in government. Mr. Speaker, I note that former CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] minister 
Eldon Lautermilch said, “The problem being the amount of 
money that corporation STC has been losing in the recent past 
has been what we believed to be not sustainable.” So even in 
’97, the NDP [New Democratic Party] thought the subsidy to 
STC was unsustainable. And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what 
that subsidy was? The per passenger subsidy then, when the 
NDP thought the thing unsustainable, was $5.52 a passenger. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members are heckling from their seat. 
When they were in office, they did believe that some routes 
should be cancelled. They believed that routes should be 
cancelled when the subsidy for per passenger was five bucks. 
Today, the taxpayers are subsidizing it to the tune of $90, Mr. 
Speaker, per passenger, and so we had to make this difficult 
decision. As for the assets of the company, we’ll proceed with 
an orderly disposition of those assets. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s about 
keeping one’s word. And to describe or characterize this as 
some sort of . . . the way that he does just isn’t fair. I mean, this 
service provides service to an entire province. And it costs less, 
it costs less, costs less than the transit service of the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we have pictures of course of the new Mercedes. 
They’re all decaled up, but they’ve never been out of the 
garages, Mr. Speaker. Either they’re selling them off and this is 
a sell-off, or they’re letting them rust in a field somewhere, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this does raise an important question. What 
kind of analysis did the Sask Party undertake before deciding to 
scrap this very important service? Was any assessment done at 
all about the impacts on health care and on patients accessing 
care? Was there any assessment at all into what this means for 
corrections or for jobs or for education? Was there any 
consideration at all as to what the impact is for small businesses 
and producers, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And we ask these questions because, time and time again, we 
see the Sask Party shoots first and aims second, Mr. Speaker. 
Before cutting our provincial public transit and parcel system, 
it’s evident that they didn’t undertake a risk assessment and an 
assessment of all the risks and end impacts. If so, table that. 
But, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier finally just do the right thing 
and scrap this short-sighted and reckless sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, of course very careful 
consideration and assessment went into this very difficult 
decision, including ensuring that there would be programs in 
either the Ministry of Health or Social Services to help those 
who are most vulnerable get to important medical 
appointments, for example, if they used to rely on the bus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again in the member’s preamble, well he either is 
not quite wanting to face reality or he doesn’t know that STC 
actually doesn’t service the whole province right now. There’s 
many communities that don’t have STC service. Well the 
member just sort of shrugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the reason, part of the reason that STC 
does not serve the whole province is that when they were in 
office, they discontinued lines. They cut lines. I’m sure they did 
some assessment as to why they would cut lines. And I would 
ask the member if he supports the fact that his previous . . . that 
his party in office reduced lines, because they cut those lines. 
They cut services to Saskatchewan when the subsidy from the 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

taxpayers to the bus company was $5 a passenger, and now it’s 
$90 a passenger. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess we have just a difference of opinion. 
We believe that the government should focus on core services 
in health care and education and social services. We don’t 
believe the taxpayers should . . . in the long term can afford to 
subsidize, on a per-passenger basis, $90 per passenger for the 
bus company. And so we’ve made the difficult decision, Mr. 
Speaker. But I wonder if the member can highlight for all the 
members in the House, at what level of subsidy would he 
consider to be unacceptable for the taxpayers to subsidize? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Tax Collection Procedures 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, answers like 
that show us that they’ve not just lost their moral compass, but 
good old Saskatchewan common sense, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, they’re all over the map. STC’s parcel service is an 
important tool for producers and businesses across 
Saskatchewan, but the Sask Party has no plan. But the Sask 
Party doesn’t seem to care much these days about supporting 
local Saskatchewan small businesses. In this budget, it’s tax 
after tax after tax on the job creators, small businesses across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, the president of the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association calls the Sask Party’s decision to put a new 6 per 
cent tax on construction labour, “a tax on growth.” Mr. Speaker, 
why did the Premier push ahead with this new tax that puts the 
province at a competitive disadvantage, raises new barriers to 
investment by placing a tax directly on investment and jobs? 
How on earth does he think it makes any sense to ram forward 
with the epitome of a job-killing tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll certainly answer the 
question with respect to taxes, and I appreciate the question 
from the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, he mentioned 
in his preamble that somehow he inferred that it’s good old 
Saskatchewan common sense to continue indefinitely with a 
subsidy to a company, $90 per passenger on that bus. He says 
it’s good old-fashioned Saskatchewan common sense that the 
government has to provide freight service in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a different view on freight for sure, 
Mr. Speaker, than members opposite. We think the private 
sector is more than able to deliver freight around the province. 
And if the member knew this file, and if he knew his history, he 
would know that when they discontinued routes, the private 
sector stepped in on freight. When we’ve had to discontinue 
routes, the private sector stepped in on freight. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have every expectation that that will be the case 
again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I understand that in the budget, 
when we expand the base on PST [provincial sales tax], there 
will be certain sectors that are frustrated. But, Mr. Speaker, 
there has been considerable national commentary on the 
wisdom of our move away from taxes on investment and 

income towards taxes on consumption. We have economists 
and other think tanks weighing in that this is the right thing to 
do for the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the plan is fully implemented, we’ll have the lowest 
income taxes for families. We’ll have the lowest income taxes 
on business. We’ll have the lowest manufacturing rate in the 
country. And, Mr. Speaker, as long as those members aren’t 
sitting on this side of the House giving in to the federal 
government’s wishes, we will never have a carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this tax hike shifts close to $350 
million onto the backs of Saskatchewan people who want to 
build a new home or renovate, or a business that wants to grow 
and expand. Surely the minister will admit that a $350 million 
jump in costs will be a cold shower on hopes to stimulate that 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said yesterday that they had received 
thousands of calls from businesses about their tax changes. I 
have no doubt about that. Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing about 
that tax hike that makes any sense. But that seems to be the 
minister’s MO [modus operandi] — hiking job-killing taxes, 
while families are faced to pay more and businesses lose out. 
 
Restaurants Canada said that the Sask Party’s PST changes will 
have a “devastating impact on restaurants.” Mr. Speaker, to 
again take from Restaurants Canada, why is the minister “. . . 
punishing the sector of the food industry that creates the most 
jobs and economic activity”? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome this debate 
here in the Chamber with respect to the shift from taxing 
income and productivity in the province of Saskatchewan to 
taxing consumption, Mr. Speaker. Restaurants, going out to a 
restaurant for a meal is obviously a consumable good. It is part 
of a consumption tax base that most other provinces tax, Mr. 
Speaker. In the province of Manitoba, they’re not harmonized 
with the federal GST [goods and services tax]. They have an 
8 per cent provincial sales tax on their restaurants. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting. I’ve done a little 
research as we’re preparing to wrap up the budget debate here. I 
went back and looked at some of the budgets of the previous 
government. Back in ’02-03, Mr. Speaker, just prior to the ’03 
election, and ’04-05 . . . Well, not interested in an answer. They 
hate when we go back into their record, Mr. Speaker. They 
absolutely hate it when we bring up their record. 
 
So we took a look at . . . They were 11 and 12 years into their 
mandate, Mr. Speaker, 11 and 12 years into their mandate. Why 
didn’t they diversify the economy? Why did they continue to 
rely on resource revenues as a major part of their revenue base, 
Mr. Speaker? And it struck me. Do you know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because they were getting equalization from Ottawa 
on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker, equalization from Ottawa to 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

the tune of over $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. So they never thought 
it necessary to have to diversify the economy to attract new 
business into this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are making a major shift. I acknowledge that. I recognize 
that. We are making a major shift to get away from our reliance 
on resource revenues to ensure that our services are sustainable 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s billion-dollar 
tax hikes, even when combined with the Sask Party income tax 
changes, will cost the average family more than $400 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day the minister and the Premier got 
very confused about how they were punishing small businesses. 
Mostly that was because they didn’t quite understand the 
difference between an independent business and a large 
corporation. So let me quote Mr. von Schellwitz of Restaurants 
Canada again: “Clearly this policy benefits large corporate 
grocery stores at the expense of thousands of labour-intensive 
small businesses that make up the hospitality industry.” 
 
It seems pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite 
know this, because over and over and over again they brought 
petitions against the food tax into this Chamber to read them. 
So what’s changed, Mr. Speaker? Why is the Sask Party 
breaking their word and adding this tax hike to Saskatchewan 
restaurants and the families who will be forced more to be their 
customers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — First and foremost, it’s not a tax on the 
restaurateur. This is going to be flowed through to the 
consumers. We acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. That’s part of 
the shift, that’s part of the shift from taxing income and 
productivity to a consumption-based tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, I met with the restaurant association. I met with the 
restaurant association. By their own, by their own admission, 
Mr. Speaker, in those provinces that have a provincial sales tax 
harmonized with the GST, they showed a bit of a dip. They 
showed a bit of dip in — initially when it was harmonized with 
the GST — in restaurant meals being sold, Mr. Speaker. And 
then you know what it does, Mr. Speaker? It takes back off. It 
takes back off. 
 
They also said to us, they said, look . . . I met with them with 
the Minister of the Economy. They said, look, if you’re going to 
tax restaurant meals, ensure that you level the playing field with 
respect to ready-to-eat meals in grocery stores. Ensure that you 
don’t have that tax not on the ready-to-eat meals in the 
Safeways or IGAs or Sobeys of the world, or the Co-op stores 
of the world. Mr. Speaker, this tax applies to ready-to-eat meals 
the same as the GST base does, Mr. Speaker, levelling that 
playing field. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Financial Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, Restaurants Canada estimates 
that the Sask Party tax hike will cost Saskatchewan’s hospitality 
industry $140 million in lost sales. You don’t have to be a 
financial guru to figure out that punishing the sector of the food 
industry that creates the most jobs and economic activity may 
not be the best strategy for turning the economy around. 
 
And neither is ripping up agreements with our cities and towns, 
taking millions of dollars from them and then downloading 
even more costs. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is forcing even 
more tax hikes onto Saskatchewan families. They have left the 
cities and towns with no choice. Instead of working together, 
instead of simply talking, the Sask Party picks fights. And 
Saskatchewan families will be forced to pay the price. 
 
Yes, the meeting yesterday was a good start, but it should have 
happened more than a year ago. Can the minister finally say 
definitely whether municipal revenue sharing will change at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do 
agree with the member opposite on one thing: it was a very 
good conversation that I had with three mayors and the 
president of SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] yesterday, along with three of the other ministers 
in our government. Answer to her question, is revenue sharing 
changing in this budget? The answer is absolutely no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, municipalities don’t know 
what to expect. They certainly didn’t expect to have their 
grants-in-lieu scrapped. Now many of our cities and towns will 
be forced to raise taxes and cut services. They also have to try 
to fill the gaps in this year’s budgets they have already passed. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this may sound crazy to that Sask Party, but 
the cities and towns want to be able to plan. Instead of certainty, 
every day they have to wait and see what the Premier will 
announce next on social media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday when asked if the Sask Party may 
reverse their position on the $36 million download, the minister 
said, “Never say never.” Does the minister not think our cities 
and towns deserve a better answer than that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is no secret that 
there is a $1.2 billion shortfall, and we’re asking our municipal 
partners to share in about 3 per cent of that shortfall, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s very rich coming from the member opposite 
who represents a party that, when they were the governing 
power, that the municipalities didn’t know from one year to the 
next what their budget was going to be. We had no clue. And 
they downloaded again and again and again. The predictable 
revenue sharing formula . . . 
 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The predictable formula that we have 
with the municipalities . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member from Saskatoon Centre 
come to order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The predictable formula that we have 
in the revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, has increased revenue 
sharing to municipalities by over 100 per cent. In our major 
cities it’s 2.5 times more money that they receive under this 
government than they did when the NDP were in power. Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t want to go back to the unpredictable 
year-over-year, have-no-clue method of that particular party. 
And they still have no clue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries and Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sustainable, predictable 
funding should not be too much for a city or a town to ask of 
the province. Nor should it be for a library. They’re community 
hubs, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of Education needs to stop 
listening to that Minister of the Economy who said, “People 
have access to the Internet, which is basically a library of 
everything,” Mr. Speaker. His comments would be laughable if 
they weren’t so damaging. The Sask Party doesn’t seem to be 
able to understand that libraries are more than just books. They 
provide programs and services that Saskatchewan people rely 
on. In fact, while there are fewer people checking out books, 
usage of our libraries is way up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s decision to rip out nearly 60 per 
cent of library funding is already having an impact to these 
services. The Palliser regional library has already laid off six 
employees. My question is this: how can the minister claim to 
be an advocate, claim to be an advocate for literacy and 
education while making such deep cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we value very much the 
books and the libraries that we have in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve increased municipal revenue significantly since 
2007 and 2008. In Saskatoon and Regina, 97 per cent or more 
of the funding for libraries come from the municipalities, so the 
reduction in our funding to libraries is relatively small 
compared to the funding that comes from the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan over 50 per cent of the 
funding comes from the municipalities. It’s healthy and a good 
exercise to go through to look at and determine how best we 
can continue to serve the citizens of our province. 
 
We know that usage has dropped. Items checked out of the 
libraries since ’07 has dropped by 1.6 million. The number of 

library cards, down by 175,000. Mr. Speaker, we want to have 
those discussions. We want to be productive and we want to be 
helpful to the libraries in the rural municipalities in our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure how this is 
helpful to the libraries, and I have over 1,100 emails to my 
office already indicating just how unhelpful this is to libraries. 
 
Let’s pause for a moment. We have a deputy minister who is 
arrogantly fighting to shut down small libraries because, 
according to him, they’re close enough to a city. He’s also the 
Minister of Education. Mr. Speaker, they’re hiking education 
property tax, but cutting government funding to schools so 
much that there will actually be less money making it to our 
kids’ classrooms. 
 
The letters are pouring in. The numbers are pouring in. 
Saskatoon Public Schools, down $11 million. Regina Public, 
down $9.5 million. Mr. Speaker, they’re saying these are 
difficult decisions that have to be made. Of course these are 
difficult decisions. These are our kids and their future and our 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But make no mistake, these are Sask Party cuts. It’s their 
decade of mismanagement, scandal, and waste that got us here. 
They’ve stolen money from our kids’ classrooms, so I’ll try one 
more time for an answer. Why does the minister think that it’s 
okay to use money meant for our kids’ classrooms to pay for 
this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at what the 
regional libraries have in accumulated surplus: Chinook, $1.6 
million; Lakeland Regional Library, $1.1 million; Palliser, $2.1 
million; Parkland, $1.2 million; Southeast, $2.5 million; Wapiti, 
$2.88 million; Wheatland, $2.8 million. Mr. Speaker, the 
regional libraries should sit down and should work with the 
municipalities that fund them and try and develop a long-term 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our province we have 306 libraries. Alberta, 
265. Manitoba, 128. In Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the members opposite want to know the 
facts. I’ll give them to them, Mr. Speaker. Let them get out their 
notepads and write down some things so that they’re properly 
informed for a change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have 4,000 citizens per 
library; Alberta, 15,000; Manitoba, 10,000. Mr. Speaker, why 
don’t we have the discussion about whether we can share 
libraries with our schools? That’s the things that we should be 
doing. We’ve got a bunch of public libraries in schools already: 
Glentworth, Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, La 
Loche, Pinehouse, Sandy Bay, Canora, Englefeld, Carnduff, 
Maryfield, Oungre, Yorkdale, Gronlid, Nipawin, St. Brieux, St. 
Louis, Tisdale, Outlook, and Warman all share. All share. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

Meewasin. 
 

Funding for University of Saskatchewan 
College of Medicine 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m one 
of hundreds of physicians in this province who are grateful for 
the education I received at the College of Medicine here in this 
province. In each of the last two years, that College of Medicine 
lost $20 million in funding — 20 million the year before last, 20 
million last year — draining the reserves, something this 
government knows a lot about. They were informed, Mr. 
Speaker, that if that 20 million was not returned to this year’s 
budget, we were at risk of losing accreditation of our College of 
Medicine and risking that college entirely. 
 
So when the budget comes out, we see an announcement that 
that 20 million is back. Well, wonderful news, until you read 
the fine print. The university was being informed that they had 
to give $20 million from the rest of their funding to the College 
of Medicine. Bit of an overreach. But the big problem is that 
that 5 per cent cut that the university was already receiving had 
become a 10 per cent cut. 
 
Harming the rest of the university, Mr. Speaker, does nothing to 
help the health of the College of Medicine. Will this minister 
commit to saving the College of Medicine without starving the 
University of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I would point to a statement 
by the then president of the university in 2013 that “. . . 
accreditation status in the College of Medicine is not a funding 
issue, it’s a fundamental problem of structure.” That said, we 
know the College of Medicine has had its challenges, but as of 
October 2015 it is no longer on probation, Mr. Speaker. And we 
continue to work with the college and with the university on a 
financial and restructuring plan that will ensure full compliance 
with ongoing accreditation standards. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, 69 million in dedicated funding is 
being targeted to the college this budget year as part of 309.2 
million in operating funding to the university. A fiscally healthy 
and sustainable College of Medicine is in all our best interests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to apologize. I inserted a word 
that I should not have used, and I do apologize for that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise here 
today to respond of course to this devastating and callous 
budget, this damaging budget, Mr. Speaker. But before I get 
going too far, as other members do, I want to recognize some of 
the important people in my life that assist with this service and 
that, you know, make our lives worth living. 
 
In my case, I want to recognize my life’s partner, my wife 
Stephanie who’s teaching here today, Mr. Speaker, teaches at 
George Lee School, Mr. Speaker, here in Regina. And I want 
to, certainly I think of our little guy, our son William, Mr. 
Speaker. But I also want to thank and recognize our extended 
family and, in many ways, it’s those extended families that 
really do support and enlighten, and a bit of a sounding board at 
times for all of us. And they’re always there to help and serve in 
whatever way that they can. 
 
So certainly to my mom and my dad and to my in-laws and to 
my sisters and to my brothers-in-law and to my herd of 
nephews, to the whole gang, I say thank you. In fact they’re a 
formidable force when you hit the campaign trail, Mr. Speaker. 
But outside of those experiences, there’s a lot of, just those rich 
and rewarding experiences that we have as a family. 
 
And you know, from mom and dad and from our family, it’s the 
values that were instilled at a very early age and throughout our 
life that guides the work and how I try to approach certainly this 
role and the service as an MLA, but life in general. And it was 
that work ethic, Mr. Speaker, that commitment to hard work, 
and to service though as well, Mr. Speaker, to giving back, that 
understanding of fairness and of social justice, and that 
readiness to question the status quo or to fight the things that 
were wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I see . . . You know, I was an educator of course before I 
was elected, a teacher, Mr. Speaker, and my wife is as well. But 
I grew up, you know, watching my dad provide that service. 
You know, as a kid growing up, I saw somebody who put his 
heart and soul into kids and families and communities. Albert 
School, Regent Park — I could go through the list, and that was 
our life. Because not only do you teach the day, but you spend 
. . . You enrich the lives of those kids and communities through 
the evenings and through the weekends. 
 
And I draw on those experiences, Mr. Speaker, that I had as a 
kid growing up, and watching how committed and intrinsically 
motivated my dad was as an educator. Not all about a big 
paycheque, because it certainly wasn’t that, Mr. Speaker, but 
working hour upon hour, evening after evening, weekend after 
weekend, for the greater good of kids and communities. And I 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

share that because I look at this budget that, quite frankly, 
devastates the educators in this province, devastates classrooms, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also am so thankful to work with good people like Gloria 
Patrick, our constituency assistant in Regina Rosemont — 
almost the MLA, Mr. Speaker, for Walsh Acres — entered into 
a process, actually late in an election, ran for almost just three 
weeks. I think that if she had another day and a half, she’d be 
the MLA for Walsh Acres, Mr. Speaker. But setting that aside, 
this is somebody that serves our community, works in youth 
shelters as well, Mr. Speaker, that has an incredible daughter, 
Kaitlyn, who’s priority number one in her life. And Kaitlyn is 
involved in certainly supporting our office and our community 
in so many ways as well. And I’m lucky to work with 
somebody who takes on the work with the kind of purpose that 
Gloria does. 
 
I also want to thank the men and women that are sitting here 
with me here today. In this team, a team of 11 MLAs, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a mighty team. And not by the number of 
seats, but certainly by the commitment and the care and the 
energy and the time that this team of MLAs brings to the people 
of Saskatchewan. This is a team that takes on this service with 
care, with commitment, and with the kind of sincerity that, I 
mean, that everyone in this province should expect from any 
one of their MLAs. But it’s a true honour to serve with people 
who truly care about the people that they serve, serve their 
constituencies, but also take on their respective portfolios, 
whether Finance, through Education or Advanced Ed or Health 
and beyond, take that on with the kind of spirit and care that it’s 
deserved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t do it alone. We do it with our families; we do it 
with the support of our constituents; and certainly we do it with 
the support of a staff team, Mr. Speaker. Team might be 
stretching it, Mr. Speaker — maybe enough to field one shift on 
a hockey rink, Mr. Speaker, but a small team, down in the 
caucus office of the official opposition. But a group that, again, 
like sees greater purpose in their work, that grinds it out, Mr. 
Speaker, to be honest, with hard work, with intelligence 
obviously to prepare a team like this, and gives us the 
confidence to hit the floor and helps connect so many of the 
dots across the province and the people and communities across 
this province. So to that entire caucus team and its leadership I 
say thank you as well. 
 
I say thank you to the members of the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan and to the leadership of that party, as in not 
myself, Mr. Speaker, but the executive and our provincial 
secretary and our very small staff team that really take on the 
work ahead of us with the kind of focus that they need to, 
clearly focusing and understanding that for us to be able to 
build Saskatchewan that we, as a party, need to be as strong as 
we can be and reach out to everyone across the province. 
 
Now importantly, Mr. Speaker, when I enter into these 
discussions and as we stand in the Assembly and when we 
address issues in the rotunda and as we reach out across the 
community, it’s our constituents who we’re serving. And to the 
good people of Regina Rosemont, I thank them for the 
opportunity to continue to serve. I thank them for their trust. I 
thank them for their advice, their input, their care. And it’s 

really remarkable, when you come through a process like a 
budget like this, to really be overwhelmed, certainly by the 
amount of contact from people all across the province. But my 
constituents are remarkable, Mr. Speaker. And in many ways 
it’s almost hard to keep up to the emails or the text messages or 
the Facebook messages or the Twitter messages, Mr. Speaker 
— messages of care, messages of support, messages that 
reinforce the importance of the fight that we have before us, Mr. 
Speaker. And I certainly work for good, honest, hard-working, 
optimistic people, Mr. Speaker, with good hearts and common 
sense. And I’m lucky to do so. 
 
And as the official opposition of Saskatchewan, we serve an 
entire province — in the case of Saskatchewan, an incredible 
and beautiful province, Mr. Speaker, a vast province that’s rich 
in so many ways, Mr. Speaker, rich in resources as we know, 
Mr. Speaker, our natural resources that we have. But rich in our 
natural environments and wildlife and opportunities for people 
to enjoy and grow and thrive. And rich in communities with 
incredible stories, Mr. Speaker, as well incredible histories that 
have been built by many with many people that build the 
strength that we value here in our province. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, our greatest strength as a province 
always lies in its people and it’s a remarkable honour to serve 
the people of this province. And at these very challenging times 
where the threats are very real for Saskatchewan people and 
where we’re reaching out, it’s a real honour to be connecting 
and hearing from so many across the vast reaches of this 
province, from the far North and from many, so many, Mr. 
Speaker, across rural Saskatchewan, for whom we need to build 
and strengthen a relationship, Mr. Speaker, for whom . . . have 
been betrayed by this budget, Mr. Speaker. So it’s with that 
context and those supports and that lens that I enter into this 
budget debate. 
 
You know, for a week now we’ve been rising in this House to 
address this budget. And the people of Saskatchewan too have 
been rising up and speaking out and protesting this damaging 
and callous budget. With it of course, they’re recognizing that 
the Sask Party is not just breaking promise after promise, their 
word, but they’ve broken trust with Saskatchewan people. It’s a 
betrayal. 
 
They’re failing Saskatchewan families, tearing the things apart 
that give us strength and the things that will give us strength, 
Mr. Speaker, the things that people and families count on, that 
communities depend on. And after nearly a decade in 
government, the Sask Party seems to have learned nothing 
about really supporting people and families. 
 
They failed to get the job done during the best years and they’re 
failing big time, Mr. Speaker, during difficult times. Mr. 
Speaker, far from laying out a plan to build Saskatchewan 
together, the Sask Party have shown their petty and their 
short-sighted side with this budget. 
 
The Sask Party in fact is putting brakes on the economic 
recovery that every family and community deserves, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re attacking our classrooms, our local public 
education system, Mr. Speaker, breaking their word and hurting 
our students. They’re cutting even deeper into advanced 
education, in job training, and they’re punishing independent 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

small local businesses, the true job creators in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re hiking taxes on families by a billion 
dollars and forcing municipalities to raise taxes even higher, 
doing the dirty work of that Premier and that Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, forced to do that work from a government shirking 
their responsibility. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that once 
promised Saskatchewan people that they wouldn’t raise taxes. 
They said it time and time again. They toured around the 
province, Mr. Speaker, saying that they wouldn’t raise taxes. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, they’re breaking their word, and they’re 
ushering in the biggest tax hike in Saskatchewan’s history, a 
billion-dollar tax hike, Mr. Speaker. I guess if you’re going to 
break a promise, their theory is, do it in a big way, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re raising the price of just about everything in our 
province, from restaurant meals to children’s clothes, shoes, and 
our power bills, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s even raising the 
cost of going out with a fishing licence and a case of beer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This budget hits families and people hard. It pounds those that 
are working so hard to make ends meet and to build a future for 
their families, and this at a time where their very jobs are being 
threatened and lost, and actually being threatened and taken 
away by the actions of that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even when you take into account the tax scheme of the Sask 
Party, the average Saskatchewan family is paying well over 
$400 per year alone, in taxes alone, Mr. Speaker. And then 
there’s the massive increases, four times in the last two years, to 
our power bills — another $120, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s the Sask Party friends — you know, the big 
corporations, the wealthiest, and the most well connected — 
that at this same very time are offensively getting breaks and 
giveaways, Mr. Speaker. It’s not decent. It’s not fair. It’s bad 
fiscal policy, Mr. Speaker, shifting benefits to the wealthiest 
and making the rest of us, hard-working, everyday 
Saskatchewan people and families, pay the price. 
 
You know it’s fair to say that this budget is full of unfair and 
damaging shifts and it’s full of shiftiness, Mr. Speaker, at every 
turn. And all of this while the Sask Party continues to add 
billions of dollars of debt to Saskatchewan people. A 
government that’s run deficit after deficit with debt now 
skyrocketing, if you can imagine, to over $18 billion in this year 
alone. In fact they’ve actually doubled . . . And it’s hard to get 
your mind around this, Mr. Speaker, because it’s so, so big. 
They’ve actually doubled the size of the debt in just the past 
five years. 
 
Of course they don’t say that on their billboards, Mr. Speaker, 
but that explains the level of trust that Saskatchewan people 
now assign to this Sask Party. Deficit after deficit after deficit. 
You know, this is a government that didn’t get the job done 
during the best days, that couldn’t balance the budget, that 
drained the rainy day fund during the sunniest days, and not 
saving a dime of course; a government that hid this mess — 
worked so hard to hide this mess from Saskatchewan people — 
but are now being exposed. The costs of the years of Sask Party 

mismanagement, scandal, and waste clearly piling up for 
Saskatchewan people. The years of blowing recklessly through 
dollars on mismanaged projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But now it’s Saskatchewan people that are forced to pay the 
price for this mismanagement, this scandal, and this waste. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s put it simply: this is a betrayal of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And the Sask Party don’t reflect Saskatchewan values anymore. 
The actions in this damaging and callous budget — I could call 
it much, much worse, Mr. Speaker — don’t reflect 
Saskatchewan values. 
 
[11:15] 
 
They weren’t straight with the people of Saskatchewan on the 
state of the finances. They weren’t straight about how much 
they wasted. They weren’t straight about the scandals, and 
they’ve lost their moral compass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Despite nearly a decade of record resource revenues, far from 
saving up a sovereign wealth fund, instead what they’ve done is 
piled up foreign debt, Mr. Speaker. And who’s paying the 
price? Are they? Well of course not. It’s the cabinet that’s not 
even apologizing for not saving a dime and blowing through the 
billions during the last decade. Are they apologizing? No. Are 
they willing to cut their ministerial stipends, the bonuses by 
just, just 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the additional pay that they 
receive as a cabinet for being responsible for this mess and to 
show some contrition? No. They want to hold on to those 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Are they willing to cut the number of MLAs by at least five in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and save a quarter million for each 
and every one of those that are saved, Mr. Speaker? No, they 
don’t want to do that either, Mr. Speaker. It’s about protecting 
their self-interest. 
 
What will they cut? Well they’re cutting the funding for our 
kids’ already under-supported classrooms. And in fact they’re 
jacking up the school taxes but cutting their contributions so 
much that classrooms will end up with much less, millions less: 
shortfalls in divisions across this province in Swift Current, and 
Regina, Saskatoon, and beyond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’re not just cutting millions. They’re also cutting 
autonomy. They’re cutting control, Mr. Speaker, eliminating 
local voices on school boards by taking over their budgets. A 
direct takeover of local public education, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re fleecing even their backbenchers on this one, Mr. 
Speaker, who I know, who I know heard from local voices on 
education the importance of maintaining control. So it’s a 
matter of not just being straight with Saskatchewan people, 
they’re not even being straight with their own members, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they’re undermining . . . You know, education, as we 
know, is a foundation to our future. It’s what extends 
opportunity to all. This attack on our already under-resourced 
classrooms is devastating. It’s devastating for students, for 
families, for communities. It’s devastating for teachers and 
certainly educational workers, Mr. Speaker. This doesn’t build 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

the kind of future that everyone in this province deserves. 
 
And they’re undermining literacy and community-building by 
cutting funding to our public libraries by almost 60 per cent, 
blindsiding the libraries in this province, and clearly not even 
understanding what kind of hub and what kind of purpose 
libraries provide communities across this province. You know, 
now they’re facing the unfortunate reality, the damaging reality 
of laying off staff, cutting services, and even looking at 
closures. 
 
They’re cutting in health care too, scrapping local voices from 
health care. And they’re still ramming ahead with their reckless 
and short-sighted 3.5 per cent cut to the entire public service, 
Mr. Speaker. No respect and no plan, Mr. Speaker. Services 
will be lost and people will be thrown out of work. The Sask 
Party’s clearly, through this budget, picking the pockets of 
people and the most vulnerable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re completely scrapping a Crown 
corporation that ties our vast province together and, 
importantly, serves those in need. Scrapping off and selling 
STC is wrong, and it’s desperate. People from across the 
province rely on STC to get around, to access education and 
employment and training. And they rely on it — you know, our 
small businesses, our producers — on the parcel service, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And people access it for health care. Twelve hundred people 
last year alone, and this number is growing, relied on it 
regularly to access medical appointments, including cancer 
treatments, Mr. Speaker. And I think of organizations like the 
Cancer Society that’s put together a compassionate volunteer 
team to support those as they come in for cancer treatment, to 
pick them up at the STC depot and to get them to their care, Mr. 
Speaker. All of this is being lost. 
 
You know, I was at the depot just the other day, and I saw this 
very thing. I met one of those volunteers and an elderly woman 
receiving cancer treatment that was arriving and getting her 
compassionate ride, Mr. Speaker. This is not a government that 
cares, and this is not a government that has thought this 
through. 
 
You know, the Premier of course and all of them pledged, hand 
over heart, looked people in their eyes, and promised that they 
wouldn’t sell off our Crowns. This budget breaks that promise. 
And as they sell off our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, sadly they’re 
selling out Saskatchewan people and the future that everyone 
deserves. Our Crowns belong to and should benefit all the 
people of Saskatchewan, all the people of our province. 
 
You know, it’s also disappointing to see the Sask Party 
scrapping the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. It makes 
money, supports shortline rail with matching grants for 
improvements and line maintenance, and it’s an asset that’s 
there and owned by producers, Mr. Speaker. One lever and a bit 
of control to address and improve our under-performing grain 
transportation system, but the Sask Party just doesn’t seem to 
care anymore. 
 
And on top of that, they’re downloading millions of cuts onto 
our cities and towns and forcing them to hike property taxes 

too. For decades the province has paid cities for services and 
provided the Crown buildings through the grants-in-lieu 
program. But the Sask Party’s changing legislation, actually 
changing the law so they can break their promise and 
commitment, so that SaskPower and SaskEnergy don’t have to 
pay the cities anymore. They’re going to . . . I guess, through 
the Sask Party, you just squat on the lands of cities and towns 
all across the province not paying for the services, Mr. Speaker, 
that they’re provided by those cities. And you know, it grabs 
tens of millions of dollars directly away from our cities and 
towns across Saskatchewan who are growing and who have 
needs. And of course this all falls directly to property taxpayers 
and to families who need services and pay the freight on this, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
There’s only one taxpayer; I think this is something the Premier 
needs to understand. You know, it’s no wonder that municipal 
leaders are outraged by this budget, by this move. Regina ward 
2 city councillor Bob Hawkins, a former Sask Party candidate 
said, “This budget comes like a thief in the night.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the end it will be Saskatchewan families that 
will feel taken by the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, 
waste, broken promises. The Sask Party claims that somehow 
all these tax hikes and cuts and layoffs are going to create jobs. 
There are 40,000 people currently out of work in the province. 
That’s double the number of people unemployed than when the 
Sask Party took office, doubled the number of people 
unemployed from 20,000 to 40,000, Mr. Speaker. And instead 
of investing in job training, post-secondary education, and 
stimulating the economy, the Sask Party is cutting those very 
programs. 
 
And they’re attacking small businesses too, Mr. Speaker, the 
job creators, the entrepreneurs. In fact CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business] vice-president Marilyn 
Braun-Pollon calls this budget “. . . brutal from a small business 
perspective” and “. . . the biggest tax hike we’ve seen among 
Saskatchewan’s history.” Brutal, Mr. Speaker, from a small 
business perspective. 
 
The majority of new jobs are created by small businesses, Mr. 
Speaker. But the Sask Party instead is ramming forward with a 
plan that doesn’t make any sense. Restaurants will feel the pain 
of the piling on of a new 6 per cent PST, a brand new tax to 
restaurants, Mr. Speaker. And in a damaging, job-killing, 
investment-killing, expansion- and renovation-killing move, the 
Sask Party is hitting the construction industry with a new tax as 
well, a new 6 per cent tax on jobs. The epitome of a job-killing 
tax, Mr. Speaker, when we need jobs and we need investment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon 
Home Builders’ Association said the Sask Party’s new tax on 
construction materials and labour will have “. . . a huge impact 
on affordability.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a decade in government, either the Sask 
Party just doesn’t get it anymore or they couldn’t care less 
about the role that they have to serve all Saskatchewan. You 
can see it. You can see it in what’s missing in this budget. And 
unless you count the price of rent rising for seniors in care 
homes and eliminating foot care and hearing aid services, 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

seniors are ignored in this budget. They’re not ignored, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re hurt. They’re hurt by this budget. It’s 
disgraceful. It’s damaging, all while the wealthiest and well 
connected get breaks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s nothing, nothing in this budget to address the suicide 
crisis and the unacceptable conditions in many of our 
communities in northern Saskatchewan, despite promising time 
and time again that they would work to increase mental health 
services and supports in these communities, services that are 
not adequate, that are shamefully under resourced, and that are 
taking loved ones from families, from communities, from the 
North, and from all of us, Mr. Speaker, and taking opportunity 
from this very important and vital region. You know, there’s 
some new money coming in from the federal government on 
this front, but the Sask Party and the Premier clearly is saying 
through this budget that it’s not a priority for the provincial 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a budget, nary a mention, of the 
Truth and Reconciliation recommendations in this budget. No 
dollars to support implementation of the recommendations, 
something that of course this government has suggested that 
they’ll do, something that’s critical to our province’s future. But 
again it’s all talk and no walk from this Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It couldn’t be more clear that this Sask Party has lost their 
moral compass, forgotten who they’re working for, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that will be the legacy of the Sask 
Party. That will be the legacy of this Premier, Mr. Speaker — a 
legacy of deficit after deficit after deficit. A legacy of debt. A 
legacy of mismanagement despite historic opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. A legacy of broken promise after broken promise. A 
legacy of not being able to keep one’s word, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the legacy of that Premier and the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a better way. By being honest and having 
faith in Saskatchewan people and small businesses, we can do 
better. Instead of cutting our kids’ classrooms, attacking our 
universities and colleges, and eliminating job-training 
programs, we can invest in extending opportunity and getting 
people back to work so that they can collect a paycheque and 
contribute to the economy and build their lives. 
 
Instead of slashing funding for health care, preventive care, and 
the most vulnerable, we can help to provide opportunities and 
supports to build independence, well-being, and health. Instead 
of jacking up taxes on job creators, our small businesses, our 
entrepreneurs, we could extend conditions that support them to 
hire more Saskatchewan people and to thrive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of breathlessly defending huge payments to foreign 
contractors and well-connected partisan supporters, Mr. 
Speaker, we could defend payments, investments to our cities 
and towns, classrooms, and people and Saskatchewan 
businesses. And instead of selling off our Crowns, Crowns that 
benefit all of us and tie us together, we can support, build, and 
be proud of them and the services they provide, recognizing not 
just how important they’ve been to our past but how vital they 
are to our future, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that when they’re 
gone, they’re gone. 
 

Instead of picking fights with cities and slashing funding for 
parks, rinks, and pools, and even libraries, Mr. Speaker, we can 
be straight with Saskatchewan people about the state of the 
finances, the challenges and realities that we face, the decisions 
that got us here, and how we can work together to get ahead. 
 
The Sask Party has lost their moral compass. This budget is 
damaging. It’s callous. I could call it a whole heck of a lot 
worse, Mr. Speaker. We offer the amendment to help them find 
their way. And for so many reasons and many, many, many 
more reasons that I wasn’t able to cite here today, I support the 
amendment and I will not be supporting the budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
been looking forward to participating in the debate. I’d just like 
to offer, I’d just like to offer some thanks to my colleagues on 
this side of the House and to thank them, many of them who 
have intervened in the speech, in the debate, in the budget 
debate. I want to thank my colleagues for thoughtful and 
excellent speeches that they’ve been able to provide for 
members of the House. I thank them for that. I also want to 
thank my colleagues for their ongoing support, Mr. Speaker, 
which is something that I’ll never take for granted. 
 
[11:30] 
 
I also want to offer a few thanks. I usually, on important 
occasions like this, perhaps the address in reply to the Throne 
Speech, or budget speech day, I like to make sure I thank the 
people that are most important in my life, my family, especially 
Tami. We’re sort of empty nesters now with our youngest at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Our son Colter is living in 
Bowling Green, Kentucky when he’s not travelling around, and 
our daughter and her husband live in Saskatoon. But I remain so 
very grateful for my wife and my family and for their ongoing 
support, so I want to put that on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have not often enough on occasions like this 
thanked some other people in this building with whom I work 
and have had the pleasure and honour of working for some 
time. In the Premier’s office here, Mr. Speaker, there are two 
individuals, Ruth and Rhonda, who are well known to people in 
this Assembly and well known to people in the building and 
well known to people across the province to the extent they 
have engagements with the office. In the case of Ruth, I’ve been 
working alongside her as a colleague since we started in 2007 in 
government. 
 
And they are amazing women; they’re wonderful to work with. 
They make sure people that come to that office feel as they 
should, that it is theirs, that indeed because it is their office, it 
belongs to them. And their support, not just for me, but family 
and the team is something I don’t often put on the record 
enough in terms of how grateful I am for it, so I do so now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know I’ve had the great benefit of serving with the 
same senior staff now since we formed government, and in 
some cases before we formed government, and that doesn’t 
happen very often. Mr. Speaker, I consider my colleagues 
across the country, other premiers, and I can tell this House 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

that, you know, a chief of staff generally does not last longer 
than a couple of years for various reasons in most of the places. 
And in the case of Joe Donlevy, he is the only chief of staff that 
I have had, and he is a great support, source of counsel, that I 
need to publicly thank here. Reg Downs, I’ve been working 
with Reg, well, in politics since university, but more recently I 
guess, if 1999 is recent, in this building here as Reg has 
continued to serve in opposition and in government. He’s a 
senior adviser, one of my very best friends, and I think probably 
the best political strategist that there exists in the Dominion of 
Canada. And so I thank him and Kathy Young, and all. Kathy 
Young who has been the director of communications and now 
chief of operations does an amazing job as well. And I just need 
to thank all of those people and get that on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few years ago . . . Well the Minister of 
Government Relations reminds me of someone else. And I 
think I have made a point of thanking this individual but I think 
it is important to get on the record that Everett Hindley and I 
have been working together since 1999 when I convinced him 
to leave a promising career in news. He was the news director at 
CKSW in Swift Current. I talked him into working in the 
constituency office when I was first elected, and we’ve been 
together ever since. He’s been pretty candid with me that he 
regrets that decision. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like peas and carrots. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes. The member from Wood River says 
like peas and carrots. It probably is true. He is invaluable and 
has become one of my very best friends. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s that old saying, if you can go to work every 
day with your friends and do something that you like, you’ll 
never work a day in your life. And I have been so blessed. So I 
thank all those people for making that possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not too many years ago my nephew, one of my 
nephews, Justin, moved from the province of Alberta to the 
province of Saskatchewan where he is now working as an 
agri-farm professional very near Swift Current. He relocated his 
family, his growing family at the time. And since he’s come 
back that family has grown some more I’m happy to report to 
members of the House. Mr. Speaker, he has a son, he has two 
sons now, two daughters and two sons. 
 
His oldest son, Lane, was driving with Justin. I think they heard 
. . . There was a commercial. Maybe one of the unions had put 
out an advertisement perhaps a little bit critical of our 
government. And I think there was a line in the . . . Because I 
got this text from my nephew, Justin, about my great-nephew, 
Lane, hearing this advertisement wherein there was a line where 
the announcer says or somebody in the radio ad says that, and 
I’m quoting now, Mr. Speaker, “that Brad Wall was making 
terrible mistakes.” And Lane took exception to this. He’s only 
about . . . He’s in grade one. But he took exception to this and 
he said, Dad, that’s not true. That is not true. Uncle Brad’s not 
making terrible mistakes; he’s making great mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tami and I have . . . We have not yet been blessed 
with grandchildren. Maybe that’s coming down the road. But 
these grandnephews and nieces feature prominently in my 
thinking even as we were considering the decision making that 
we were facing in this budget, and even as I’ve listened to the 

debate from members on both sides of the House who earnestly 
participate and have strongly held views. And that’s what this 
place is all about. But I think of, I do think of Lucy Jane and 
Lane and Nevaeh and little Holt, the newest baby, when I think 
about the decisions we’ve made in this particular budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every now and then and it doesn’t happen every 
year and it certainly hasn’t happened every year for us. Every 
now and then though, there is a budget that might speak more to 
the next generation, that might speak more to the long term 
even than it does to the current financial affairs of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, let me just say in a general sense I 
think that is very much the case with this particular budget. 
 
This budget does propose and offer challenges to my nephew 
and my niece, to the parents of those kids, challenges that 
they’ll face with respect to perhaps PST changes. He’s in 
agriculture. Agriculture wasn’t untouched. Rural Saskatchewan 
wasn’t untouched in this budget. And I am mindful of that, and 
we are all mindful of that. That’s why these decisions are 
difficult. We know that they affect people’s lives, sometimes in 
ways that we would rather not have them affected. So too, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s important to remember their kids, what this budget 
might mean for those kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of longer term aspects to this 
budget that I’d like to just touch on a little bit today. Choices 
that were made that will pay dividends; if not today, then in the 
mid term and very much so in the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did, as the Finance minister has very 
effectively presented, we did move away in this budget from 
taxing investment and income towards taxing consumption. 
And economists will tell you that if you can do that in a 
jurisdiction, you ought to. We’ve seen the Ministry of Finance’s 
impact assessment of what happens when you adjust taxes on 
the consumption side versus the income side or the business 
side, the business tax rate. We know that we can affect the 
economy more positively by focusing on a more competitive 
income and investment tax than perhaps being focused on a 
consumption tax, and so we made that difficult choice, 
understanding that Lane’s dad is going to have more cost with 
respect to the PST in the short term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another shift in the budget the Minister of 
Finance has made. And he’s going to speak in a moment; I’m 
sure he’ll touch on this. I don’t want to dwell on it because I 
don’t want to basically, in advance of his speech, repeat what 
he’s going to say. But the other shift he mentioned, even in 
question period today, is that we would shift away from 
resource revenue dependency in this province towards a more 
stable and reliable tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had it put to me that why didn’t you 
start this a lot earlier? Well that’s a pretty fair question. It’s a 
fair question for everybody in this Assembly, for both parties in 
this Assembly, to have to answer. Why didn’t we do this a lot 
sooner? Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, that choice 
was not made. It was not made by members opposite when they 
were in the government and, to be fair, it wasn’t made by us 
until this particular budget. But we have made the choice now. 
 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

I remember there was a rancher in Beechy who — I think it was 
even at the nominating meeting years ago in Rosetown that 
selected the current Minister of Health — a rancher from 
Beechy asked me the rhetorical question, if I knew when the 
best time to plant a tree was. And I mentioned my chief of staff, 
Joe Donlevy, Joe has never tired of this story. I want to put that 
on the record. He asked me when are the best times to plant a 
tree was? And I said, well I don’t know. What’s the best time to 
plant a tree? He said 25 years ago or today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps this should have been happening 25 years 
ago, perhaps should have been happening about the time we 
discovered oil in this province, about the time we started being 
world leaders in mining potash. Perhaps about that time, 
somebody that sat in these benches should have said, you know, 
we need to make sure we’re not reliant on the volatile resource 
revenues of this province. For whatever reason though, and I’m 
not impugning any motives on either side of the House because 
we’re all here trying to do our best on behalf of those we 
represent, but for whatever reason, that decision didn’t happen. 
 
Well we have signalled in this budget to my grandnieces and 
nephews and to their generation especially that we will begin 
today, that we will begin with this budget when it’s passed to 
move this province away from a dependence on resource 
revenue. Mr. Speaker, it’s essential that we do this in the 
interests of that generation and even in the shorter term interest 
of the government’s finances. 
 
And here’s why I would say that. It has become clearer and 
clearer to all of us on this side of the House and frankly to 
economists and forecasters, that there may well have been, have 
taken place already, a structural change with respect to certain 
commodities, commodities we’ve got a lot of, commodities that 
are important to the province of Saskatchewan — resources. 
That the days of 80 or 90 or $100 oil, they ain’t coming back 
any time soon, if ever. 
 
I do not know how anybody in this House can consider what’s 
going on in the oil shale play in places like Texas and 
Oklahoma and not understand . . . and have seen the 
transformation in terms of the energy independence sort of 
quotient in the country of the United States as a result of those 
plays. I don’t know how anyone can look at those plays and 
look at the third-largest reserves on earth right here in Canada, 
by the way — because that’s what Canada has, the third-largest 
oil reserves — and combine those two developments and realize 
that . . . I don’t know how we can realize anything but the price 
of oil is not going to be coming back to where it was. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with that realization in mind that we 
have to make some decisions. It’s with that realization in mind 
that the caucus, the men and women of this caucus, led by the 
Finance minister and treasury board, made some very difficult 
recommendations that we now see before us in the form of a 
provincial budget. And so, Mr. Speaker, I know we’ll have the 
debates and I’ll listen to . . . I listened to the Leader of the 
Opposition and, Mr. Speaker, I respect the fact that he doesn’t 
agree with the budget. He’s going to oppose it. I respect the fact 
he’ll do so aggressively. That’s his job. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also heard in his comments the motives of 
this side of the House being impugned. I heard in his speech 

words and descriptors that would imply that we are not 
earnestly motivated. Mr. Speaker, maybe he believes that; I’d 
like to think he actually doesn’t believe that. He might think 
that’s part of sort of the rhetorical device that he needs in this 
place. I’d like to think that he understands, as we understand 
about them, that we do want what’s best for this province, not 
just for this current situation, not just for Lane’s parents who 
face some of the challenges I mentioned, but that we are 
earnestly seeking to improve things in the long term for those 
kids and for that next generation, that the place, the province 
that we leave them is truly better than the way we found it, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s what motivated members on this side of 
the House. That’s what has motivated us through this very 
difficult process. It motivates us still. It’s why we would engage 
in the debate. It’s why we would defend a budget that’s got a lot 
of challenging elements to it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the essential part of this budget from a 
long-term perspective, that we will shift taxes away from 
consumption taxes more . . . sorry, towards consumption, away 
from investment and income, and that we’d also move off of a 
reliance on resource revenue. And so, Mr. Speaker, as a feature 
of this budget, and it hasn’t gotten a lot of attention in this 
province — and I understand that there’s a lot in the budget for 
the media to cover and the opposition to talk about — but it has 
gotten a lot of coverage outside of the province, and that’s the 
element of the budget that speaks to these tax changes more 
specifically. 
 
When this plan is fully implemented, and that’s just in the 
mid-term, that’s just a few years from now when this budget 
plan is fully implemented, the people and the province of 
Saskatchewan will quite rightly be able to say to Canadian 
families that if you live in the province of Saskatchewan, if 
your family is here, as an individual or a member of a family, 
you will pay between the lowest and the third-lowest income 
taxes in all of Canada. That’s assuming that none of the other 
provinces increase their income taxes and, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think that’s a sure bet given the level of deficits we see in other 
jurisdictions without a plan for them to get back to balance. 
 
Fully implemented, a family will pay lower income taxes here 
than anywhere else in Canada. Fully implemented, a business 
will pay a lower tax on their income than anywhere else in 
Canada. We’ll be tied with British Columbia. If the members 
opposite party is successful in that election, I think we’ll be 
standing alone in that regard. I think we’ll see an income tax 
increase on business in BC [British Columbia] as we saw with 
their colleagues’ party in Alberta. They did the same thing 
there. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So we’ll have the lowest to the third-lowest income taxes for 
families. We’ll offer the lowest business taxes for those who 
create jobs, for those in industry who in fact create the spinoffs 
by the way, for which create jobs and opportunities for smaller 
businesses. We’ll have the lowest business rate. And, Mr. 
Speaker, by far, when this plan’s fully implemented, we’ll have 
the lowest manufacturing and processing rate in all of Canada. 
It’s not actually going to be even close in terms of the rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve heard, I think again, people 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

involved in politics on both sides of this aisle for years talk 
about the importance of diversifying the economy. We have 
seen in the last seven or eight years a major move in that 
direction, a major move away from a dependence on the 
resource sector or even primary production in agriculture, for 
new jobs and for the economy. But we have to continue that 
effort, and we have to do more than talk about it. We have to do 
more than talk about how many eggs in baskets we have. We 
actually have to have a plan for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so our plan is featured prominently in this budget, that we 
would be able to say to those that are in Saskatchewan today 
who manufacture things, who add value, who help diversify the 
economy, that you stay in this province, you add jobs in this 
province, and you’ll be, you know, you’ll pay the lowest tax 
rate in all of Canada by far. And we also have a message to 
those companies who aren’t currently in Saskatchewan that, if 
you come here to this province, expect to pay lower taxes on 
investment, expect to pay the lowest tax on manufacturing and 
processing. And your employees, those families you will bring 
with you or that you will hire here will pay the lowest income 
taxes in all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, that is an advantage. And it 
speaks to a future that is less reliant on the resource sector but a 
future where the economy of this province is a leader within 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that we can sustain the valuable 
public services that members have talked about in their 
speeches is if the economy’s robust enough, in fact, to provide 
the taxes to support them, if we have that broad tax base that 
can withstand the volatility of resource price changes, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s our only hope to be able to say to 
Saskatchewan people, you can expect shorter wait times for 
health care, because it costs money to shorten those wait times. 
It’s the only way we can say to Saskatchewan people, you’ll 
have the best education possible, because the only way we can 
afford that education is if there’s tax dollars to support it in the 
long term. It’s true for social services. It’s true for every quality 
of life that we might desire for this province. 
 
We need to have a long-term view of how do we make sure that 
the tax base can support those things, that the economy is strong 
enough so that the tax base is broad enough that these things 
can be offered to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
That has always been our focus. 
 
We have a growth plan that’s still in effect. We campaigned on 
it in ’07. We updated it in 2011. It called for that reduction in 
CIT [corporate income tax] that we now just have introduced in 
this particular budget. But the reason that we have been so 
focused on growth, that this has been our north star as a 
government, isn’t because we like to talk about pie charts and 
GDP. It’s because we know we need to support public service, 
and the only way to do that that’s sustainable without long-term 
deficits, Mr. Speaker, is to have a strong enough economy that 
generates the revenue. And so for this reason too, the budget 
takes a very long-term view of what we need to do in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even with some deficits that we’ve had here lately 
. . . And again I wouldn’t agree at all with the characterization 
of my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, in terms of the 
number of deficits. Members in the House will know that the 

NDP used a GRF [General Revenue Fund] budgeting when they 
were in office. In fact their last budget, Mr. Speaker, had them 
withdrawing about $500 million from their rainy day fund. This 
is 2007, Mr. Speaker. It’d be pretty hard to make the case there 
was even a light mist, never mind rain. But they took $500 
million out in an election year, in an election year, to balance 
their budget. That’s what they did. 
 
And the member for Elphinstone, I’m glad he’s been 
participating in the debate because he was in cabinet. I think he 
was a minister at the time. And so he would have sat around the 
table and they would have decided that well, we’re going to run 
a deficit, a General Revenue Fund deficit, and we will balance it 
by taking money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, or the rainy 
day fund. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, they always like to talk about what 
was left to this government. In that particular budget they used 
$500 million from the rainy day fund when I don’t think it was 
raining, and left in that fund $300 million. That’s what was left 
in that year, because they were running a campaign and they 
wanted to make some promises and had to fund those things. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we took over, particularly in that first 
year, there was some significant new revenues coming in from 
the resource sector. The members opposite like to ask the 
question rhetorically, where did all that money go? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we chose to pay down debt. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
operating debt, even with this budget, even with these deficits 
that we have run in the last while, in the last few years, our 
operating debt is lower than it was than when we were elected 
by about 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We would like that number 
to be higher and one day we’ll get there again, but that’s the fact 
of the matter. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition likes to talk about the overall debt 
of the province, and fair enough. Yes, the Crown corporations, 
like any company, finance their business. They borrow. These 
are large companies. I think under the member’s logic that these 
huge companies, these huge utilities would run . . . would cash 
flow everything, which of course no entity does. No corporation 
would do that. They finance those things. 
 
So too we have borrowed for some major projects, mortgages if 
you will, against definable assets. But, Mr. Speaker, what we 
have been reducing and what is lower today than it was when 
we took office, even with this particular budget, is the credit 
card debt, for want of a better way to describe it. That operating 
debt where there isn’t an asset attached to it, and in some cases 
there’s not even a regular payment schedule that would see that 
debt retired. And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, we inherited 
operating debt from not just members opposite but other 
governments previous to that, at high rates — 14 per cent in 
some cases. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government, again thinking 
about the long term, about Lane and his sisters and his brother, 
is that we have been reducing operating debt. We will continue 
to reduce operating debt, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why they hate 
those billboards. A colleague said, you know, they always talk 
about some billboards I think we had put up when we 
highlighted the fact that we had reduced the operating debt. 
They don’t like it because it doesn’t fit with their narrative. But, 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

Mr. Speaker, it has the happy coincidence though of being true 
because that operating debt remains down, even today with 
respect to this particular budget. 
 
There is a recognition of the importance of this budget being 
about the long term, if you take a look at the infrastructure 
investment that’s in it. Mr. Speaker, huge infrastructure dollars 
in highways. Mr. Speaker, in this budget, this very difficult 
budget, two new schools to be built for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And yes, we will continue to work on the 
bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, day in and day out, the Leader of the Opposition, 
the interim leader of the NDP, kind of does some drive-by 
smearing of the women and men that are involved in that 
bypass project. And we would say to our friends on city council 
in Regina as a reminder: that’s the largest infrastructure project 
in the history of the province, by the way, invested right here in 
our capital city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear members basically smear the project and 
kind of write off the consortium, the group that’s out there 
doing the work. Mr. Speaker, I have done this in question 
period but I will do it in the course of my budget speech, and 
that is to remind the Leader of the Opposition and all the 
members over there, members from Regina who have 
consistently opposed and ran down this project by the way, I 
will remind them that of the total businesses involved in the 
bypass — and it’s 134 total business involved in the bypass — 
71 per cent are local businesses. Ninety-five are local and from 
Saskatchewan. And one of the biggest ones, a well-known 
company that they’ve kind of, I think, indirectly smeared as 
well, the Broda Group of companies which is, I think, a 
century-old business started in that Preeceville, maybe the 
Invermay area, and then moved into Prince Albert. A 
family-run business that has employed hundreds of 
Saskatchewan people, thousands if you consider some of the 
projects they’ve been involved with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope we will never hear on this side of the 
House — I don’t think you will — any member that would 
stand up and first of all run down a project in their own 
constituency, one that’s needed in terms of traffic safety and the 
important moving of goods and services as the Minister of 
Central Services talked about yesterday. But none of us would 
ever kind of run down a project like that because we think there 
might be a few one-liners in it, as we’ve heard from the interim 
leader of the NDP. I don’t think you’ll ever hear any of us do 
that, and neither will we ever take a drive-by smear at 71 per 
cent, 95 local companies who are pretty proud of that project, 
95 local companies who have employees who are proud to be 
working on the Regina bypass because that project is about the 
future. That project is a project for Lane and his brother and his 
two sisters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud to have been the government that 
finally undertook this project. We knew it was on the books for 
a long time, frankly like the Global Transportation Hub and 
other ideas and initiatives that they kept delaying and they kept 
procrastinating. This side of the House is proud that we are 
finally moving on that bypass in the interests of the capital city 
and the overall economic interests of the province. 
 

We’re proud that that P3 [public-private partnership], as CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] reported last night, that 
project is on time and it’s on budget. We’re proud that there’s 
8,000 jobs created by that particular project. And we’re proud 
that 71 per cent of the companies are from right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And when it comes down to a 
choice between them or those companies and their employees, 
we’ll pick the employees and the companies every single time. 
 
They’re going to have some explaining to do, I think. I think the 
member for Regina, the interim leader of the NDP, has 
probably already had some uncomfortable conversations with 
those companies who would say, why are you running this 
project down, to the NDP. Why are you running down a project 
that’s on time and on budget and employing all these 
Saskatchewan people, and important for the infrastructure of the 
constituents that he’s supposed to represent right here in 
Regina? I expect if he hasn’t had those conversations, they’re 
probably going to be coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know he’s had uncomfortable conversations in 
the past. I think there was that whole Mexico thing, me going to 
Mexico. We’re pretty much aware that he’s had uncomfortable 
conversations before, and I hope that he responds to these 
companies the same way he did when he made that mistake, 
which was simply to acknowledge this was not a very good 
thing to have done and a mistake and that he would now 
support the project and also support all of those companies that 
are involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bypass is an indication, and the investment in 
the budget, in the highways budget, in that bypass is a very 
clear indicator that we are thinking about the long term in this 
province, that we are thinking about Lane and his little brother 
and his sisters as we consider decisions that we need to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to begin the process of getting 
expenditures under control, moving away from a dependency of 
resource revenue, we had to make a number of current choices 
as well. So there’s some long-term initiatives in here: the 
infrastructure piece I mentioned, what we’re going to continue 
to do on the operating debt and taxes. But there are some 
current choices we have to make to kind of set up the long-term 
plans that the government has for the economy and public 
service. Those are not easy choices. 
 
I remember the debate we had in caucus and the discussion that 
was there and that occurred during budget finalization with 
members representing their constituents, voicing also their 
strongly held views. And what was abundantly clear is that 
these were difficult choices just because of the amount of 
discussion we had, much more than has been the case in other 
budgets for obvious reasons, from the scale and scope of the 
changes that are here. 
 
But I was proud of my colleagues because there was a real 
focus, our own rhetorical question of ourselves, and a focus that 
we all had as to answering the rhetorical question, what’s the 
role of government? What should be our priorities as a 
government in not just difficult times frankly, but even when 
times will get a little bit better fiscally? 
 
I think we all agree that our priorities should be in health care, 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

that our priorities should be in education, that our priorities 
should be in social services, that our priority should be in 
safety, public safety. And by the way, I’m very proud that in 
this particular budget under the Attorney General’s . . . the 
Ministry of Justice’s budget we’ve got some new dollars, some 
additional dollars to respond to the real concerns in rural 
Saskatchewan about public safety. And the crime reduction 
effort by members who are on that committee, we certainly 
want to thank them for their efforts. 
 
But we’ve had that discussion on this side: what’s the role of 
government going forward? We’re going to have to make some 
choices. If the price of oil’s not coming back and we can’t make 
it all up with other taxes — that would be harmful to the 
economy — then we have to look at the expenditure side too. 
 
And so we made choices with respect to STC. The minister of 
STC, the Minister Responsible for STC has done a very good 
job of ensuring this caucus had all of the information before we 
made that final decision and ensuring that there was a plan for 
those who need that transportation, before we moved on it. But, 
Mr. Speaker, part of his presentation at caucus was the fact that 
just a few years ago the per-passenger subsidy was 30 bucks, 25 
bucks, $25 per passenger, Mr. Speaker. And what is it today? 
After we’ve seen ridership continue to fall and costs for the 
company continue to increase, it’s approaching $100. It’s 
approaching $100. Mr. Speaker, I would also point out to 
members on that side of the House that when they were in 
office, they cut routes. They made a decision to stop running 
buses down certain highways, to stop the service. Not reduce it, 
not go to smaller buses; they cut lines. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know because we’ve looked at the evidence, 
the facts, we know that they made those decisions to cut lines 
when the per-passenger subsidy from taxpayers to the bus 
company ranged between two and five bucks a passenger. 
We’re at 100 now. So the NDP thought $5 per passenger was 
too much of a subsidy, that they had to cut the service. I’m sure 
they didn’t want to either. It wouldn’t have been a fun choice 
for them to make, to say, well I’m sorry community X and Y, 
we can’t provide bus service to you anymore because it just 
costs too much money to justify it. We have other priorities, I’m 
sure they would have said, that we really need to focus on. 
 
That is the nature of the consideration on this side of the House 
of that particular issue. And we know in rural Saskatchewan 
that bus service is important. But when it comes to a choice 
between health care and education and social services or 
continuing with the subsidy that would be $100 million over 
five years, almost $100 per passenger, we had to make that 
difficult choice. And we made that difficult choice. 
 
And I’m grateful to be serving with women and men who are 
prepared to simply look at the facts, understand that this would 
not be easy, this would be a difficult decision. But make the 
right decision, if not for now, if not for Lane’s dad, then for 
Lane. Because we need to make sure things are sustained in the 
long term and in the short term if we are going to leave things 
better than we found them. And that means more choices. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, in his speech, talked about how 

he opposes the decision we’re going to make with respect to 
selling the cars for the Grain Car Corporation. I guess it’s his 
view, and I respect this view. It’s certainly his right not only to 
hold it but to present it in this place. That’s his job. His view is 
that, I guess, that’s a role for government going forward even if, 
even if you have to make a choice between a grain car, maybe 
the maintenance that’s required, and health care and education 
and social services . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well no, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s the challenge. The member just . . . I 
couldn’t understand what he said, but the Leader of the 
Opposition said something just now. I get that in opposition you 
have to oppose, and they’ve done a good job of that.  
 
But there is another part to the obligation, I think, and that’s to 
offer what you’d do differently. And in his speech he said he 
doesn’t like the tax increases. The NDP have said they wouldn’t 
do the tax increases. In his speech he said, don’t like any of the 
cuts. Don’t change revenue sharing. Keep the bus company 
even at $90 per passenger and $100 million over five years. 
Don’t do any of this and balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other than pixie dust and unicorns, I don’t know 
how we would . . . I don’t know, what’s the means to that end? 
There aren’t any means to that end. You have to make difficult 
decisions, and that’s what we have sought to do. 
 
So we’ve decided, look it’s not really the role of the 
government to be in the . . . We don’t need to be in the grain car 
business. In fact we could work with shortlines, we can work 
with the industry to make sure the disposition of that asset is 
good for taxpayers. But it also might be good for those 
shortlines, might also be good for grain transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have every faith that that’s precisely where the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation will take us. That is 
precisely where we will end, Mr. Speaker, with the taxpayers 
getting a good return for rail cars, and the industry, the grain 
transportation industry and the shortlines and the agricultural 
sector, being happy with that decision, Mr. Speaker, at least 
being satisfied that it’s made in the long-term interests of that 
industry. Those are part of the choices. These are some of the 
choices we’ve made. 
 
Tough choice in the current situation to get to a long-term goal 
on revenue sharing, I should say on municipal government 
support, because we maintained revenue sharing per the 
agreement we have with our municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to question period today and I listened to 
members opposite say, well you know, basically use the 
argument that municipalities need predictability in their funding 
from the province. I almost . . . I couldn’t believe what I was 
hearing. The very first place the NDP stopped when they were 
dealing with budget challenges, stopped to take some cash, was 
the municipal sector. And then they stopped again the next year, 
and then they took a little bit more the year after that. And not 
once did they ever provide municipalities with even an iota of 
surety or predictability as to what they might expect the next 
year. It was just a very bad surprise, every particular budget. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, they have found, they’ve found the road 
to Damascus after that being their record where they 
downloaded on municipalities every year and failed even in the 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

good years. And I think members opposite often forget that they 
were sitting on their own rainy day fund, spending some of it in 
the end, a lot of it, blowing through their rainy day fund in the 
end when it was just misting, I think, and not raining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were sitting on those dollars and still 
wouldn’t provide municipalities any predictabilities, wouldn’t 
get the deal done, wouldn’t get a revenue-sharing deal done. 
Mr. Speaker, in the election campaign in 2007 we said if we are 
so honoured to be able to serve in government, one of the very 
first things we’ll do is we’ll sit down with the municipal sector 
and we’ll hammer out a municipal revenue-sharing deal for 
RMs [rural municipality] and for urban municipalities. I don’t 
want to oversimplify it, but we thought it can’t be that hard. It 
can’t be 16-years hard to come up with a way to give that 
predictability to municipalities. Apparently it was for members 
opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They wouldn’t even meet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — They wouldn’t, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
of Health makes a very good point. They would not even meet 
with SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities]. We had people involved in SARM for a long, 
long, long time, longer time, and people who were involved in 
local government in SUMA for a long . . . And they wouldn’t 
even sit down and meet. 
 
So I found the question period today questions pretty interesting 
because, Mr. Speaker, very early on in the life of our 
government, we met. We thought, well we could probably meet 
with them. It seems reasonable. So we did, we met with both 
sectors, and it was a matter of months and we had a 
revenue-sharing deal that was predictable for municipalities, a 
revenue-sharing deal that holds today in this budget, even 
though there’s difficulty. 
 
Now we made a choice around grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. And 
by the way, members opposite oversimplify grants-in-lieu and 
say, well that’s the taxes these buildings should be paying, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not actually. It’s a very convoluted process that’s 
evolved over the years. And some of it’s a recognition for the 
fact that municipalities sold their electrical utility or their right 
to be in the electrical utility business to SaskPower back in the 
day when SaskPower was aggregating its business, and some of 
it’s for other surcharge reasons. But there’s not necessarily a 
direct line between these grants and what the property taxes 
would be in those buildings and, in some cases, the grants are 
getting paid and some of the Crowns are paying property taxes. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we looked at that and thought all sectors 
have to participate in this, especially a sector whose revenue 
sharing has doubled, doubled. In the case of Regina and 
Saskatoon, revenue sharing is up two and a half times from 
what it was when members were in power — and it really 
wasn’t revenue-sharing; it was just whatever they would 
whimsically decide with every budget to maybe deign to give to 
the municipal sector — but 2.5 times as great as it was in their 
last budget when they had about $700 million in their rainy day 
fund, Mr. Speaker. Even when they burned through a half a 
billion of it, they still didn’t have money for the municipal 
sector. 
 

Well that all changed in about 2008, 2009. And, Mr. Speaker, 
our assurance to the municipal sector is this — and the 
ministers had good meetings yesterday — our assurance to the 
municipal sector is this. We do want to make sure that the 
challenge we’re asking all the different sectors in the province 
to absorb is fairly distributed. We do believe . . . And that’s a 
principle that the Minister of Finance has worked to lead to 
ensure that the budget’s fair, even in the difficult decisions, that 
it’s fair to urban, that it’s fair to rural, maybe not necessarily 
positive in every respect to those sectors, but that what is 
provided in terms of fiscal restraint is fairly distributed in the 
sectors of our province, urban and rural, and across our 
economy. And so we have made the decision that we have 
made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also some other choices that I want to 
highlight today, that in a very difficult budget we were also able 
to see a historic, the largest ever social services budget in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. Knowing that 
utilization rates are increasing, knowing that government’s 
fundamental job is to be there for those who are most 
vulnerable, that budget has increased. That’s also a current 
choice that we made, Mr. Speaker, for the immediate term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear more in the weeks ahead about an 
initiative that the Health ministers have been leading with 
respect to dealing with ER [emergency room] times in our 
major centres, an innovation that will require an investment, a 
brand new investment, to achieve a brand new investment that’s 
in this very challenging budget. Mr. Speaker, that is going to be 
of great interest in both the major cities of our province, and 
perhaps in other centres as well. 
 
We made a choice, as I mentioned earlier, to build schools in 
this budget as well. Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s been 
something happening in this province since 2007. Not only has 
there been a government in place that has been focused on a 
growth plan but, Mr. Speaker, the population of this province is 
growing at an historic level, and it hasn’t stopped. Even through 
the challenge of low commodity prices, every quarterly report 
Stats Canada provides, our population’s gone up. It just 
happened again, just right around the time of budget. Our 
population has increased and so, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve 
been building schools. And we’re happy to have that challenge. 
Forty of them and two now at least planning dollars in this 
budget, in Rosthern and in Weyburn, two great communities, 
well represented here in this legislature. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we weren’t just thinking 
about the current year, even our choices that I’ve just talked 
about, choices that are very much about more near-term issues 
that we have in Saskatchewan. But members on this side of the 
House have been checking out the horizon. We wanted to take 
this opportunity to make sure we would make things 
immeasurably better for that next generation, so that Lane 
doesn’t have to first go to Alberta, like his dad did before he 
came back home to the province. 
 
There’s other good news in my family. My brother’s actually 
recently returned. He’s the only brother I have, and he was in 
the House here recently with my youngest nephew. But he was 
in Alberta, as well as Justin and his family. And you know for 
me, every time I’m just . . . On Saturday we had a birthday 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

party for my dad. He turned 75 on the 25th, so we were out at 
my brother’s acreage. He’s got a little place on 363, which the 
Minister of Highways knows needs probably some repair, just 
south of Swift Current. It was quite a family gathering, the likes 
of which we haven’t had in a while. Do you know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because people are home. Kids have come home. 
 
And that’s why we’re, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re focused 
on the long term. Because Lane’s dad, he chose to leave. He 
had to go somewhere else, like so many other young people. 
They left this province. And when we sat in opposition benches, 
we would meet with heartbroken parents who couldn’t figure 
out, in a province like ours, with all of our resources, with all of 
our potential, why in the world do young people almost on a 
default, on a de facto basis, leave, have to leave to find another 
future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t think that made much sense either. 
Hence the growth plan. Hence the focus on, well, things like the 
graduate retention plan, one of the largest tax reductions for a 
group of people — post-secondary students — that the province 
has ever seen. A way for them to earn back almost all of their 
tuition. And I haven’t checked the recent dates, but not very 
long ago 58,000 young people, students, took advantage of that 
program and have chosen to stay in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of initiative we’ve undertaken for 
the short term and for the long term so that Lane at least has the 
choice to stay in the province when he is the age that his dad 
decided that he had to leave. That is precisely why this budget 
takes the long-term view that it does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the national economists and think tanks have 
taken a look at recent budgets in Canada. And I won’t go into 
all the details, but you can look at what the Dominion Bond 
Rating agency had to say. They compared ours with the 
province of Alberta. They noted that we have a determined plan 
to return to balance where others don’t seem to have that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an assistant professor at the University 
of Calgary who had to comment on the budget as well. That 
article in Maclean’s where he’s quoted is entitled, 
“Saskatchewan swallows the fiscal pill that Alberta refuses: 
Through restraint and strategic tax hikes, Saskatchewan shows 
how to get off the royalty rollercoaster.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jack Mintz in a National-Post column also 
pointed to the fact that from a policy standpoint, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is on good ground. This is a 
sound budget that is about the long term, that is about future 
generations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is the most difficult budget I’ve ever been 
a part of. I think all members of this House, no matter how long 
they’ve served in this place, would agree that has been the case 
for them. But we have made the right decisions. I believe that. 
Tough funding choices, but the right decisions, not just for the 
province today, but for the province that Lane and his brother 
and his sisters will inherit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, throughout that process, we have been well 
led by the Finance minister. And I also want to . . . I’m going to 
be giving way to him soon, but on behalf of this caucus, and 

dare I say on behalf of a province, some of whom are obviously 
still upset, we owe a thanks to him because we are charting a 
longer-term vision in view for the province that will leave this 
province of ours stronger. 
 
Just before the budget was tabled — and I’ll close with this — 
just before the budget was tabled, Stats Canada released the job 
statistics for the country. And we know they’re coming. It’s the 
first Friday of every month, and we know they were coming, 
and we thought, you know, we were sensing anecdotally that 
things were turning a little bit. Even though the budget has its 
challenges, that the economy was kind of getting used to this 
lower prices — we’re not used to them yet — but getting used 
to lower oil prices and lowering their cost structure, and people 
were starting to get back to work. And that was true in other 
sectors as well. 
 
[12:15] 
 
But we didn’t know for sure. But I was surprised when the 
numbers came out. Even though I was expecting some 
improvement, I was a bit surprised. And maybe I shouldn’t 
have been. Maybe I should never underestimate the people and 
the economy of this province to be resilient. But I was a little 
surprised that Saskatchewan posted 8,000 new jobs year over 
year and month over month and led Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
about 16,000 jobs created nationwide, half of them in the 
province of Saskatchewan facing low commodity prices. 
 
That tells me something. That tells me that we’ve been 
diversifying our economy. That tells me that we’ve been 
focused on competitiveness to make sure this is the right place 
to invest and to create jobs. It tells me we’ve been also focused 
on things like infrastructure which has been part of our growth 
plan and featured prominently in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues along that trend. It’s focused 
on the long term. It’s focused on competitiveness. It’s focused 
on ensuring that we can sustain public service through a strong 
and lasting robust-broadened tax base. And for that reason, I am 
grateful to the Minister of Finance for what he tabled in this 
Assembly last week, and I will be proud to support this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and equally determined and resolved to reject the 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of the Economy on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s my pleasure to introduce a good friend of 
mine, somebody who I’ve known for some period of time. An 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

MLA from Alberta, for Calgary-Foothills in particular, elected 
in a by-election just about two years ago, Mr. Speaker, a 
professional engineer, a very active member of his community, 
Mr. Prasad Panda who is sitting on the floor with us here today. 
Mr. Panda has worked for a number of global companies. He’s 
also, I should note, the official opposition critic for economic 
development and trade in Alberta, so he’s been very busy lately, 
Mr. Speaker. There has been a lot of work for Mr. Panda. 
 
We had a very good discussion this morning with regard to a 
number of issues. But I want to thank him for his commitment, 
his party’s commitment to the New West Partnership, which we 
share a very deep commitment, Mr. Speaker. We believe in 
open trade in Canada. I understand the Premier in Alberta 
spoke, had some comments today on the New West Partnership. 
Maybe I’ve missed past comments on NWP [New West 
Partnership], but it’s actually the first time I’ve ever heard her 
comment on the New West Partnership. 
 
And you know, we have some challenges with regard to our 
trading relationship with Alberta. We know that they’ve moved 
forward with some very anti-trade policies with respect to beer. 
But the matter is before the courts; I won’t kind of speak further 
on that. But I can say that on this side of House, we appreciate 
that relationship with the NWP. We’re fully committed to 
NWP. And I would like all members to welcome Mr. Panda to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
join with the minister in introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Prasad Panda to our 
Legislative Assembly. We’re happy to have you here and watch 
our legislative proceedings today. The minister has already 
given you a very great introduction, but he forgot to mention 
one thing that I’ve heard from your Wildrose colleagues in 
Alberta — that you’re known to be the only Wildrose MLA 
who opposes the bear hunt. Having your namesake as Mr. 
Panda, apparently that’s what you’re teased as. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, welcome. And I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming you to our Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want rise on this occasion today and welcome two very special 
guests, two wonderful ladies from northern Saskatchewan. 
Joining us in the east gallery is Mrs. Lorraine Durocher and 
Mrs. Irene Durocher. Lorraine, of course, is from Jans Bay and 
Irene is actually from Ile-a-la-Crosse, my home community, but 
she’s moved to Canoe Lake where her and her husband, who 
unfortunately has passed since, enjoy a very successful business 
life. And certainly they’re quite active in their community. 
 
Both of these ladies are here to bring a couple of students from 
the Bold Eagle program, which is a great program for young 
people joining the armed forces. So I’d like to take this 
opportunity to ask all my colleagues to welcome these two 
wonderful visitors from northern Saskatchewan. And I would 
tell them, please enjoy your day, as they are taking a tour of the 
Assembly, and thank you for all your work for those two young 
people that you brought all the way to Regina today. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.]  
 
The Speaker: — It is my duty pursuant to rule 31(8) to warn 
the Assembly that the minister is about to exercise his right to 
close the debate, and afterwards all members will be precluded 
from speaking to this question. Therefore, if any members 
wishes to speak, let him or her do so now. 
 
Before I recognize the Minister of Finance, I would like to 
advise the Assembly that the minister has 20 minutes to close 
the debate. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to colleagues here. It is my pleasure to rise in my place a little 
over a week after I rose in my place to deliver the 2017-18 
budget on behalf of this government for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And like everyone else, I just want to make a 
few thank yous before I get into my remarks, Mr. Speaker, if I 
might. 
 
I want to thank my treasury board colleagues. As Chair of 
treasury board, I get to spend a lot of time with these 
colleagues, capably assisted by the Vice-Chair, the Minister of 
the Economy, and then other members who sit on treasury 
board. It is a long process to put together a provincial budget, 
Mr. Speaker. We began literally last fall and worked through up 
to Christmas and then through the January and February months 
as we put together the budget and bring it together. And we 
spent a lot of time together listening to presentations and 
making decisions and advising cabinet and caucus on decisions. 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

I want to thank the Premier, Mr. Speaker, for his continued 
confidence in me as the Minister of Finance. This is my second 
budget now since becoming Minister of Finance in May of 
2015. And I want to thank the Premier for his continued 
confidence, members of cabinet, and most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, the members of caucus, all of my colleagues on this 
side of the House. 
 
This experience with this budget, Mr. Speaker, was truly a 
caucus-driven development of a provincial budget, more so than 
I’ve ever been experienced in. We had long deliberations with 
members of caucus to talk about some of the decisions that 
were going to be made in this budget, getting feedback, as the 
Premier alluded to in his speech, getting feedback from their 
constituents, their own heartfelt beliefs and thoughts on the 
direction this budget ought to take as we deal with these 
challenges. And I found the discussions at times tense, at times 
emotional and passionate, but certainly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Determined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well very determined, of course, but 
certainly educational for me in the sense of what they were 
hearing from the various parts of the province that we needed to 
deliberate on to form this budget. 
 
I want to thank the Finance officials, Mr. Speaker, who this 
government is so capably served by, led by Clare Isman, a 
long-time civil servant and professional here in the finance 
community, and her entire team. But I also want to reach out 
and thank all the officials across all ministries and the Crown 
corporations. As treasury board members would know, we have 
the opportunity to have the various ministries and Crowns come 
before treasury board — well CIC for that matter on the Crown 
side — but come and do their presentations and offer up their 
advice and issues that they want to see funding for, issues that 
they want to see brought forward to the treasury board table and 
the cabinet table and the caucus table. So I want to thank all 
officials across government for their deliberations and advice to 
this government as we prepared this budget. 
 
I want to thank my office staff here in the building, Mr. 
Speaker, led by my chief of staff, Morgan; and Paul; Danielle; 
April; my previous chief of staff, Dawn Popescul, who left my 
office earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, and is engaged in some 
other work with respect to Executive Council; and my 
constituency assistant, Ronnie, who’s actually on holiday today. 
He’s in Seattle so I doubt very much he’s tuning in, but you 
never know. He might be online watching this because he likes 
to follow the proceedings here in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course my partner, Nancy, and her two kids — Nancy, 
who keeps everything in perspective, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
enjoying following her daughter, Libby, around with respect to 
basketball, and her son, Ryder, who’s in the business school in 
Saskatoon, just doing terrifically in his third year of university, 
Mr. Speaker. And I wish those kids well as they prepare for 
final exams. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, mindful of the time I have here today 
to wrap up this budget debate . . . And I’ve listened carefully to 
a lot of the speeches here in the Chamber. I’ve listened carefully 
to members of the opposition and their speeches, and certainly 

from my colleagues here. I haven’t had the opportunity to listen 
to all of them. I have taken some Hansard home. That tells you 
about my social life. I’ve taken Hansard home and read some 
of the speeches because I was interested in what members had 
to say. And I want to follow up on some other speeches I 
missed yesterday afternoon. I hear there was some very, very 
powerful speeches here yesterday that I want to follow up and 
have a look at. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit of a student of history, 
not nearly as much as the Minister of Energy and Resources, 
but a bit of a student of history. And I wanted to go back down 
memory lane a little bit and take a look at what other ministers 
of Finance had done when faced with challenges here in the 
province. So Hansard’s a fascinating document to pick up, Mr. 
Speaker, because it captures everything that’s been said in this 
Chamber since this Chamber was created. 
 
And I went back. And as I listened to the member from 
Athabasca give his speech the other night, I thought, I wonder 
what he said in 1995 when he was a Liberal member in this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, sitting on the opposition benches 
opposing the then-NDP government. So I went back and read 
his budget speech and then I read his budget speech in 1996, 
Mr. Speaker. It is the exact same budget speech he gave the 
other night in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Only the players have 
changed. The issues are still the same. 
 
He was railing on the NDP government of the day of $15 
billion in debt here in the province; 15 billion he said at that 
time. This was 1995, Mr. Speaker. And he said the province is 
just in dire straits. It will never survive this NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. We need a new Liberal government in this 
province. We don’t want you to screw it up until we get a 
Liberal government in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I felt a sense of déjà vu all over again, as Yogi Berra would say. 
And then I listened very carefully to some of the newer 
members in the opposition benches. And it’s a good crop they 
got elected in 2016, Mr. Speaker. We have a lawyer, and we 
have a social worker and a former school trustee; and most 
recently in the Meewasin by-election, a physician. A good crop 
of outstanding individuals here in the province of Saskatchewan 
who have a lot to offer here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I listened to their critique of the budget and was trying to 
find where they would offer up their alternative plan if they 
didn’t like the budget. I was particularly interested in the 
member from Meewasin, who I think aspires to be the leader of 
the opposition, the leader of the NDP at some point in time — 
he’s run for it twice. Maybe he doesn’t, I don’t know, Mr. 
Speaker. But I read through his speech. I listened to it in the 
Chamber and then I read through his speech to determine if he 
was going to offer an alternative vision. 
 
And he started down that path, Mr. Speaker, and then you could 
tell he was shifted to the talking points that he’s been given by 
his caucus mates to just criticize the budget. Criticize the 
budget, even to the point of saying that we are not investing 
properly in social investment. With a $1.4 billion investment in 
social services in this budget, Mr. Speaker, the largest amount 
ever, ever, in a social services budget under this government, 
and yet the member still had the temerity to suggest that we 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

were not investing in social investment here in the province. 
 
So I read very carefully to see if he was going to offer an 
alternative plan, and I didn’t see that. So I would just offer 
some advice, if he’s willing to take any from me, that as he 
aspires to the leadership, he’s going to have to get off the critic 
role because they’re rock stars over there at being critics, Mr. 
Speaker. Their former leaders, Mr. Broten and Mr. Lingenfelter, 
went around this province and were very good at criticizing this 
Premier and this government. What they weren’t so good at was 
offering alternative vision for the people of Saskatchewan to 
aspire to. 
 
And so in the absence of an alternative vision or plan, the 
people will turn to where leadership is, Mr. Speaker. And 
leadership has been shown in this province by this Premier and 
this government over the last number of years, and I think it 
continues in this budget. 
 
I went back, and I hear over and over again that, oh, you have 
record revenues; you have record revenues. And I’m always 
reminded by the Minister of Energy and Resources that you 
know what else we have, Mr. Speaker, is record expenditures, 
record expenditures in the priority areas of health care, 
education, social services, highways, and infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I went back and had a look at the financial statements of the 
province over the last number of years. From 2002, Mr. 
Speaker, to 2007-08, the last six years the NDP was in 
government, do you know what they had, Mr. Speaker? They 
had record revenues. Every single year in those six years in 
their fiscal years, Mr. Speaker, they had record revenues 
relative to the size of the GDP in the province. But they had to 
make some choices. They had to make some choices as to 
where they were going to spend those record revenues. And the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, and Regina Elphinstone, and 
of course, the old member from Athabasca, were part of 
governments, Mr. Speaker, during those years that made those 
choices. 
 
So I thought, wouldn’t it be interesting to go back and see what 
choices they made in their budgets. So I looked at two different 
budgets, ’02 and ’03, just prior to the election in ’03; and then 
’04-05, coming out of the election of ’03. 
 
Tell me if this sounds familiar, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from 
the budget address from Mr. Eric Cline from 2002-03: 
 
[12:30] 
 

This is not a year for large spending increases. In fact, once 
again this year our expenditures will exceed our revenues. 
In this sense, on a cash basis we are in a deficit situation as 
we were in 1995-96, 1997-98, and last year, and many 
other years . . . [when we relied upon] savings from 
previous years to balance our books. 
 

That’s in his budget speech, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say that 
is why, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Going back at least as far as the Liberal government of 
Premier Dunning in 1925 [They never like to go back to 

their old record, but 1925 was apropos], prudent 
governments have relied on stabilization funds as we will 
be doing this year. We will be balancing the books by 
relying on the savings built up in surplus years. Last year 
we used $411 million. This year we’ll use $225 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
. . . With the new budget year, we will abolish more than 
350 full-time equivalent civil service positions . . . [in the 
province of Saskatchewan]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to say, on tough choices: 
 
The tough choices did not stop with reorganization of 
government. Mr. Speaker, we will also introduce a number 
of changes in fees and charges to better recover costs, and 
we will introduce two tax changes related to alcohol and 
tobacco. 
 

Does that sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? Then he goes on to say: 
 

Other fees and charges will be increased marginally on a 
user-fee, cost-recovery basis. Some will be asked to pay a 
greater share of the cost of prescription drugs and 
long-term care . . . based upon and subject to their ability 
to pay. 
 

Mr. Speaker, on public debt, I found this fascinating. The 
Leader of the Opposition might want to pay attention to this. 
This is in his budget speech: 
 

Mr. Speaker, a budget is a good time to talk about debt. I 
want to repeat our position on debt beginning with the 
distinction between Crown debt on the one hand and 
operating debt on the other. 
 
Crown corporations, as a matter of course, have some level 
of debt. They build power lines, take high-speed Internet 
throughout the province, and so on. These are 
infrastructure investments, the cost of which should be 
amortized and paid for over time by those who will use and 
benefit from them. This is self-liquidating debt [Mr. 
Speaker] and is quite appropriate. 
 
On the operating side, debt to pay for day-to-day 
operations is not usually a good thing. Debt to build public 
infrastructure for today and tomorrow may be. Here too we 
should aim for a reasonable approach. Public debt does not 
have to be zero. It should be some reasonable percentage 
of the gross domestic product. Our tax-supported debt has 
gone from 41 per cent of GDP in 1993 to 23 per cent today 
[Mr. Speaker]. Interest costs have gone from a high of 
$882 million to a low of $621 million . . . 
 

He’s proud of this, Mr. Speaker. Our debt to GDP on an 
operating basis this year, Mr. Speaker, is less than 10 per cent. 
Our interest on the public debt is less than $400 million. They 
were bragging about $623 million interest on the public debt, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let’s have a look at the budget speech of ’04-05. This is 
after the election of ’03, Mr. Speaker, by the Hon. Harry Van 
Mulligen. Let me see if I can refresh their memories, because 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

the member from Elphinstone was certainly a member of that 
government. 
 

This budget responds to the fiscal reality in Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget exemplifies restraint and demands change, 
because Saskatchewan people understand the value and the 
inherent importance of prudent financial choices. So we 
are addressing our financial picture today. We are not 
delaying until tomorrow. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say:  
 

Mr. Speaker, our economy — with its dependence on 
natural resources and commodities — is subject to cyclical 
fluctuations. 
 
We can experience great swings in commodity prices or 
production. As examples, I will note the price of oil, or the 
lower crop production brought on by drought. 
 
These fluctuations can, and do, result in unexpected 
demands on the provincial treasury. Sometimes the result 
is increased expenditures. Sometimes it means falling 
revenues. The only constant is that these changes cannot be 
anticipated or incorporated into the government’s budget 
and financial plan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to say: 
 

I am presenting our 11th consecutive balanced General 
Revenue Fund budget — balanced with the benefit of a 
$158 million dollar transfer from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. [Mr. Speaker, it’s in the speech.] 
 
This transfer is a 40 per cent reduction from the last fiscal 
year. [So that was at least $250 million] We will further 
reduce the gap between our revenues and expenditures next 
year, and by the fiscal year 2006/2007, our revenues and 
expenditures will balance  
 

Mr. Speaker, see if this language sounds familiar: 
 
During the budget process, we conducted an extensive and 
thorough expenditure review. Our goal was simple, to hold 
the line and reduce expenditures. We will continue this 
process. 
 
Everyone has had to make sacrifices. It is our commitment 
to fiscally responsible governance. 
 
We are holding the line on salaries in government 
departments, and Crown corporations. 
 
I am sorry to say that some people will lose their jobs 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great regret that I announce that 
approximately 500 seasonal, temporary, and permanent 
staff will be impacted by this budget. 
 
Twelve Departments have had their budgets reduced this 
fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 

Increasing revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the delivery of essential services is neither 
easy nor . . . [expensive]. 
 
There is a cost that must be paid to protect our quality of 
life — to preserve those public services essential to 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
To maintain our essential services, provide assistance to 
our communities, and support our young people, this 
budget contains a number of revenue initiatives. 

 
This is ’04-05, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to talk about “effective 
midnight.” I know the critic for Finance doesn’t like that 
“effective midnight” stuff because it’s too difficult for 
businesses in the province to adjust to that, but effective 
midnight changes were going to happen. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, he goes on to say, he goes on to say: 
 

We will change the current Fuel Tax exemption on farm 
gasoline to 80 per cent of all bulk purchases effective April 
7, 2004; and the annual farm rebate for retail gasoline 
purchases is eliminated beginning this calendar year. 
 

And then he says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Effective midnight tonight the Provincial Sales Tax rate 
will increase from 6 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 
They eliminated 500 jobs in this budget, Mr. Speaker. They 
increased the provincial sales tax from 6 per cent to 7 per cent. 
Their resource revenues were about 16 per cent that year, Mr. 
Speaker, and they had an $844 million surplus at the end of that 
year. Why? That one kind of bugged me. I thought, why would 
you make those kinds of decisions if you’re kind of forecasting 
that kind of surplus at the end of your fiscal year. 
 
Here’s what happened, Mr. Speaker. One of my assistants 
brought it to my attention. The Iraq war happened that year. The 
Gulf War happened that year. Oil prices spiked up. They found 
themselves in a windfall. They still went ahead with this fiscal 
plan, Mr. Speaker. They went ahead with this fiscal plan with 
the same kind of language we’re talking about here. 
 
But I kept wondering to myself, they’ve had all these years in 
government now — this is ’04-05, so they’re some 14 years, 13, 
14 years into their mandate — why didn’t they diversify the 
economy? Why didn’t they make the difficult choices at that 
time, Mr. Speaker, to say, you know what? We can no longer be 
relying on resource revenues as much as we are. Oh well, we 
just had a Gulf War. Oil prices spiked up. Let’s go spend that 
money. At the same time they were receiving over $3 billion 
over the course of that time in equalization payments, Mr. 
Speaker, equalization payments. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it just somewhat ironic that this is the 
kind of language being used in budgets back in the day when 
they stood up as cheerleaders, cheering on these ministers of 
Finance dealing with the choices of the day. Now I can 
fundamentally disagree with the philosophy they took with 
respect to their attempt to diversify the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 30, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

But here’s what we’ve done on this side of the House. We have 
to get away from a reliance on resource revenues. That’s 
understandable. We have to get away from that volatility . . . 
[inaudible] . . . we see on an average basis, Mr. Speaker, over 
the course of five years, where we see commodity prices doing 
this and we’re trying to make public policy decisions on this 
side with respect to our spending based on that kind of 
volatility. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we heard that over and over and over again 
from the people in our pre-budget consultations — whether it 
was business, stakeholders, in the education sector, in the 
post-secondary education sector, small businesses, farmers 
across the province, Mr. Speaker — they said to us over and 
over again, we have to have some kind of stable level of 
revenue. At the same time, we have to continue to try to grow 
our economy, Mr. Speaker. We have to continue to try and 
grow our economy. That’s what we tried to do in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are making a major shift. I acknowledge that. Is there some 
pain associated with that? I fully acknowledge that. This entire 
government acknowledges that, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 
move from taxing income and productivity to taxing 
consumption, and spreading that base out over a much wider 
spectrum here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if resource revenues, for whatever reason, 
happen to spike back up, we will use those revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, to either pay down operating debt, perhaps reduce 
some taxes in a targeted fashion, or reinvest in those priority 
areas of education, health care, and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the plan. The people of this province want 
to see that their Premier and their government have a plan to get 
back to balance, given the financial challenges. And they’re 
prepared to share in that, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard that over and 
over again. I’ve gotten dozens and dozens of emails of saying, 
stick to your guns. Stick to your guns. Do not back up on this 
with respect to taking care of the province, with respect to 
getting to a balanced budget in three years time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they have said to me, over and over again, do not follow 
the path of Alberta. Do not follow the path of Alberta. And here 
was a quote from the Minister of Finance in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m paraphrasing here, but he said, when asked a 
question, he said, well, when oil comes back, we will balance 
the budget, and happy days will be here again. I’m not sure that 
instills a lot of confidence in the people of Alberta. But so be it, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. They’ll have to deal with 
their constituents at the next election, based on a lack of a plan.  
 
We are prepared to lay out this plan before the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to kick the can 
down the street like these ministers of Finance did back in ’02 
and ’03, and ’03 and ’04, Mr. Speaker, under an NDP 
government. 
 
We are going to stick to this plan. It is a plan that does 
controlling and reducing our government spending. It 
modernizes and expands our tax system and our tax base, Mr. 
Speaker. It ensures the economy remains strong. It invests in 
our priority areas of health care, education, social services, 

highways and infrastructure, and it returns our budget to 
balance in three years time, Mr. Speaker. I am proud of this 
budget that this government created. I will be supporting the 
budget, and not the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. First the amendment, amended motion, 
moved by the member from Saskatoon Nutana and seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That all words after “That the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 

 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget of 
broken promises, callous cuts, and tax cuts that makes 
Saskatchewan families pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The nays have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:42 until 12:46.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the amended motion 
please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 46] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ross 
Weekes Brkich Hart 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis Bonk Carr 
Nerlien Lambert Buckingham 
Kaeding   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 11; 
those opposed, 46. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 
 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2017 

Moved by the member from Regina Northeast and seconded by 
the member from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Yeas have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:49 until 12:50.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 46] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ross 
Weekes Brkich Hart 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis Bonk Carr 
Nerlien Lambert Buckingham 
Kaeding   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 46; those 
opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:53.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2054 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2034 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2035 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2036 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2036 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Purple Day for Epilepsy Awareness 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2036 
 Prince Albert’s 2017 Citizen of the Year 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2037 
 Saskatchewan Communities on List of Top 40 Towns 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2037 
 Remembering Joseph Auguste Merasty 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2037 
 Grenfell Senior Hockey Team Wins Championship 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2037 
 Rural Women Month 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 
 New Schools Opening in Regina 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Assets and Services 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2039 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2039 
 Changes to Tax Collection Procedures 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2040 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2040 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2040 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2040 
 Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2041 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2041 
 Funding for Libraries and Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2042 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2042 
 Funding for University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2047 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 2059 
 Recorded Division (Main Motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 2060 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


