


















































November 23, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 17A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3063 
 November 23, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of this honourable 
Assembly, please welcome to our province, seated in the west 
gallery, we have international guests as well as guests from 
across Canada that are members of the Canadian Simmental 
Association. 
 
Simmental is an influential breed, Mr. Speaker, of cattle whose 
history dates back to the Middle Ages. 2017 celebrates 50 years 
of Simmental cattle in Canada. As part of the finale to the 
Canadian Simmental’s 50th anniversary, they are hosting this 
year’s Simmental Federation of America Conference in Regina 
as part of Canadian Western Agribition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of this Assembly join me 
in welcoming the many people of the Canadian Simmental 
Association and their international guests to Saskatchewan’s 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Minister of Agriculture in welcoming our international and 
Canadian guests with the Canadian Simmental Association and 
congratulate them on 50 years of this breed and wish them 
continued success. And I suspect they’ll be getting over to 
Agribition as well, and wish them all the best in their 
endeavours. I invite all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I ask for leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to introduce you to Megz Reynolds who’s seated 
in the west gallery today. Megz is the blogger of Dirt Sweat 
N Tears. She and her husband, Liam, farm just outside of Kyle, 
Saskatchewan. She has two young children. 
 
You know, social media is a very powerful tool, Mr. Speaker, 
and coming from a film background in Alberta, Megz has been 
an important part of the ag community, doing a lot of chat to 
popularize our agricultural community. Her particular piece on 

combining in Saskatchewan has been viewed by many, many 
people, often with her children in tow. She’s used her voice to 
share her learning and, in addition to that, she used her voice to 
illustrate the issues regarding the federal tax changes, Mr. 
Speaker. She became the face of that fight, making it 
normalized in our part of the world, Mr. Speaker, landing her 
on the front of The Globe and Mail. 
 
She’s here today. She’s attending Agribition this week where 
she’ll be sitting on a panel to talk about mental health in the 
agricultural community, which is a very real issue. She’s part of 
a new crop of young women leaders using their voice for good. 
And I would like to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
welcome a special guest seated in your gallery. Shane Jahnke is 
here. He’s a fourth-generation rancher in Saskatchewan and the 
third generation who is a president of the Saskatchewan Stock 
Growers Association. 
 
I’d like to especially thank him for the good work he’s done 
since the wildfires we’ve had in southwest Saskatchewan. And 
as far as an advocate for the Saskatchewan livestock industry, it 
doesn’t get any better. So I’d like to ask all members of the 
Assembly to help me welcome Shane to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Mr. Jahnke to his Legislative Assembly, 
and also join with the minister in congratulating him for the 
efforts of the stock growers in raising funds and awareness 
following the wildfire tragedy in the Southwest. I invite all 
members to join me in welcoming him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also join 
with the Minister of the Economy and the member opposite in 
welcoming Shane Jahnke to his Assembly. I had the 
opportunity to meet Shane just over 25 years ago, when we 
were both first-year students at the University of Saskatchewan 
in the College of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And there was many 
a night that we spent in our joint efforts to enhance our 
scholastic experience as we . . . Our goal was to graduate at the 
highest of that class together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to acknowledge the generational 
effort of the Jahnke family, including Shane and his father, his 
grandfather, and his great-grandfather in their advocacy on 
agricultural issues, whether it be through the stock growers or 
whether it be through general agricultural issues. Shane exuded 
that in university as he was heavily involved with the 
Agricultural Students’ Association, and he’s gone on to 
continue in that advocacy through the stock growers and other 
agricultural organizations here in the province. So, Mr. Speaker, 



3064 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming Shane to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to 
introduce two members who are sitting in your gallery who are 
no stranger to this House, Doreen Eagles and Al Brigden. 
Doreen is obviously the former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for my seat, Estevan, and they’re in town 
to celebrate Agribition and take in the activities that are 
happening there. Oh, and apparently it was Doreen’s birthday 
yesterday. Yes, 55 I hear; oh lower, she says. So through you 
and to you, I would like all members to welcome her back to 
what truly is her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Just very quickly, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
the official opposition, it’s good to see Doreen back at her 
Legislative Assembly. And certainly, no shrinking violet up in 
that gallery, Mr. Speaker. But we’d wish her a very happy 
birthday and, you know, great to see you here at your 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed this petition today wish to 
bring to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the 
dubious distinction of having the highest rates of domestic 
violence amongst the provinces in Canada. Employers should 
be obligated to reasonably accommodate survivors of domestic 
violence in the workplace. Employees who are survivors of 
domestic violence should be able to take a leave of absence 
from their employment without penalty, and Saskatchewan 
must do much more to protect survivors of domestic violence. 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, which is what we’ve called for in our private 
member’s Bill No. 605, which we’re very hopeful that the Sask 
Party government will take on and support and pass. Those 
who’ve signed this petition today come from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Weekes, 
Porcupine Plain, Carragana, and Tisdale. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition regarding the closure of Main Street access to Highway 
No. 1 in the town of Balgonie. The individuals that have signed 
this petition are concerned about the permanent closure of Main 
Street access to Highway No. 1 in the town of Balgonie. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and actions to leave the west-in, west-out driving 
access for vehicles into and out of Balgonie, Saskatchewan 
at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main Street, 
Balgonie. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at Main Street, Balgonie intersection, but 
would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition that I’m 
presenting today come from the communities of Balgonie, 
Lajord, Avonhurst, Kronau, and Pilot Butte. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside this province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties. And we know over 
the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.6 
million in corporate donations, and of that, 2.87 million are 
coming from companies outside Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

the city of Regina and Yellow Grass. I do so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that the Sask Party is making students and their 
families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement; that 
Saskatchewan students already pay the second-highest tuition 
fees in Canada; that this budget cuts 36.8 million from 
post-secondary education and 6.4 million from technical 
institutions; that funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid 
Fund and scholarships has been cut by 8.2 million; and that the 
Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by cancelling 
their first home plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 
 

I do so present. This is signed by citizens from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reopening of the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, they point out that it 
was shut down precipitously on the part of that government 
without thought to the impact on community or on the 
rehabilitation of the folks that went through that facility, or the 
fact of the employment impacts in a region of the province 
where employment is already such an urgent issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately reopen the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better our 
community for generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Buffalo Narrows. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across the 
province; that the Sask Party hiked education property tax by 67 
million but cut total government funding for education by 121 
million; and that even though the Sask Party is making us all 
pay more, our kids are actually getting less; and that the Sask 
Party cuts mean that students will lose much needed supports in 
their classroom, including funding for buses for kindergartners 
as well as help for children with special needs. I’ll read the 

prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
educational system pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Citizens who have signed this petition today reside in Melfort. I 
do so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday I 
along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow had the 
pleasure of attending the 26th annual Festival of Trees in 
Moose Jaw. The venue was elegantly decorated with Christmas 
trees and wreaths and festive displays, and it truly lived up to its 
reputation as Moose Jaw’s social event of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the festival is one of Moose Jaw Health 
Foundation’s largest fundraising events. This year over 
$300,000 was raised, bringing the grand total of funds raised to 
almost $4 million since the festival began. The highest selling 
item of the night was a 30th anniversary display from Fifth 
Avenue Collection which sold for $17,000. There were also a 
number of items that were donated back into the live auction, 
and there was also a special gift presented. Mr. Speaker, in a 
remarkable, generous gesture, the late Cecil Rathwell donated 
his home, a gift valued at over $150,000. 
 
All funds raised, Mr. Speaker, will go toward the purchase of a 
new portable X-ray machine and a portable ultrasound unit for 
the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital. 
 
This speaks incredibly generous of the people of Moose Jaw, 
and I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
organizing committee, the dedicated volunteers, and the citizens 
of Moose Jaw in supporting this year’s Festival of Trees. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
commemorate the International Day for the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women, which is recognized across the world 
on the 25th of November. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we have the dubious distinction of 
having the highest rates of domestic violence in Canada. In fact 
Saskatchewan’s rate of domestic violence is twice the national 
average. As I’ve said in this House before, these rates are 
shameful and unacceptable. 



3066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

Violence against women is more than just a women’s issue. 
This is an issue for everybody in this province. As a province, 
we must step up and do everything we can to support all 
survivors who are struggling to get out of abusive situations. 
 
I’m very proud of the legislation we’ve put forward in this 
House, and I call on all members to support it. We know that 
violence often follows women to work, and we must provide 
support for them in the workplace. Passing this legislation will 
catch us up to other provinces that have taken these important 
steps. Now more than ever, we need to invest in supports and 
programs and services that prevent domestic violence and assist 
survivors, and I know we can get closer to finally putting an end 
to all forms of violence against women once and for all. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Saskatchewan Public Servant Named One of Canada’s 
Most Powerful Women 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today Alanna Koch will be recognized and awarded with the 
Women’s Executive Network 2017 Canada’s Most Powerful 
Women: Top 100 Award, as one of RBC’s [Royal Bank of 
Canada] champions in Toronto tonight. Koch was nominated by 
KPMG Regina in April of 2017. 
 
The award was first launched in 2003 and over the years has 
supported and recognized inspiring and hard-working women 
across Canada. Some of Koch’s accomplishments was, she was 
the first deputy minister to the Premier in Saskatchewan, the 
longest-serving deputy minister of Agriculture, and the first 
woman ever elected to the board of Agricore United, a 
100-year-old company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every woman recognized today has proven 
themselves to be influential leaders in management, executive, 
professional, and board roles, which is why Alanna was so 
deserving of such an award. This award serves to recognize 
talented leaders and to inspire the current and next generation to 
push the boundaries of what is possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Alanna Koch for being recognized for the 2017 Canada’s Most 
Powerful Woman Top 100 Award and thank her for her 
professional leadership and service to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Remembering Nolan Royer 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 11th, 
2017, we lost a young man named Nolan Royer who was found 
unresponsive in the pool of a Saskatoon hotel. Nolan was 17 
years old and the Regimental Sergeant Major at 2293 Army 
Cadet Corps. As a former commanding officer of 2293 Army 
Cadets, I cannot help but feel a strong connection to this 
tragedy and to mourn with my cadet family the loss of this 
amazing young man. 

Nolan was currently a grade 12 student at Holy Cross in 
Saskatoon. He held a passion for the outdoors: hiking, biking, 
running, and camping. Nolan was a national biathlete and he 
graduated from the esteemed parachutist course.  
 
Although this tragedy happened during personal time and not 
during a cadet activity, I have seen our cadet family come 
together over the past couple of weeks to offer support for 
Nolan’s friends and family. This was a tragic loss and a life that 
was cut too short. 
 
I want to thank Nolan for being an organ donor and his family 
for honouring his wishes. His organ donation will save the lives 
of at least five people. I offer my sincere condolences to 
Nolan’s friends, family, and cadet family who are mourning 
across the country. I call on all members to join me in 
remembering the life and memory of Nolan Royer. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Targeted Enforcement Operations 
Make Communities Safer 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
November 7th to 10th, the Saskatchewan RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] conducted targeted enforcement in 
the Onion Lake area. This planned enforcement effort was in 
response to increased gang activity and reported calls in the 
area. A number of nearby detachments and specialized units — 
including the RCMP traffic services, integrated intelligence 
unit, general investigation section, police dog services, and 
members from Alberta RCMP — worked collectively to 
suppress gangs in the area. This operation resulted in 70 traffic 
safety charges, 26 arrest warrants executed, and four charges 
being laid as a result of a search warrant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an operation like this requires the co-operation 
and commitment of our dedicated policing partners as well as 
community leaders. The RCMP, the town of Onion Lake, and 
Chief Wallace Fox worked collaboratively to achieve their 
common goal of building a safer community. 
 
It doesn’t surprise me to see the community’s commitment to 
this goal. As the MLA for the area, I’ve had many 
conversations about how to make our communities safer. Our 
government is committed to doing as much as we can to support 
officers in their efforts to achieve this goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the House join me in 
thanking the officers from all across this province and Alberta 
who participated in this enforcement operation and the 
community leaders in Onion Lake. By working together, we 
will make our communities safer. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Project Red Ribbon  
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to have the opportunity to speak at MADD [Mothers Against 
Drunk Driving] Canada Project Red Ribbon 30th anniversary 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3067 

campaign launch later today. The Red Ribbon campaign runs 
over the Christmas and New Year’s holiday season. It is a 
national awareness campaign run by Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving Canada aimed at reminding people of the terrible costs 
of impaired driving. During the campaign, people are 
encouraged to display a red ribbon on their car to serve as a 
visual reminder to drive safe and drive sober. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the holiday season comes many parties and 
celebrations which often involve alcohol and can sometimes 
lead to people making terrible decisions to drive impaired. 
Impaired driving is still the number one cause of fatal collisions 
in our province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, impaired driving is unacceptable. That is why our 
government strengthened impaired driving legislation. On top 
of the significant changes that were made in 2014, we now have 
some of the toughest impaired driving laws in Canada. 
 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] also contributes 
$23,000 annually to support MADD Saskatchewan initiatives in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, the MADD Red Ribbon campaign is 
so important that we encourage everyone to take part and 
display a red ribbon. I would like to thank MADD Canada for 
their yearly campaign which really does save lives. 
 
I would also like to remind everyone to plan a safe ride home 
this Christmas and New Year’s season. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Southeast Regional College Offers Online Courses 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to share 
some news from the Southeast College on their achievements in 
education. Mr. Speaker, starting this year students can begin 
taking their first year of university classes in education, health 
studies, pre-social work, and other programs right in their 
communities. 
 
Partnering with the University of Regina, Southeast College has 
taken bold steps to enhance access and opportunity for our 
province’s students. With the help of Skype, students are able to 
access live-stream courses while still receiving personalized 
instruction, small class sizes, and student supports at their local 
campuses. This allows professors to teach in Weyburn while 
also delivering the same high-quality instruction to the Estevan 
and Moosomin campuses. Mr. Speaker, according to Southeast 
College, their students are “absolutely loving the technology.” 
 
Not only does this innovative approach to post-secondary 
education enhance access for the students, it makes studying 
more affordable as well. Southeast College estimates that 
students can save approximately $10,000 by taking their first 
year of studies at home. 
 
We’re proud of all the work our post-secondary partners do to 
ensure our learners have access to quality education. I ask all 
members to join me in commending Southeast College and the 
University of Regina on this partnership to better educate our 
students, and wish the college well as they gear up for the 
winter semester. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Truth and Reconciliation Issues 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this week Sask Party leadership 
candidates have revealed some very troubling opinions. These 
are people who have and will likely again sit in the backrooms 
and front benches of Saskatchewan’s government. One of them 
will even be our next premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one candidate said that he doesn’t believe we have 
a problem with racism. Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time 
that we have heard troubling comments from that side of the 
House, and we all have to do better. Mr. Speaker, the first step 
to solving any problem is admitting it exists. Does the Premier 
agree that real inequalities still sadly exist in this province, and 
does the Premier also agree that the first step to truth and 
reconciliation is recognizing and acknowledging that truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely true that 
we need to do better, all of us, not just in this Assembly but 
society as a whole. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s the effort of the 
government to endeavour to do that as it is for each individual 
member. I would say that is true about truth and reconciliation 
issues that have come to the fore of late. I think it’s also true 
that we, as a province, need to do better by all of the newcomers 
who have come to Saskatchewan as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Position on Abortion 
 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
Premier. Rhetoric can sometimes get very heated in this place, 
but there are some issues that we must all be very clear on, 
which brings me to another matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Three of their leadership candidates have said clearly that they 
oppose a woman’s right to choose. At least one has shockingly 
even said he opposes a woman’s rights in the case of rape. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge the two Sask Party leadership 
candidates who have said that they defend women’s rights. 
 
And I want to ask the Premier: what has his government’s 
position been on a woman’s choice? And what assurance can he 
provide that the already poor access to reproductive rights in 
Saskatchewan will not be made worse by the Sask Party 
government after he’s gone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the policies of the 
Government of Saskatchewan related to this matter, that is 
largely a federal one, have not changed since our election 10 
years ago, and there is no contemplation of a change. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



3068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately the 
concerns for reproductive rights in this province are much 
deeper. Action Canada for Sexual Health and Rights has stated 
that Saskatchewan is one of the hardest places to get an 
abortion. Most women outside of major centres of Regina and 
Saskatoon do not have access to services. And even with the 
promising approval of new drugs, there remains limits on which 
doctors and pharmacies are approved or willing to provide these 
services. And, Mr. Speaker, women without insurance often 
can’t afford to pay the hundreds of dollars these drugs cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, access to health services should not be determined 
by who you are, where you live, or how much money you 
make. So will the Minister of Health commit to supporting a 
woman’s right to choose by ensuring that all women have 
access to reproductive services, regardless of where they live or 
how much money they make? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
drug Mifegymiso, that the member opposite I think is referring 
to, was listed under exceptional drug status coverage this last 
September 5th, Mr. Speaker, as we followed the same process 
with this that we do with other drugs that are approved 
nationally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the Premier just indicated a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, 
our position on abortion has not changed. Our position on how 
we handle these drugs has not changed. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[10:30] 
 

Crime Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Statistics Canada released their 
crime numbers this past week and Saskatchewan is leading the 
country. And the situation is getting worse. There were 54 
homicides in our province last year — that’s more than our 
province has seen since StatsCan started keeping track in 1961, 
and a higher homicide rate than anywhere else in Canada last 
year. 
 
The people of Regina Elphinstone or of the province of 
Saskatchewan don’t need to hear these stats to know that crime 
is a significant problem in this province. Combined with the 
Sask Party’s cuts to social services, community-based 
organizations, and municipalities, they have made a recipe for 
the situation to get worse, not better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 13 of the 54 homicides were gang related, and 
more than half of those occurred outside of Saskatoon and 
Regina. Mr. Speaker, 36 of the 54 homicides involved an 
indigenous victim. 
 
We need action now. When will the Sask Party stop with the 
one-off announcements and start acting in a comprehensive way 
to address the growing crime problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
over the last number of years, crime rates in Saskatchewan have 
fallen steadily. However very recently the crime severity index 
has gone up. And my learned friend is absolutely correct: the 
homicide rate has spiked up, and spiked up absolutely 
unacceptably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my predecessor wrote to the federal government 
and asked to work with them for a comprehensive strategy on 
drug issues. Mr. Speaker, the member for Lloydminster recently 
just highlighted the collaborative work that’s being done by the 
RCMP and leaders in Onion Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you some of the things that have 
and are taking place. Right now we have 124 RCMP in the First 
Nations policing program. We have 258 officers in the 
protection and response team that are now focused on rural 
crime, 60 police positions currently deployed to the combined 
traffic services in Saskatchewan. So as part of this, there are 30 
new police positions, 30 repurposed police positions, 40 
Ministry of Highways commercial vehicle enforcement officers, 
and 98 Ministry of Environment conservation officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is quite right to raise the 
issue. We share his concerns, and we want to be able to address 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s so-called rural 
crime strategy turns out to be more of a shell game than a 
solution. Even with what they announced last week for Regina 
and Saskatoon, that targeted funding has only increased 1 per 
cent over the last three years. And, Mr. Speaker, after the Sask 
Party’s cuts last spring, cities across the province have had to 
consider cutting their police budgets. In both Saskatoon and 
Regina, police services were cut by a million dollars each. 
 
Mr. Speaker, police chiefs, community leaders, and common 
sense tells us that we need more investment in community 
supports, not less. We need more funding, not less, and we need 
more action and not less. What the Sask Party is doing is not 
working. Clearly this is a complex issue that requires a 
multi-pronged approach. So again, when will they stop with the 
one-off announcements and start acting to address the crime 
problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member for North 
Battleford travelled around the province, met with people, 
developed a strategy. The strategy was a solid strategy. We 
consulted with police officers. We consulted with communities. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re implementing that strategy. 
 
But I can tell the member opposite sort of for the basis of 
background, since 2007 we’ve increased funding for police by 
68 per cent to the RCMP. Municipal police grants are doubled 
since 2007. In 2007 under the NDP [New Democratic Party], 
they were $6.78 million; in 2017, over $14 million We have 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3069 

added over 120 municipal police officers in 2008, and we’ve 
added 750 RCMP officers to police rural areas. Mr. Speaker, we 
take this seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisition 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister 
about the sale of the land at the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] to Loblaw, and he said he was confused. So let me try it 
again. The government expropriated the land. They claimed 
they needed it for public purposes. But, Mr. Speaker, instead 
they sold that land to Loblaw. So, Mr. Speaker, how much did 
Loblaw pay for that expropriated land? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment, 
GTH, and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we are working hard at the Global 
Transportation Hub to ensure that it is a success. I’ve had 
opportunity to tour the Loblaw facility. I know the member has 
driven past on the road, but I would encourage her and we 
would help to arrange a tour of any of the facilities at the Global 
Transportation Hub, including Loblaw, where she will see over 
60 countries . . . People from over 60 countries are currently 
employed at the Loblaw facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will also know that she did ask a 
written question on this matter, submitted a written question on 
this matter, and for commercial and proprietary reasons, that the 
agreement is a confidential document and that will not be 
released. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan people’s 
money. The government paid over half a million dollars for that 
land and the people deserve to know how much Loblaw paid. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people also deserve to know 
how much of their money the Sask Party spent to settle the 
lawsuit that the former landowner brought forward when he 
found out that the land that was expropriated from him was 
flipped to a private company. They refuse to tell us in written 
questions, Mr. Speaker, but will he tell us now? And will he tell 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, how much did this 
transaction and the lawsuit cost Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it seems that when 
it comes to the way that government deals in commercial 
dealings, the members opposite want a different set of rules for 
when we are the government than the time that they were the 
government. 
 
The member would know and does know — and in fact just 

repeated it in her question — that for commercial reasons that 
this information would not be released. The same rules have 
been applied in terms of disclosure as when the members 
opposite did similar types of business transactions, that that 
information wouldn’t be released as well because of 
confidentiality and proprietary reasons. And so the answer 
remains the same. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Loblaw land is just one of the 
many lawsuits the government has faced and is facing around 
the GTH and the bypass land. Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to keep it 
simple for the minister. We know that the government settled 
the lawsuit for an undisclosed amount. So can he give us a 
ballpark figure maybe? Tens of thousands? Hundreds of 
thousands? Was it millions of dollars? Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
know. 
 
And again we are talking about taxpayers’ money. And if he 
won’t tell us how much was spent on these lawsuits, and he 
won’t tell us how much Loblaw paid for his expropriated land, 
perhaps maybe the Highways minister can answer an even 
simpler question. Does the Minister of Highways think that it 
was appropriate for the GTH to expropriate land and then flip it 
to a private company? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the government has the 
power of expropriation. All governments have that power and 
it’s to be used carefully. It’s often used for highways. It’s often 
used for a variety of other things. It could be used for airports. It 
could be used for any number of other things, including 
something like the GTH, which was a centre that we want to 
have in our province. 
 
We’ve got, Mr. Speaker, at the GTH in the Loblaw building, 
nearly 1,000 people that are working in there. Yes, we used the 
power of expropriation trying to assemble some of the land 
there. We’d rather not use the power of attorney. We’d rather 
have willing buyer, willing seller. But, Mr. Speaker, at the end 
of the day the government has the power of expropriation, and 
the government uses it when it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker. It 
was done under the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of lawsuits 
that these private individuals have brought forward against this 
government for misusing the expropriation power, for using 
public dollars to use land to flip it to private sources, private 
companies, private enterprises. Mr. Speaker, why won’t this 
government . . . Why are they settling these lawsuits? If they’re 
so confident in their position, why aren’t they defending these 
positions in court? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 



3070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d urge the member 
opposite to take a drive home this weekend and drive down 
Highway 11 where the highway was moved out from downtown 
to around the towns that are on there. Each and every one of 
those cases required a process to assemble the land, to move the 
highway, and to twin the highway when it was twinned. 
 
Some cases under the NDP going back into the ’60s and ’70s, it 
would’ve been expropriated and, Mr. Speaker, in some cases it 
would’ve been negotiated as willing buyer, willing seller. 
 
The Provincial Auditor suggested some of the GTH land should 
have been expropriated rather than willing buyer, willing seller. 
 
The members opposite can’t have it both ways. You can’t say 
one day, you paid too much for it, and the next day they say, 
you can’t expropriate. Well, Mr. Speaker, those are the tools 
that are available to the government and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to use them appropriately and we’re going to use them 
fairly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, let me start with a quote: “This 
deficit budget is the direct result of the 5.6% reduction in 
funding received from the provincial government’s budget 
released in March 2017.” That is a direct quote from the 
University of Saskatchewan’s most recent annual report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan has been forced to 
cut services and even run a deficit this year because the 
province slashed funding by $18 million. Mr. Speaker, how can 
any government who has any consideration for the future cut 
advanced education so deeply? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased to be able to rise today and highlight some of the things 
that we are doing, this government is doing for post-secondary 
education in this province. The 2015-16 university fiscal year 
information from Stats Canada indicated the following, Mr. 
Speaker. The U of S [University of Saskatchewan] receives 63 
per cent of their operating revenue from the province, and that’s 
the fifth highest in the group of 15 comparable universities in 
Canada, that’s medical doctoral universities. U of R [University 
of Regina], 55 per cent of their funding comes from our 
provincial government. 
 
As far as tuitions go, Mr. Speaker, the U of S tuition revenue is 
comprised of 23 per cent of their operating revenue, seventh 
among those universities. And I think it’s also important to note 
here, Mr. Speaker, that of those four universities that were 
ahead of the U of S, three of them are in the province of 
Quebec. And that’s a pretty convenient fact. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s response does not 
acknowledge many of the facts that I identified in my question, 
so I’d like to ask again. How can any government who has any 
consideration for the future cut advanced education so deeply? 
We’ll give them another chance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I think as the member opposite 
knows that we’ve had serious declines in our revenue and our 
budget, and that has led to some constraints that we’ve had to 
adopt. And we’d like to thank our universities and all 
post-secondary educations for the efforts that they have taken. 
However, Mr. Speaker, we continue to support our 
post-secondary institutions in this province and we’ll continue 
to do that. And I’d just like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that prior 
to our decade in government, 2006 Stats Canada report 
illustrated, from 1990 through to 2007 under the NDP’s 16 
years of government, tuition fees ballooned by 227 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Between ’91 and 2007, the average tuition at 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] increased by a whopping 320 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll take no lessons from the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is they’re making 
students, the next generation, start their lives while paying the 
price for Sask Party mismanagement. The University of 
Saskatchewan’s annual report also says that the Sask Party’s 
cuts will mean the U of S will “. . . no longer maintain the same 
quantity and quality of services.” Mr. Speaker, they’ve already 
had to put the planned school of architecture on hold. The med 
school is constantly under threat, and who knows what’s next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Advanced Education commit 
to providing long-term, predictable funding to our universities 
and other educational institutions? And will the minister ensure 
that they won’t look to students to cover these funding cuts with 
even more tuition fee increases next year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
pleased to rise and be able to highlight some of the things that 
this government is doing for our post-secondary institutions. In 
2017-18 alone, Mr. Speaker, we are providing the U of S with 
$329 million in operating funding. That’s almost $120 million 
more than was available to them from the previous government 
in ’07-08, and that’s a 57 per cent increase in funding. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Over our last decade of growth, our government’s provided 
U of S with over $3 billion in funding, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that’s a very solid record. And when you compare those last 10 
years of operating funding under the NDP and our record over 
the last 10 years, our government . . . [inaudible] . . . provide the 
U of S with $1.4 billion more or 90 per cent in operating 
funding, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Education says that teachers and parents should be happy with 
her party’s cuts, and she says that things in the classroom are 
just fine. Well that’s definitely not what I’m hearing from 
parents, teachers, even from students across this province. 
Yesterday the minister finally admitted to what she called a 
“slight decline” in the number of teachers in classrooms this 
year. But she said all is fine, because most of those teachers 
retired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter how those teachers left our kids’ 
classrooms. The fact is they’re not there now and they haven’t 
been replaced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 188 fewer teachers and support staff in 
our kids’ classrooms this year over last. How can the minister 
not admit that this is having a negative impact on our kids’ 
classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
challenging year, the real picture is relatively balanced and 
there have been some hopeful increases. In ’17-18, there were 
eight school divisions that saw increases in the number of 
regular classroom teaching FTEs [full-time equivalent]. For 
example, Saskatoon Catholic, St. Paul’s Catholic saw an 
increase in enrolment and an increase of 18 regular classroom 
teaching FTEs. Prairie Valley School Division saw a 1.2 per 
cent increase in enrolment and a 2.5 per cent increase in regular 
classroom teaching FTEs year over year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, context is important. And growth since 2007 . . . 
The number of students have increased by 20,000 under this 
government, the highest enrolment of students in the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] system since 2001, Mr. Speaker. 
With growth comes challenges. For our province, such growth 
is relatively new in terms of a phenomenon, Mr. Speaker, and 
we are meeting the challenge by building where they closed — 
40 new schools, 21 opening this year for the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, our teachers and our kids are being 
left with larger class sizes and fewer resources, and this is a 
fact. The Sask Party is also threatening teachers with either a 
wage cut or more cuts to their classrooms or layoffs. Mr. 
Speaker, what kind of choice is that? 
 
More cuts, fewer teachers, larger class sizes. It could not be 
more clear that this government has no respect for teachers and 
the work that they do in our kids’ education. It’s become 
obvious that public sector workers across the board will reject 
this government’s wage cuts. So I ask the minister, what are her 
plans if teachers reject the government’s threats? And will she 
assure teachers today that there will be no further layoffs? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 
minister has noted, the record of the government in education 
has been significant in terms of increases in operating budgets 
and significant increases in capital with the new schools 
opening up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just say that on this issue of the wage 
mandate, Mr. Speaker, the government has noted that it has a 
target that would be the equivalent of 3.5 per cent reduction in 
the overall human resource expenditures of the government. 
Mr. Speaker, it would be . . . I think it’s quite clear, and the 
Minister of Finance has noted, that the 3.5 per cent however as 
a mandate at a bargaining table is . . . well frankly, it’s not 
going to be working for this year. Mid-term will be adjusted, 
and while we’re going to continue to pursue the 3.5 per cent 
overall objective for reduced human resource expenditures in 
government over the period of time, it will not, Mr. Speaker, 
constitute a mandate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — So no assurances about no layoffs, Mr. Speaker. 
Now the minister can refuse to take responsibility, spin old 
numbers and rhetoric all she wants, or she can have the Premier 
stand up to answer her questions. And it might make her feel 
better, but it doesn’t make things better for our kids. It doesn’t 
reassure parents, Mr. Speaker. Teachers are signalling that they 
won’t agree to the government’s outrageous and unfair 
proposal. So let me ask again: what is the minister’s plan if they 
reject the offer? Will she take more resources out of our 
classrooms? Is she actually ready to cut even more teachers and 
support staff from our children’s classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk for a 
moment about our commitment to education and early years 
education which was challenged yesterday by the member for 
Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker. The other day I happened upon 
his plan for education. And you know what they say about 
imitation, Mr. Speaker. We are flattered, because we already 
have accomplished 23 of his 33 points. Some of his highlights 
include, Mr. Speaker, ensuring our students learn essential 
digital literacy such as coding. We’re on it. 
 
“Resource and support early years learning” and “Resource 
early years intervention.” Mr. Speaker, we created the first ever 
early years plan. Since ’07 funding for pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten], pre-K programs has gone from 7.6 million 
to 27 million this year, 1.6 billion this year to supports for 
learning, which include special-needs students in the classroom 
— over a quarter of a billion in a challenging budget year — 18 
million to early childhood intervention programs and KidsFirst, 
for home visits, family in transition support, nutrition 
development. 
 
Quote from the member for Regina Rosemont: “Facilitate 
government-ministry co-operation” — such as the Prince Albert 
hub model, Mr. Speaker? “Utilize schools as community hubs” 
— such as the mâmawêyatitân centre, Mr. Speaker? Check, 
check, check. 



3072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be standing this 
bill. Rather, I will be moving Bill No. 108, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, and I would ask that it be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 108 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I intend to be consistent 
with this bill. I move that Bill No. 109, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 109 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 54. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
response to question 54. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Questions Surrounding Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As always, 
it’s good to get to Thursday where we have the opportunity to 
engage in some meaningful and deep thought-out debate here, 
in this Assembly, and certainly today is no exception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important, and why I’m bringing this 
motion forward is that I think we need to talk about the 
transparency and accountability, or actually the lack that we’ve 
seen of transparency and accountability at the Global 
Transportation Hub. We know as a result of the auditor’s report 
last June that there were some very, very serious mistakes that 
were made. We also know that the people of Saskatchewan 
should be given the answers they deserve around the Global 
Transportation Hub, and I think what we saw here in question 
period today is instead another example of the government not 
providing information to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that questions remain, serious questions remain about 
issues and the individuals surrounding the GTH scandal, and 
that’s been amplified by even revelations just recently, Mr. 
Speaker. And we know that it’s unacceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan that, after all this time, there are still more 
questions than answers when it comes to the GTH. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be moving a motion to that effect at the end of 
my comments, my brief comments, as we commence this 
debate. 
 
One of the things I really want to focus on today because we are 
in a leadership race here in the province, Mr. Speaker . . . And 
for the Sask Party, they are actually going to pick someone who 
will be Premier of this province without a mandate from the 
people of the province. And this person is going to be Premier 
for a long time, depending on when the next election will be, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’s important to understand what their 
positions are, what their spoken and stated positions are in 
terms of the GTH. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that some of the backbenchers are 
going to be getting up to speak to the debate today and many of 
them have chosen a leadership candidate that they’re 
supporting. So I’m hoping, when they do get up, and I’m 
challenging whoever is speaking to this today to tell us about 
your chosen leader’s position, whether you agree with it or not 
and whether or not you think that we should have the GTH 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

exposed to much greater scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s first of all see who the brave souls are in the leadership 
race in terms of stating positions on the GTH. Unfortunately 
Alanna Koch is not one that has come forward with a clear 
position on whether or not she believes the GTH should be 
further examined. She basically has adopted what we hear the 
Premier saying and that there’s an RCMP investigation and 
we’ll see after that. Here’s a quote: “If there’s questions left 
unanswered after the RCMP investigation, then I would need to 
take the appropriate action.” She goes on to say: 
 

I’m not sure a public inquiry is the right approach, because 
it takes quite a long time for [all] that work to be 
completed and it’s a fairly expensive process. So I’d want 
to make sure that was absolutely necessary, and I’m not 
sure it is. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have some prevarication on the part of 
Alanna Koch who’s running to be the next Premier of this 
province here in a couple months. 
 
So let’s move on. What do we see the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook telling us? He’s good at putting out a lot 
of words, but sometimes I’m not really sure what he’s saying, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is no exception. Here’s a quote that we 
have from the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook in his 
capacity as the potential premier of the province. He said, 
“We’ve had processes in place . . .” This is a quote, for 
Hansard: 
 

We’ve had processes in place to protect that in this 
province, and those continue to be in place. The fact of the 
matter is that, as we move forward, this team here that we 
have today will be having discussions on all sorts of public 
policy. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, obviously not addressing the issue at all, not 
letting us know, as the future premier of this province, what his 
views are on the GTH. 
 
Now let’s move on. We have some candidates who are very 
clear, and one that I really appreciate is the position of the 
member from Regina University. And I must say I also really 
appreciate her unequivocal support for women’s reproductive 
choice. So I have to give her kudos for that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Estevan is suggesting I buy a membership. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Weyburn. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Weyburn. I’m sorry, Weyburn. I always get 
you guys mixed up. But that I buy a membership in his party so 
that I can choose the next premier. As much as I would like to 
be able to, I am compelled by the rules of my own party and I 
am proudly going to remain a member of the New Democratic 
Party. I’m proud to be able to vote in our leadership race 
instead. 
 
Going back though to the member from Regina University, we 
asked her what she thought about the GTH scandal and all the 
unanswered questions. She’s unequivocal, and I will quote: “I 
support the call for a judicial inquiry into the Global 

Transportation Hub land transactions.” Clear, clear, clear. And 
for those that are supporting her, they know exactly what 
they’re going to get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
We do have one member opposite who was briefly in the race 
and he had a lot to say about the GTH scandal. It was 
remarkably different than the 110 times he stood up in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and gave the government line in response 
to the scathing commentary that we found in the auditor’s 
report. So what does the member from Meadow Lake say if he 
was going to be the next premier? He said, “. . . there were very, 
very serious mistakes made that should never have happened.” 
He also said, “I defended the position of the government and 
what I’m saying here today is what that position is going to 
change to, if I’m premier.” He went on to say, “We should 
never have been in this business in the first place. If this was a 
project that could have had economic merit on its own then the 
private sector should have been involved in it.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re hearing from the private 
sector as well and we see that going on in Saskatoon. There’s a 
business hub north of Saskatoon that’s entirely privately owned 
and privately developed, Mr. Speaker. We see that now on the 
east side of the city on Tower Road, where AGT Food has 
established its plant. It was originally going to start at the GTH, 
but I think they realized that a private sector approach might be 
more appropriate for them. They moved over to the east side of 
the city and now they’re starting their own business hub on the 
CN rail line, Mr. Speaker. So what we heard today in question 
period is a direct, direct contrast and perhaps a justification for 
some mistakes that have been made. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake went on to say, when he’s 
talking about the 2,200 acres that were expropriated for the 
GTH footprint, he says, “Land development is not a core 
competency of government.” And yet we had the whole front 
bench today here defending that expropriation of 2,200 acres of 
farmers’ land in order to . . . There’s no public purpose there, 
Mr. Speaker. They flipped it to private interests wherever they 
can get somebody to buy it. And we know that some of those 
land deals have fallen through, and that some of those lands that 
were originally sold are going to be put up for sale, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And of course the member from Meadow Lake refused to 
answer reporters on August 24th asking if he had brought up all 
these concerns that he was now bringing forward when he was 
sitting at the cabinet table, Mr. Speaker. He refused to answer 
those questions. 
 
Now we have another member, and there are people, 
backbenchers here who are supporting him, from Saskatoon 
Northwest. So I’m hoping if you’re going to get up in this 
debate, you will defend your chosen leader’s position. In this 
case this member from Saskatoon Northwest has said, “Without 
prejudging the outcome, I believe the only way to lift the cloud 
over the GTH is to shine a very bright — and very public — 
light on the entire matter.” 
 
Now you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, when this candidate for the 
next Premier was the Attorney General and Minister of Justice, 



3074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

he actually raised a few questions at the cabinet table when Mr. 
Marquart had an offer to purchase on the nuns’ land. Now you 
remember all that, Mr. Speaker. But when Minister Wyant 
raised that at the cabinet table, all of a sudden a second buyer 
was brought in. Sorry, Mr. Tappauf had the offer to purchase to 
begin with. Minister Boyd tried pushing that through. Minister 
of Justice said, wait a minute. So all of a sudden there was a 
quick deal where a third buyer was brought in, and that’s Mr. 
Marquart, a well-known businessman here in Regina. 
 
So why did the Minister of Justice not question it further at that 
time? We don’t know — cabinet secrecy — but we also know 
that he’s now come out and said that he thinks we need a very 
bright light to shine on the whole land acquisition processes, 
and particularly the east parcels. 
 
So I hope whatever backbenchers are getting up in this debate 
are going to take the opportunity to amplify that and support 
that, because it’s exactly what we’ve been calling for. 
 
And he said quite a bit actually, the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. He said, and this is true on our part as well, Mr. 
Speaker, “When we get out and talk to people, and if it’s not 
their first or second question, it’s their third. And they want to 
know what we are going to do about it.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a candidate for the next premier who is 
hearing from people across the province. It’s not just this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. This is people across the province 
who are concerned about the lack of transparency and 
accountability that we have seen on this deal, and further 
dealings I think in terms of land flips with publicly expropriated 
land, and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that . . . Oh, there’s still a couple more. I forgot. There’s 
two more members that are seeking . . . Well one member and 
one former federal member who are seeking the next 
premiership of this province with a mandate from only 
members of the Sask Party. That’s the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. Now he’s been very vocal on a lot of his opinions 
as of late, his personal opinions, Mr. Speaker. Some . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . As my colleague indicates, might be 
his own worst nightmare. But, Mr. Speaker, he has said this 
about the GTH. This is the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove, quote . . . Or sorry, this is . . . He has said that the 
GTH would be “better run in the private sector.” And he 
believes that if we sell the land at the GTH it should be sold to 
free up money for education and mental health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what do you think the GTH is trying to do? 
They’re trying to sell the land. So he’s saying they should try 
and sell it. Well that’s what they’ve been trying to do for the 
last four or five years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not going very 
well. As you know, their budget projections for the last three 
years have been astronomical figures like $15 million, and they 
aren’t meeting those projections because they can’t sell the 
land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So how is it that the member from Willowgrove thinks that the 
solution to the GTH is to sell it? They can’t sell it, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re having trouble selling it. So that’s one of the most 
illogical positions I think we’ve heard from any of the 
leadership candidates. I certainly hope that one of the member 

from Willowgrove’s supporters is going to get up and address 
that. One of the backbenchers perhaps is one of the supporters 
for that member. So we want to hear from them in terms of 
what their position is about his solution to the GTH is to sell it. 
That’s exactly what they’re trying to do and they’re having a lot 
of trouble doing it. So, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the most 
illogical statements from any of those leadership candidates that 
I’ve heard. 
 
And finally there’s a new runner in the race that came out of 
nowhere recently, and he’s pretty clear on his position about the 
GTH. This is Rob Clarke, a former federal Conservative MP 
[Member of Parliament] who’s recently jumped into the race. 
And he’s basically said, “Right now, these people are upset. 
They’ve seen scandals and insider deals.” Mr. Speaker, there is 
some clear, honest words, if I’ve ever seen it, from one of the 
Conservatives, and he’s actually calling for clarity, 
accountability, and transparency when it comes to the GTH 
deal, Mr. Speaker.  
 
One of the things he did say in his press announcement is that 
people in public office should be “above reproach.” Now I’m 
not exactly sure what that would mean, Mr. Speaker, but clearly 
he’s going to sweep clean, come in with a new broom and 
sweep clean and dust out all those little dusty corners where 
some of these backroom deals were made for the acquisition of 
the east parcels at the GTH. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a lot of concerns. There’s a lot 
of scandal that is still swirling around the GTH. And you look 
at other issues that are swirling around the GTH as well. We 
had Public Accounts several times last year, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve had Public Accounts this year calling for that 
transparency and accountability that we wanted, that the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve. 
 
And you’d think when it’s public accounting, the Public 
Accounts Committee, when public dollars are being spent by 
the bucketful at the GTH — $7 million to move the 
transmission line, $13 million for the first Pinkie overpass, and 
now they’re redoing the overpass at Pinkie Road — there’s 
millions of dollars that are being put in into infrastructure to 
support this project. And yet they still can’t sell land out there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We wanted to ask questions at PAC [Public Accounts 
Committee]. We wanted to ask questions from the minister who 
was responsible, Mr. Speaker. We never got that opportunity. 
He refused to come forward. We also wanted to ask questions 
of his special advisor who arranged that land deal, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Laurie Pushor, who never came forward. He works in this 
building, Mr. Speaker. He’s still here. And yet he has not come 
forward to answer simple questions about that particular land 
transaction. 
 
And you know, this government likes to hide behind the 
auditor’s report. Well they know. They know — and I hope all 
you backbenchers who get up to speak about this will come 
clear on that — they know that we have not been served well by 
this scandal. 
 
I’m running out of time, Mr. Speaker, so I will read the motion 
that I’m putting forward. And it reads as this: 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3075 

That this Assembly acknowledges the importance and 
need for further transparency and accountability on the 
Global Transportation Hub, considering that very serious 
mistakes were made that should have never happened, that 
the people of Saskatchewan are owed answers to questions 
around the Global Transportation Hub, that questions 
remain about issues and individuals surrounding the GTH 
that have been amplified by recent revelations; and further, 
that it’s unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan that 
after all this time there are still more questions than 
answers when it comes to the GTH. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved a motion. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan had one gap and many holes to fill: people of 
Saskatchewan being ignored; less opportunities of employment; 
less jobs; low GDP [gross domestic product]; this desperate 
economic situation in Saskatchewan compelling people to leave 
to find jobs in neighbouring provinces. 
 
The Sask Party government identified room to be filled: work 
can be done which makes Saskatchewan more business 
attractive; make our economy grow fast; create more jobs; and 
making Saskatchewan able to be recognized in global market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub is not one new 
idea; it is a very simple and old market tactic existing since 
thousands of years. People produce and manufacture and bring 
their goods and services into one place where sellers look for 
buyers and buyers look for sellers. When connections get 
established between buyers and sellers, it is known as a market 
hub or trade centre. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, take a look at Regina downtown. 
People go there to buy services and to buy commodities. Just 
imagine we live in Regina and eliminate downtown and any 
business centre, or eliminate any trade centre or market, this 
will make life so miserable and difficult. How would you buy 
agri-products? How would you sell your services? We, as a 
world, depend on these trade centres. We, as a country, depend 
on these markets to sustain our economy. We, as a province, 
depend on these trade centres to provide our people with jobs 
and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Global Transportation Hub is one unique way 
to connect to the world here in Saskatchewan. Just like the 
World Trade Centre in Vancouver, BC [British Columbia]; the 
Northern California World Trade Center; and the World Trade 
Centre in Los Angeles, California, we would like to be fully 
equipped to succeed and grow in the international marketplace 
as other countries, states, and provinces are doing. There is 
business, and we want people to come in Saskatchewan and 
establish their business here. 
 
We are on the right track, Mr. Speaker. Many businesses 
already succeeded here in the Global Transportation Hub such 
as Loblaw Companies Limited, Canada’s largest food retailer, 
supplies some 250 stores from its distribution centre at the 
GTH. They’re very active in the community. They are one of 
the biggest donors to the Regina food bank. They volunteer for 

Habitat for Humanity. They volunteer with animal shelters and 
donate pet food. They volunteer and donate to the Canadian 
Mental Health Association. And they support the Piapot First 
Nation powwow and are also sponsors of the North Central 
smudge walk. This is just a small example of the wonderful 
corporate citizens they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this trade centre was long overdue when we look 
at the economic impact on Saskatchewan, such as the private 
sector investment which has topped $485 million. There are 
over 860 full-time jobs. Also the GTH employment during the 
construction has created 1,800 construction jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
this project was designed to support trade for generations to 
come. One can see many successful business stories associated 
with the GTH. 
 
I remember when the member of Regina Rosemont used to say, 
there are approximately 5,000 trucks that are crossing per week 
on Dewdney Avenue. Well, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the Regina 
bypass, those trucks will be off Dewdney and on their way to 
the GTH. I will say that he was right about one thing: there are, 
I think, approximately 4,800 trucks moving in and out of the 
GTH every week. 
 
This is an old saying, Mr. Speaker: the moving wheel makes the 
economy better. I would like to quote from the North American 
Strategy for Competitiveness, Tiffany Melvin: “Inland ports are 
huge economic engines . . . The GTH has the opportunity to be 
a major player in the continental freight movement network, 
and to put Saskatchewan on the map.”  

 
[11:15] 
 
Many people in Saskatchewan are also excited about the GTH. I 
would like to quote from Steven McLellan, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce: 
 

We’re big fans of the GTH. The concept makes great 
sense — as a province we rely heavily on exports and the 
better we do that, the more we prosper. The opportunities 
in the future are extremely positive.  
 
One of the realities of the supply chain world is that it has 
many peaks, valleys, players, and complexities. The GTH 
simplifies that by providing expertise in the area in a 
geographically centralized location.  
 
The GTH also provides the ability for service companies 
and producers to exist in one space for pickup and 
drop-offs. As the GTH grows, it reduces costs, time lag, 
and unknowns, which is great for business. It was never 
intended to be an overnight thing, but an investment in the 
future success of the province. The GTH is something that 
will keep us in the export world for a long time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re connecting to the world here in 
Saskatchewan. We have many clients succeeding here in the 
GTH. We have Brightenview; Canadian Pacific Rail mainline 
access to the GTH connecting to seaports and key North 
American markets; and Consolidated FastFrate. FastFrate offers 
cross-dock and LTL [less than load] transportation solutions to 
major Canadian centres. 
 



3076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, there is a very good connection here at GTH. CP 
Rail brings bulk shipments, and at the same time, same place, 
LTL and cross-dock services are available by FastFrate. 
Emterra Group, Regina’s curbside recycler processes 50,000 
tons of material annually at the GTH which helps the 
environment, conserving energy, and reducing landfill. Future 
Transfer, Loblaw Companies, Morguard Investments, 
SaskPower, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority], Slinkemo Enterprises — all these businesses, small 
or big, play a significant role in our economy. The existence of 
physical capital such as factories, machinery, and roads will 
lower the cost of economic activities and leave more revenue 
for businesses and for government. 
 
As we are working to retain business in Saskatchewan, over 17 
million’s generated in incremental diesel fuel tax and 15.2 
million in province personal income tax. Mr. Speaker, I invite 
them to visit the GTH and see how they are attractive for the 
Asia-Pacific rim and other international entities seeking to enter 
the North American market. With their commitment to 
providing a premiere transportation and logistics hub, coupled 
with the encouragement and support from the Saskatchewan 
government, they have engaged private sector partners to help 
establish a global trade and exhibition centre, manufacturing 
assembly facilities, and e-commerce fulfilment solutions at the 
GTH. They are working together to attract entrepreneurs, 
investors, suppliers, and service providers to launch and 
upgrade these existing opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in, the Government of 
Saskatchewan was lacking necessary infrastructure. There were 
inadequate roads. They were closing schools and hospitals, and 
businesses were closing down and leaving the province. 
Saskatchewan was barely on the map when it came to global 
trade. Our government has worked hard to turn that around and 
to attract investment and trade opportunities. The GTH is a 
giant step to bring businesses into our province and encouraging 
international trade. The members opposite like to stand up in 
the Assembly and rant every day about the GTH, but I bet none 
of them has ever even visited it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH has invested 42 million into its 
infrastructure to support its current and future clients. Mr. 
Speaker, our government welcomes the opportunity to attract 
people, jobs, investments. The Global Transportation Hub is our 
gateway to Asia, our gateway to the world, and the right 
location to have. Mr. Speaker, that is why I will not be 
supporting the motion put forward by members opposite. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s awfully 
disappointing to have to be weighing in again in this Assembly 
as we have, and again and again and again on this Premier’s 
scandal, this Sask Party’s scandal, this land scandal, the one that 
this Premier of course, this outgoing Premier stood in this 
Assembly and defended day after day after day after day, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, it’s interesting. The outgoing Premier, 
here, you know, a lot of outgoing premiers might sit down 
maybe with Sheila Coles in the morning show for an interview. 
But not this Premier. He sits down for a one-hour interview 
with the RCMP, Mr. Speaker. That’s a different type of 

departing interview. 
 
And really it’s because we’ve had a government that’s 
obfuscated every step of the way, that’s blocked the 
information, that hasn’t provided any accountability, and at the 
very least — at the very least — ripped off taxpayers, ripped off 
nuns, wasted millions of hard-earned public dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. And of course we see the impacts of that as well. 
Saskatchewan people have observed their SaskPower bills and 
they see all too well as they stroke that cheque, or as it, you 
know, comes out of their account at the end of the month with 
the massive increases. They see the impacts of decisions like 
using $25 million from SaskPower as a slush fund to get this 
deal done with two donors of the Sask Party. 
 
You know, in many ways this deal and the way this 
government’s responded to it really sort of speaks to the 
devolution of trust under this Sask Party, a betrayal of 
Saskatchewan people, a betrayal of the trust of the people that 
that Premier and the Sask Party were intended to serve. 
 
You know, we had a minister that presided over this debacle but 
a Premier that says he was there every step of the way. They 
worked together. And you know, it makes sense, Mr. Speaker, 
because, you know, any premier worth his salt or her salt would 
have punted that minister, plagued by scandal, a long period 
ago instead of allowing some sort of graceful exit. And that’s 
why this is so concerning for Saskatchewan people because it’s 
not just about the dollars that were, the hard-earned dollars that 
were wasted. It’s not just about the lack of accountability. It’s 
about a culture of that Sask Party in this late stage with a big 
majority, a culture of entitlement, a culture of arrogance, a 
culture and an interest of self and partisan interest and maybe of 
friends of that government and donors of that government, but 
not the best interests of Saskatchewan people. Not the public 
interests of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in many ways we know Saskatchewan people are shifting. 
They’re shifting their opinions of that government in many 
ways, and more and more are looking for change within this 
government and change of that government, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think this deal that relates directly to trust is front and centre on 
this. 
 
Of course we have a Premier . . . You know, I had the chance to 
question that Premier for a good couple of years on this front. 
We have questioned that Premier on this front. Our Finance 
critic has questioned this Premier on this front. And day after 
day he provides non-answers. In fact we have a Premier and a 
Sask Party that misled, that misrepresented, misrepresented the 
auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker, a report that exonerated no one, 
Mr. Speaker, and hid behind that report, pretending there was 
sort of no wrongdoing, never ever getting to the bottom of the 
issue. 
 
And of course the RCMP are engaged. The RCMP have 
engaged in a full investigation, and they don’t do that in a 
frivolous way, Mr. Speaker. The RCMP have a lot of 
competition for their resources. There’s a pretty high threshold 
before the RCMP would dedicate a full investigation to a 
matter, and that’s something that sadly they’ve had to do in this 
case because we’ve had a government that’s resisted any level 
of transparency every step of the way. But we know now that 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

that investigation is over with prosecutors in another province 
and certainly we’ll await what the results of that are. But 
regardless of whether or not there’s criminal wrongdoing that’s 
found in this case or not, what we know is that taxpayers were 
ripped off. What we know is that nuns were mistreated and 
ripped off, Mr. Speaker, and we know that public dollars were 
wasted. 
 
You know, we’ve had chances in this Assembly to have 
accountability where we go before the Public Accounts 
Committee, and this Sask Party just has been unwilling to come 
clean with Saskatchewan people, blocking witnesses like Laurie 
Pushor, a civil servant supposedly, that works up just a hall in 
this building, Mr. Speaker, who should be there to serve 
Saskatchewan people. And as a civil servant, if that’s his role, 
he should be there before this committee to answer questions. 
Or Bill Boyd who’s now of course out of politics, Mr. Speaker, 
who was allowed a graceful exit by this Premier, who, the 
Premier actually highlighted, was the DNA of the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker. These are people that should be before this 
committee. 
 
Of course we see the chain of emails, Mr. Speaker, that 
implicate the Premier’s office, that connect Laurie Pushor, that 
connect the former minister, that highlight things such as the 
fact that this appraisal now appears to be nothing more than 
some sort of bogus appraisal to prop up an exorbitant price for, 
you know, to pay to a donor of the Sask Party, and with no 
answers from this government as to the true motivations in this 
deal. You know, I remember one of the emails . . . You know, if 
I go back here, I think it actually says that maybe we should 
meet just to say we did. You know, that’s the culture of 
accountability by this government. 
 
And of course the Ministry of Highways was actually looking 
to acquire these lands, to procure these lands at the same very 
time. But the minister at the time, Bill Boyd, you know, had a 
different set of plans, along I guess with Laurie Pushor, but with 
no coordination with Highways, so Highways was proceeding. 
They would have either negotiated some sort of purchase; they 
may have expropriated the land; but instead of course, instead 
of course . . . And I think the former minister of Highways is 
departing here at this time. But I guess I can’t speak — sorry — 
to the presence of the . . . I’m new around here, Mr. Speaker. 
But the Ministry of Highways of course was working and 
resources were moving ahead. And instead, you know, Bill 
Boyd, Laurie Pushor, and all the Premier’s office coordinated 
the purchase of this land for an exorbitant price, paying many 
times more than this land was valued. 
 
At the end of the day, Saskatchewan people deserve 
accountability. They deserve trust in their government. They’re 
certainly not getting it from the operation opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re hearing different things from the leadership 
candidates to serve as premier for a short period of time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We hear . . . I think actually it’s laughable in a way. We have 
the former Justice minister who used to sit in the front bench, 
defend this deal day after day after day as we called for judicial 
inquiries and calling for some accountability. Now he has 
joined the call for a public inquiry. And I guess we’ll see, if he 
wins, whether or not he’s going to be true to his word on that 

front. 
 
We hear something similar from the member from University. 
We hear a few of the other candidates more interested in I guess 
attacking the reproductive rights and choices of women than 
entering into a meaningful discussion about accountability on 
the GTH deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then of course we see the entry of the latest candidate into 
that leadership race. I think he called, something to the effect of 
his own worst nightmare I believe, Mr. Speaker. I think he did 
quote. He said something to the effect that all those candidates 
have either been on the front benches or in the backrooms, Mr. 
Speaker. And I guess that would be the case. 
 
But clearly we have a Sask Party with a culture of entitlement, a 
culture that doesn’t permit accountability and transparency, that 
isn’t up to the task of ensuring Saskatchewan people deserve 
the answers they deserve on this deal. 
 
I wrote the RCMP. I believe I was the first person to write and 
call for an investigation back in early 2016, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
entered in with our caucus to call for a full judicial inquiry. And 
the more we learn, that judicial inquiry will likely need to be 
extended right through the entire bypass as well and have an 
understanding of the land deals there, Mr. Speaker, and the 
decisions of this government and the connections to that 
government. But what’s clear is that certainly we can’t take this 
government at its word, and certainly we can’t trust them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we’ll continue to work to make sure we have accountability 
on this front. You know, as an official opposition, as a team 
that’s working to serve as the next government in 
Saskatchewan, we’ll ensure that there’s ultimate accountability 
for the people of this province because they deserve so much 
better than a government that blocks accountability, doesn’t 
provide answers, and wastes the hard-earned dollars of the 
people of this province. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So I’ll certainly be supporting the strong and thoughtful motion 
by the member from Nutana. And we’ll fight for accountability 
on this GTH land scandal every step of the way. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Cannington is calling 
a point of order. I’d ask him to briefly state his point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the member 
for Regina Rosemont’s comments, and him being a senior 
member of the House, I would like to point out that he referred 
to the Premier as misleading the public, implying that he was 
lying to the public, Mr. Speaker, which is clearly against the 
rules of this Assembly. And I would ask that he rise, withdraw 
those remarks, and apologize to the Assembly. 
 



3078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

Further, Mr. Speaker, during his comments, he referred to 
Laurie Pushor, a public employee, as a so-called public servant, 
an insult that that individual does not have the ability to stand 
on the floor of this House and defend himself. So I would ask 
that he withdraw that remark as well and apologize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I withdraw and apologize. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has withdrawn and 
apologized. I recognize the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
speak against the motion put forward by the MLA from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Global Transportation Hub has been a tremendously large 
undertaking by this government to help fulfill this government’s 
vision and four goals that it has established for this province. 
Let’s remind everyone what that vision is: “. . . to be the best 
place in Canada — to live, to work, to start a business, to get an 
education, to raise a family and to build a life.” The four goals 
are: sustained growth and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people; meet the challenges of growth; secure a better quality of 
life for all Saskatchewan people; and deliver responsive and 
responsible government. 
 

The Global Transportation Hub has and will continue to 
contribute to the Saskatchewan plan for growth through the 
following key objectives: investing in infrastructure 
required for growth; supporting increased trade, investment 
and exports through international engagement; assisting in 
advancing Saskatchewan’s natural resource assets and 
strengths through our transportation design. 

 
Global transportation hubs are not a new concept. As speed and 
demand to market continues to play a role in distribution 
decisions, many shippers are evaluating which distribution 
locations would be ideal. Each distribution hub in North 
America is unique in more than their location but also their 
logistics opportunities that lie in each area. They all have one 
thing in common: they help move countless products through 
their supply chains. 
 
So let’s review the background and decision making that went 
behind a few of these key global transportation hubs that have 
developed around North America. Southern California is a top 
distribution area for numerous industries including electronics 
and apparel. One of the selling features of Chino, California is it 
has a close proximity to rail, interstates, and an international 
airport. 
 
Dallas, Texas is centrally located for all of North America and 
connects a number of major roadways and destination ports 
throughout North America. Many industrial and automotive 
shippers distribute out of this area. In 48 hours, truck shipments 
from Dallas can reach over 35 per cent of the US [United 
States] population and over 98 per cent of the population can be 
reached by rail. Its central location means that a majority of 
North America can be reached within a three-hour flight. With 

its unique proximity to Mexico, it serves as an ideal gateway to 
supporting the NAFTA [North American Free Trade 
Agreement] shipping lanes. 
 
Toronto, Ontario is considered the largest distribution hub in 
Canada. Its proximity to US and Canadian markets makes it an 
ideal location with access to over 135 million people within a 
five-mile radius. Surrounding infrastructure makes it an ideal 
port to support transportation modes through air, rail, and road. 
 
Chicago, Illinois has become the distribution hotspot of North 
America. The area moves around $3 trillion worth of goods 
annually. It has become the third-largest intermodal port in the 
world. It also has three major airports servicing it. Many 
Midwest farmers utilize Chicago and the distribution solutions 
in the area to reach markets across North America. 
 
Here understand some of the similarities. Do we see a parallel 
between this? Let’s take the background factors of all these 
successful global transportation hubs, these successful 
transportation ports and let’s look now at what the potential the 
Regina Global Transportation Hub has. The Regina hub now 
has access to both national railways as well as the main railway 
serving the United States. This hub provides inward and 
outward potential to reach ports in Vancouver, Portland, Seattle, 
New Orleans, Houston; the Great Lake ports of Chicago, 
Minneapolis, Milwaukee; the eastern grain terminals or the 
eastern terminals of Toronto and Montreal. Within 48 hours, 
truckloads moving in and out of the Regina Global 
Transportation Hub could reach destinations in LA [Los 
Angeles], Vancouver, Houston, Montreal, or even Anchorage, 
Alaska if we need to get there. In that 48-hour window over 50 
per cent of North America’s population can take deliveries in or 
out of Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada. 
 
Like LA, Dallas, Chicago, or Toronto, the majority of North 
America’s gateways are within a few hours flight or a short 
road trip. The borders of our largest trading partner, the United 
States, can almost be seen from the highest point of the Global 
Transportation Hub located in Regina. In 2016 Saskatchewan 
exported close to $30 billion worth of goods to our largest 
market such as the United States, but also around the world into 
China, India, Brazil, and Japan. The foundation of 
Saskatchewan’s economy has been the province’s ability to 
export its products to other markets. 
 
Key export sectors such as the oil and gas, but the agriculture 
and food, the mining and minerals and manufacturing 
technology sectors have all contributed to this province’s strong 
trade performance over the past several years. 
 
The United States remains Saskatchewan’s most important 
trading partner. The United States accounts for over half of this 
province’s total exports. It’s not surprising given the close trade 
relationship that Saskatchewan shares with the United States. 
However the province has also postured market diversification 
strategies and continues to build strong trade ties with countries 
in Asia, South America, the Middle East, North Africa. Markets 
such as China, India, Japan, Brazil, and Mexico, they’re 
becoming large consumers of Saskatchewan’s products and 
continue to play a very large role in the economic prosperity of 
this province. 
 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

In 2016 China and India accounted for approximately 18 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s export sales. The province’s top 10 
export markets accounted for roughly 83 per cent of its exports. 
In 2016 Saskatchewan received $7.5 billion worth of goods 
from the United States. This really reflects our integrated 
supply chain. Oil, still the number one import from the United 
States, however non-energy products such as recreational 
trailers, herbicides, ag machinery such as tractors and combines, 
and motor vehicles are really the key items that we import from 
the United States. In 2016 manufactured goods represent over 
95 per cent of the value of Saskatchewan’s imports. China, 
Mexico, Germany, and Japan are among the top five sources of 
Saskatchewan’s imports; 2013 these four countries accounted 
for 7.3 per cent of the value of the province’s imports. 
Saskatchewan has a trade surplus with all regions of the world. 
 
So now this little economic history lesson of the province is 
really a simple reminder of the role that moving goods, whether 
inbound or outbound, plays in the importance of the economy 
of Saskatchewan. With our pursuit of our Saskatchewan growth 
plan and with our provincial economy shifting from the role of 
being a primary supplier of raw products and resources to a 
more sophisticated one — that is one of providing value-added 
production, middle-process and final-process goods — 
production, shipping, and logistics are going to play an even 
larger role in our export numbers. 
 
It’s the Global Transportation Hub which is part of 
Saskatchewan’s commitment to developing a supply chain, 
logistics, and transportation infrastructure that is going to play a 
significant part of supporting our role in the global supply 
chain. What sets it apart from all other inland port authorities in 
Canada is that it is the only autonomous and self-governing port 
in the country. It offers a single point of contact for our clients 
that sets it apart from any other port or logistics hub in the 
country. It also retains a foreign trade zone status that offers 
foreign investors single window access to Canada’s duty and 
tax relief programming. 
 
So unlike traditional land developers, the Global Transportation 
Hub was not designed to be a for-profit enterprise, but really an 
infrastructure design that’s for trade for generations to come. 
The very short time frame that this self-governing port . . . It 
has 12 significant clients on board, helping create new jobs and 
new types of business opportunities for our Saskatchewan 
companies. 
 
There are currently ongoing discussions with over 40 qualified 
prospects. Over the last five years, the Global Transportation 
Hub has had discussions with companies and organizations in 
over 52 countries. They’re interested in this location because of 
our stable government and our abilities to service and work 
with governments around the world. They appreciate and 
respect our open for trade policy and our willingness to get 
things done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub is really, truly a 
good news story for the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. “The GTH has the opportunity to be a major 
player in the continental freight movement network and . . . put 
Saskatchewan on the map.” That’s from Tiffany Melvin, the 
North American Strategy for Competitiveness. “The appeal of 
the GTH opportunity [this is a quote that comes from Glen Hill, 

vice-president of Colliers] is going to increase in the years 
ahead as the Regina bypass moves towards completion.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately we do not need to remind 
the voters of Saskatchewan what happened during the NDP 
times. It was called SPUDCO, the Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company, which has been described as a 
pseudo-public-private partnership between SaskWater and Lake 
Diefenbaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion 
put forward by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and support the motion put forward by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, the people elected to serve in this House, we 
have one job. That one job is to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, to improve their health, to improve their quality 
of life. That’s not a simple job. There are competing priorities, 
economic priorities, geographic, demographic. It’s 
extraordinarily complex. There are many pressures as we try to 
do that work well. 
 
And to do that work, we need to be guided by a sense of equity 
and of justice so that we’re trying to reach the best possible 
outcomes. And that means we have to do that work in a way 
that is blind to personal and partisan connections. We need to 
be trusted and trustworthy to be able to do that one job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot in any way be, or even be perceived to 
be, beholden to outside interests or to be making ourselves or 
our friends wealthy through this province. We can’t be seen to 
be serving companies that fund the campaigns over the needs of 
the people of Saskatchewan. And any such impression erodes 
the trust that people have in this essential institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is one important issue that has eroded 
that trust. We have certainly heard about this on the doorstep in 
Saskatoon Meewasin — last spring I heard this non-stop — and 
as we’ve travelled the province over the summer. We’ve been 
hearing over and over about people’s growing mistrust of this 
government, related specifically to the GTH, though not only to 
the GTH. Certainly this particular land deal, a land deal that 
inflated prices, inflated prices for land, using public money to 
purchase that land, and in a way that was in favour of friends, 
donors, business associates of ministers of the Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a very disturbing erosion of trust. There’s 
another erosion, I suppose, where we have the poor drainage 
that the member of Nutana . . . There’s the erosion that’s 
flooding nearby farms. But it’s more the erosion of trust that’s 
the big concern when you see Crown money being used, 
SaskPower money being used to facilitate these questionable 
land deals, and not seeming to actually produce any activity on 
behalf of SaskPower on that land. 
 
We see a refusal to reveal details, the blocking of witnesses that 
should be testifying, people who know the exact details of when 



3080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

communication happened, whether or not these associates and 
donors were given information before the decisions were made 
to expropriate this land. There are individuals who know that 
information and they’re not being allowed to testify. 
 
[11:45] 
 
We also see the handing over of land at the cost of 
expropriation to major companies, companies from out of 
Saskatchewan. What is the purpose of this, Mr. Speaker? Well 
it’s really difficult to know without having a full investigation, a 
full understanding of what has gone on. 
 
This is certainly not the only issue that has undermined the trust 
of the Saskatchewan people in this government. Certainly the 
large donations, as we continue to mention. The member for 
Saskatoon Centre brought up that petition again today. Over $6 
million from corporations donating to this government, this 
government’s political party. Nearly 3 million of that money 
coming from out of province, from major companies outside the 
province. And there’s strong connections between the 
companies that have donated and the contracts that have been 
awarded and the policies that have been enacted. Policies and 
service of corporate profit over the best interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s also the issue up until a few months 
ago of the Premier’s personal top-up which delivered hundreds 
of thousands of dollars from the Sask Party, dollars that came 
from those corporate donors to the Premier. And there’s the 
ownership of that Premier of stocks in companies that he 
personally wrote a letter to, inviting them to set up shop here in 
Saskatchewan — using his power, using his influence as 
Premier to invite the benefit of companies that would benefit 
him. Mr. Speaker, these issues erode the trust of the public. 
 
And right down to the most recent issue of the emails. Emails 
that might be, that might be a minor thing; okay, you used your 
Gmail account. It might be a minor thing, but in this context 
when you’ve a government that has been so intent on hiding the 
information, so intent on avoiding transparency, of avoiding 
accountability, well that issue suddenly becomes very germane, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’ve seen the leadership 
candidates from the Sask Party taking this moment to try to 
distance themselves from some of this distrust. They recognize 
the impact of the GTH and other scandals on the trust that 
people have in this party and they’re distancing themselves, 
admittedly by degree. 
 
You have Ms. Koch, who has expressed no interest in a public 
. . . Ms. Koch has expressed no interest in a public inquiry or 
any real change. We have the member from Meadow Lake who 
suggested that, well we’ve made very, very serious mistakes 
and we should divest from the GTH and he would have fired 
Bill Boyd and Laurie Pushor as well. But now he’s supporting 
the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook and he’s gotten a lot 
quieter on the issue because the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook believes the processes are in place that . . . 
seems that he thinks everything is just fine. 
 
We have the member for Willowgrove who’s said that mistakes 
have been made and that this really should be handed over to 
the private sector. It should be sold. We have the member from 

Regina University’s gone a little further. She has asked for a 
public inquiry. She said that we need a public inquiry to really 
get to the bottom of this. And we have the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest who apparently has seen the light and 
asked that we shine a light on this issue, asked for a public 
inquiry, asked that we strengthen the conflict of interest 
regulations in order to avoid this kind of the behaviour in the 
past. 
 
And then we have the newest entry, Mr. Clarke, who’s 
described how he’s sick of the scandals, how people are sick of 
the scandals and the insider deals, and says that we should be 
above reproach. And I couldn’t agree more with that last 
statement. We need to be above reproach. For us to have the 
confidence of the public and the work we do in this House, we 
cannot give, we cannot in any way be enriching our friends. We 
cannot in any way be using the action of this House to advance 
partisan interests. We need to be above reproach. 
 
And we’ve started to see some of that, whisperings in that 
direction from the leadership candidates as they’ve started to 
talk about a message of renewed trust. But I’ve got to tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that message of renewed trust is a little bit 
of a tough sell. It’s a tough sell because of some of the actions 
that have been going on during the Sask Party leadership race. 
 
We’ve seen recently the first announcement of the donors to the 
Sask Party. And it was very interesting to see. Ms. Koch, 41 per 
cent of the donors to her campaign were corporations. The 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, 52 per cent, over half. The 
member for Saskatoon Northwest, 71 per cent of the donations 
were coming from corporations. We’ve seen corporations from 
outside the province, numbered companies, unidentified 
numbered companies donating to the tune of — and this one 
really blows me away — Saskatoon Willowgrove, 89 per cent, 
89 per cent of the donations to that, the leading fundraiser in the 
campaign, 89 per cent from corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that people continue to have 
concerns about how much they can trust the leadership in this 
party. Mr. Mandryk, the journalist here in town, described it as 
a corporate-driven party with two-thirds of every dollar coming 
from business. 
 
And we had Tammy Robert, the Saskatchewan blogger, who in 
her article, “. . . Who’s Buying Saskatchewan’s Next Premier” 
said that “Political candidates in Saskatchewan are not players, 
they are pawns who can be bought and sold to the highest 
bidder.” 
 
Now I don’t believe that the majority of the people in this 
House can be bought and sold. But that is the perception. That’s 
the perception in the media. That’s the perception in the public 
and the actions around corporate and union donations, the 
actions around the GTH, the actions around conflict of interest 
questions, around ownership of stocks — all of these contribute 
to that erosion of trust. And the GTH is exemplary of that loss 
of trust. 
 
And this motion and its call for greater transparency and greater 
accountability is so important for the good of this profession, 
for the good of all in this Chamber, and more importantly, for 
the good of the province as a whole. That’s why we need rules 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

in place and, more importantly, we need to follow those rules. 
We need to see those rules in practice fostering a culture of trust 
and ethics in politics. I’m glad to stand in support of this 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
I’d like to say a few words about the Global Transportation Hub 
and all of the tremendous benefits it provides for the 
Saskatchewan economy and the Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, the NDP across the aisle over there, they always like 
to characterize the Global Transportation Hub as something 
that’s a burden to the province. And quite frankly, you know, 
Mr. Speaker, that couldn’t be further from the truth. Mr. 
Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub already employs over 
800 people with full-time jobs, and that does not include the 
1,800 construction jobs. 
 
Having spent over 35 years in the transportation industry, I can 
tell you that this will be a great project for the future of 
Saskatchewan, and it already is. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
an export province, and if we want to build and expand our 
exports, it’s only natural that we are using the latest in designs 
and technology like we are seeing at the Global Transportation 
Hub. Saskatchewan’s economy and its history are built on its 
ability to export its products to other markets. Key markets such 
as oil and gas, agriculture and food, mining and minerals, 
manufacturing and technology have all contributed to 
Saskatchewan’s strong trade performance over the past several 
years. 
 
United States remains Saskatchewan’s most important and 
largest trading partner, accounting for almost half of the 
province’s total exports. But markets such as China, India, 
Japan, Brazil, and Mexico are becoming larger consumers of 
Saskatchewan’s products, and they are continuing to play a 
larger role in the economic prosperity of the province. All of 
these markets and many more mean we will have to have an 
excellent transportation system to accommodate the flow of 
goods as we continue to grow. 
 
And this is where the Global Transportation Hub provides such 
a benefit to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, with access by rail to 
ocean ports, Saskatchewan’s many products will no longer be 
landlocked and unable to have timely shipments all around the 
world. The speed of delivery of our products will significantly 
increase our exports if we stay committed to having the leading 
edge in transportation solutions like the Global Transportation 
Hub provides. With benefits such as a designation of being a 
foreign trade zone, a taxing authority, and of maintaining 
autonomy, all benefits that we will enjoy, the Global 
Transportation Hub is a long-term investment and its growth is 
consistent with other inland port developments across North 
America. This is an infrastructure designed to support trade for 
generations to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub is already seeing 
4,800 weekly truck movements and 60,000 intermodal lifts per 
year. Our province created the Global Transportation Hub to 
grow our province and our economy and our support of all the 

businesses operating or looking to operate at the Global 
Transportation Hub. Private investment is already at 485 
million, and that investment is creating jobs for our people and 
it’s attracting others from all over the world. 
 
There is also lots of room for growth, Mr. Speaker. Of the 1,800 
acres that comprise the Global Transportation Hub, over 700 
acres are already sold to or are in operation by clients. The 
Global Transportation Hub is admired by industry peers who 
understand that logistics parks such as the Global 
Transportation Hub will take 25 to 30 years to reach full 
maturation. The Global Transportation Hub will undoubtedly 
create jobs for decades to come. 
 
This self-governing inland port already supports 12 clients 
signed on and has tax revenue of 15 million in personal income 
tax and 17 million in incremental diesel fuel tax. Current 
businesses include the Loblaw Companies, Canada’s largest 
food retailer which supplies over 250 stores from its distribution 
centre at the Global Transportation Hub; Slinkemo Enterprises, 
providing container storage, drayage, transport, maintenance, 
and handling services. Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: they import and distribute products across the 
province. SaskPower, and SaskPower will operate a new 
logistics complex at the Global Transportation Hub as of 2019. 
Morguard Investment: Morguard is a leader in Canadian real 
estate services, offering warehouse space for lease and 
industrial land for development on the Global Transportation 
Hub footprint. Future Transfer: they specialize in third party 
logistics, warehousing, packaging, and distribution services. 
Emterra Group, Regina’s curbside recycler, processes 50,000 
tons of materials annually at the Global Transportation Hub; 
Consolidated FastFrate who offers cross-dock and LTL 
transportation solutions to major Canadian centres. Canadian 
Pacific Railway: the CP Rail mainline access to the Global 
Transportation Hub connects to seaports and key North 
American markets; and Brightenview, a Saskatchewan-based 
international business development company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can see, this is a very diverse assortment of 
companies which will only grow more as we continue to 
diversify. The Global Transportation Hub business development 
activities are very aggressive, with ongoing discussions with 
more than 40 qualified prospects. I think it should also be noted 
that the Global Transportation Hub has interacted with 
companies and organizations in over 52 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important that others outside of 
government weigh in on the importance of the Global 
Transportation Hub. I’ve got a couple of testimonials. 
Hopefully I have time to share them. 
 
Steve McLellan, the CEO of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, quoted: 
 

Inland ports are huge economic engines and huge drivers 
for our job creation, growing local companies, and 
providing opportunities to capitalize on cargo shipping 
through the province — having trade stop here rather than 
drive right on through. 

 
That’s a portion of the quote but, Mr. Speaker, with all the 
benefits to our province and to our economy, I cannot find it to 



3082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

support the member by Saskatoon Nutana. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Trade is essential to 
our economy and the GTH is designed to support trade for 
generations to come. Trade allows us to bring more money into 
our province which we can in turn spend on schools, hospitals, 
and daycares, or potentially some of the initiatives the member 
from Meewasin is promising in his leadership campaign. And 
yet he was arrested in 2001 for protesting against free trade. 
 
This question is for the member from Regina Rosemont. Do 
you support the member from Meewasin’s anti-trade stance? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course New 
Democrats have long promoted the trade interests of 
Saskatchewan to make sure that we have freer fair trade that 
works for Saskatchewan’s interests, and that we’ll always look 
out for the . . . And there’s complexity to any trade deal, and 
we’ll make sure we know the detail of that as well. I do find it 
disappointing though for that member, a member that I actually 
think brings a lot to this Assembly, that would be sent in with a 
question like that when we have a matter like the GTH before 
us, a matter of trust with Saskatchewan people, a matter that’s 
ripped millions of dollars off from Saskatchewan people at a 
time when we should be standing united for accountability in 
this scandal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I found these 
speeches from the government side very interesting. Three 
speeches, 30 minutes — not once did they use the word 
transparency or accountability. These are foreign concepts to 
the folks over there. 
 
Now I have a question to the member from Westview. And my 
question is, does he agree with the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove when he said that the government should, and I 
quote, “should not have been involved in the Global 
Transportation Hub venture” and would have, and I quote 
again, “immediately begin action to sell the GTH”? What do 
you think? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Well thank you for the question from the 
member opposite. I’d like to start out by saying, you know, our 
government supports all of the businesses at the GTH. And this 
is a generational project that’s going to create and continue to 
create jobs. We’ve seen significant investment already at the 
Global Transportation Hub and hundreds, well over 800 jobs 
created and 1,800 construction jobs. I think that’s very 
important that we always, you know, talk about the important 

things that are happening over there, 800 jobs. Maybe they 
don’t think across the floor that 800 jobs are very important, but 
to me those 800 people are very important. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, the Global Transportation Hub 
was created to grow our province and our economy. It’s 
bringing investment to our province. It’s creating jobs for 
Saskatchewan people and attracting new people to the province. 
There has been $485 million in private investment in the GTH. 
It has created 862 full-time jobs and 1,804 construction jobs. 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin: would you shut down the GTH, push out businesses 
out of our province, and terminate jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, trade is extremely important. It’s 
extremely important to our economy. And the member 
previously mentioned some previous actions of mine around a 
trade agreement once upon a time, which was a very bad trade 
agreement and never actually went through. Because it wasn’t 
actually going to protect human rights, protect environmental 
rights, it wasn’t a good deal. And the GTH, while it may have a 
very important role, has not been a good deal in the way it’s 
been delivered. 
 
It’s been a good deal for friends of Bill Boyd. It’s been a good 
deal for certain landowners. It’s been a good deal for certain 
companies. 
 
I would like to see you manage the trade . . . I would like to see 
this government manage our trade efforts in a way that don’t 
waste money enriching their friends, and would be focused on 
getting jobs for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We certainly 
think jobs are important on this side. In fact, I’ve called on the 
Minister of the Economy recently to create a comprehensive 
job-creation strategy that specifically highlights women and the 
rising EI [employment insurance] rates that women are facing 
right now, particularly in light of cuts to education and health 
care that this government has brought on. We certainly see jobs 
as important. 
 
There needs to be a comprehensive strategy though, Mr. 
Speaker, not relying simply on one particular project. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Westview. Mr. 
Speaker, what does the member for Saskatoon Westview think 
it says about the GTH that the moment the last minister for the 
GTH left his position, he called it a mistake and promised to 
sell it off? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

Mr. Buckingham: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview for the question. I think 
it’s always important that we talk about jobs, talking about jobs 
for both men and women. And you know, of the 64,000 jobs 
created in Saskatchewan, I would assume that a lot of those 
would have been women. So I think it’s an important question, 
and I think . . . 24,000, according to the Minister of the 
Economy. So I think it’s important that we always talk about 
that. It is important to create jobs for everyone in this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 
dependent on trade as 75 per cent of what we produce is 
exported. The GTH is a long-term investment with 
infrastructure designed to support trade for generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new federal NDP leader, Jagmeet Singh, has 
an interesting view on trade saying, “We’ve been very clear. It 
is not about free trade. It’s about fair trade.” Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the member from Regina Rosemont. Do you 
support Canada pursuing more borders for Saskatchewan 
companies across the globe and for foreign companies to invest 
here? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I mean, 
Saskatchewan New Democrats have always worked to make 
sure that we’re building the economy. We recognize the 
importance of exports and work hard to create jobs and 
investment within this province, and trade is important. 
 
But so is a government to act in a principled way that serves the 
interests of the people of this province. 
 
You know, it defies common sense at a time that we see here 
right now for a government to have an unlevel playing field for 
procurement, Mr. Speaker, an actual process that shuts out — if 
you can imagine — Saskatchewan companies in the process of 
procurement, Mr. Speaker. We have a time right now where we 
should be working towards a strong economic recovery. Instead 
we have a government, when it comes to our Crowns, when it 
comes to procurement, when it comes to deal after deal, that are 
selling out the interests of Saskatchewan people and businesses. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the member 
from Regina Pasqua agree with the member from Meadow 
Lake, who made a cameo appearance in their leadership race, 
that Bill Boyd should have been fired long ago? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it seems 
like the member opposite has not visited the GTH. What I 
would like to do, I would like to invite all those members to 
come in the GTH and visit that with open eyes, Mr. Speaker. 

When I see the GTH, I see more jobs, more people working on 
there. I see the GTH, Global Transportation Hub, as paying 
people’s mortgages. What I see in Saskatchewan, it is an icon in 
the business world, and go there and see the connectivity of the 
GTH with the business world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Provincial Auditor has looked into the Global Transportation 
Hub with full authority and access to all documents and the 
individuals involved. She found no evidence of conflict of 
interest or wrongdoing. Well the members opposite didn’t like 
that because it didn’t fit their rhetoric, so they demanded the 
RCMP look into the matter. So government has agreed to give 
their full co-operation to the RCMP for that review. 
 
My question is to the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Once the 
RCMP has concluded their review, will your party stop their 
smear campaign against the hard-working businesses that have 
invested in the Global Transportation Hub and our province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
unfortunate that no one could use the words accountability or 
transparency once in this whole debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Ride-Sourcing Network 
 
Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to enter in some comments with respect to the motion 
that’s on the table here. And it’s always an honour to follow 
such a vigorous debate on behalf of the people of the province 
on Thursdays after our infamous 75-minute debate here, Mr. 
Speaker, and thank all members for participating in that debate. 
 
But I am happy to enter in some comments here today, Mr. 
Speaker. And at the end of my comments, I will be moving a 
motion, Mr. Speaker, a motion with respect to supporting the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the 75-minute debate has 
expired. We are moving on. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Moe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I note, I notice that maybe 
question period today was possibly one minute too long, one 
too many questions there, Mr. Speaker. And the 75-minute 
debate might have been a minute short, Mr. Speaker, in light of 
people still trying to participate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But at the end of my comments, I will be speaking and moving 



3084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

a motion with respect to supporting this government’s decision 
to work with municipalities across this province, both large and 
small communities, to establish a ride-sourcing network or to 
look at the opportunities for us to have a ride-sharing network 
here in the province. 
 
Not only for the customer experience and to expand the 
opportunities for customers to actually participate in a 
ride-sharing experience or in a taxi-like service or a service 
where they can have a driver transport them, whether they be 
young and old, to work or whatever that may be, Mr. Speaker, 
but also as another tool in the tool box. Here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a tool so desperately needed, I would day, in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, to help us address the drinking and 
driving rates that we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This will by no means be a golden arrow or a solution, but it 
will be another tool in the tool box for us to make some impact 
on, hopefully what is some impact on drinking and driving rates 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll speak to some statistics from other cities around the 
world, Mr. Speaker, on both larger and smaller cities as 
ride-sharing is starting to expand into . . . out of the cities that 
we think in the hundreds of thousands of individuals, the 
hundreds of thousands of people, but down into cities in the 
tens of thousands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Saskatchewan that starts to affect communities that we 
know, aside from Saskatoon and Regina, here in Saskatchewan, 
communities like Swift Current or communities such as Moose 
Jaw, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. These are 
communities that we want to look into the opportunities to 
incorporate some type of platform for ride sharing here in the 
province of Saskatchewan in an effort to enhance the access to 
that customer experience, enhance the customer experience 
itself, Mr. Speaker, but also as I said be a tool in the tool box to 
reducing our drinking and driving rates here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are different platforms for ride sharing, Mr. Speaker, that 
are utilized around the world, quite honestly. I was talking with 
some individuals of a ride-sharing service last night, the 
Minister of Economy and some of the people at the Agribition 
actually last night, Mr. Speaker, that have a ride-sharing service 
that is available through an app in the country of Kazakhstan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ones we’re quite used to here in North America — not so 
much right in the province of Saskatchewan — would be 
ride-sharing services such as Uber and Lyft, Mr. Speaker. But 
also, in many ways, it really is a similar service to what’s being 
offered in many of our urban centres. Just the access or the 
dispatch of the service is a little different, going online through 
an app, Mr. Speaker, and having your payment processes 
online, and also the accountability of the experience, both from 
the driver’s perspective as well as the passenger’s perspective, 
also being online. Whereas in the taxi industry, Mr. Speaker, we 
have moved to online applications there as well, I notice in 
Regina and Saskatoon, but traditionally has been a call service 
and a telephone or verbal dispatch, Mr. Speaker, in that 
industry. 

[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about different ride-sharing options 
and the platforms that are available to communities across the 
province of Saskatchewan, I have experienced — or at least 
observed — a ride-share service at its most, you know, basic 
and really its most primitive measures, if you will, here in the 
province in a community that I visited a number of years ago. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what it really consisted of was in a seniors’ 
hall where people gathered periodically three to four days a 
week, a number of contacts on the billboard in the seniors’ hall, 
Mr. Speaker, with their telephone number. And at the top of it 
said, if you need a ride, call. And the list was there, Mr. 
Speaker. The most primitive of ride-sharing apps, if you will, 
although it wasn’t on a smartphone, was actually on the 
billboard at a seniors’ hall out in a small community in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks to the opportunity of people in 
rural Saskatchewan. And I think of a close friend of mine, a 
retiree in a rural community that would be, you know, quite 
happy to put their name forward to participate in a service as a 
driver for a service like this, as I know most of the people in the 
community and the surrounding area. And they’d be happy to 
go out and give them a ride home, sometimes even irrespective 
of the money, just as much so to, you know, get out and 
continue to visit with people in the community. 
 
So there are opportunities, untapped opportunities I think, when 
we start a discussion like this with respect to ride sharing, that 
we may not even understand or anticipate as we go into that 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. Those are some of the opportunities 
that I think may arise as we start to enter into this discussion in 
both rural and urban communities here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have utilized a ride-sharing service, Mr. Speaker, in some of 
my travels, and I can think of a fairly lengthy trip I took. I think 
it was Uber I used at the time, Mr. Speaker, from Baton Rouge 
. . . Pardon me, it was from New Orleans up to Baton Rouge, if 
I remember correctly. What we were down in that particular 
area for at the time, Mr. Speaker, was during my time as 
Environment minister. We were down there participating in the 
State Ag and Rural Leaders Conference. 
 
And I can’t remember. I think it was in Baton Rouge, but we 
were down early for a few meetings with some of the Secretary 
of Energy . . . the Secretary of Energy for the state of Louisiana 
and some of his team, if you will, Mr. Speaker, to talk about, if 
you will, a carbon capture and storage and the opportunity to 
utilize carbon capture and storage on some of the refineries that 
are operating in that Louisiana area, in that New Orleans area, 
Mr. Speaker. And there’s a great opportunity there, that they 
were interested in what we have done at Boundary dam 3, and if 
there’s any of the knowledge that we had that they would be 
able to utilize to enhance their efforts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I learned a funny thing with respect to carbon capture and 
storage, or more so enhanced oil recovery, and some of the 
carbon that was flowing through a pipeline that had been built 
in Louisiana — a 36-inch pipeline, fairly significant size — 
from Mississippi over to, I believe, it was the west Texas 
oilfield where they were using the carbon for enhanced oil 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3085 

recovery. Mr. Speaker, I was at . . . I asked where that carbon 
was coming from and I asked, you know, was there a potential 
to take some off of these six large refineries here and actually 
put it in that pipe and utilize some of that carbon rather than 
spewing it into the atmosphere. And they agreed, that’s what 
they wanted to talk about was exactly that opportunity. 
 
So I did ask where the carbon did come from, and apparently it 
comes from a hole they drilled in the ground over in 
Mississippi, and there’s a tremendously large cavern of carbon 
dioxide there that they drill. And they actually extract that 
carbon dioxide, move it through the pipeline over into west 
Texas and then use that carbon for enhanced oil recovery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think in light of the effort that has been made here in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the opportunity that this 
knowledge now can provide to really make an impact on 
emissions, not just here in our province of 1.165 million people, 
Mr. Speaker — a fairly industrious province but small in the 
scope of the world in our population and in our emissions I 
might add, Mr. Speaker — but a tremendous opportunity to take 
that knowledge into other areas of the world and to utilize it and 
to further refine it, Mr. Speaker, and to really make an impact in 
what is a global conversation around our carbon content in our 
atmosphere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m, you know, pleased to be here today to say that ride 
sharing actually had a part in lowering our greenhouse gas 
emissions, Mr. Speaker, and having a conversation around 
climate change and what Saskatchewan has to offer the world, 
Mr. Speaker, as we move forward with this very important 
conversation. 
 
And I would add that as this conversation continues and the 
Minister of the Environment and the Premier, Mr. Speaker, 
have been very active globally in this conversation, that I would 
put forward this . . . Easy there, easy there, Mr. Speaker. I 
would put forward this . . . I’m sorry to alarm you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I would put forward this, that it is in the world’s 
interest. And the world might need much more of 
Saskatchewan’s innovation and Saskatchewan’s knowledge 
when it comes to a number of subjects, but in particular on 
reducing our carbon content in the atmosphere, the 
opportunities that we have in sequestration such as carbon 
capture and storage, such as what we’re doing in agriculture, the 
opportunities we have in what we’ve done in our mining 
industry, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done in our energy industry. 
 
When there is another energy well that’s drilled in the world, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it should be drilled in Saskatchewan 
because of the suite of environmental regulations we have here 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. When there’s another mine that is 
being looked at on the global scale, I think it should be looked 
at in the province of Saskatchewan if we have that natural 
resource here, Mr. Speaker, because of the suite of 
environmental regulations that we operate under in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When there is a technology that has the opportunity to be 
exported around the world such as zero till pulse crop 
technology, Mr. Speaker, developed here in the province, that 
technology needs to be recognized either through article 6 of the 

Paris accord or at the very least we need to be very loud and 
boisterous with our customers, Mr. Speaker, and remind them 
of the sustainable products, the sustainable natural resource 
products that we develop here in the province of Saskatchewan 
and give to the rest of the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to get back to the bill at hand, that ride 
sharing, Mr. Speaker, played a small part in that, in getting me 
from New Orleans to Baton Rouge so I was able to meet with 
the Secretary of Energy in the state of Louisiana, Mr. Speaker, 
and to talk to them about the knowledge that we have around 
just that technology, Mr. Speaker, that is so important, not only 
to the state of Louisiana but the rest of the world as we move 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I finished my digression. Mr. Speaker, the 
landscape in Saskatchewan . . . I might go down there one more 
time. But the landscape in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a little 
bit different with respect to ride sharing to the landscape in the 
urban centres in many other areas of the nation of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, there are cities, you know, Toronto, Vancouver most 
notably, but even if we go, you know, to Alberta, Mr. Speaker 
. . . A fair number more people in the province of Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, thanks possibly to the members opposite, I might add. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re working on that here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think we should look at opportunities in 
ride sharing to ensure that as we grow our population we have 
all of the opportunities that some of our more populated areas of 
Canada have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have our two centres of Regina and 
Saskatoon that would support, I think, what traditional ride 
sharing would be. But as I look through some of the documents 
that we had, Mr. Speaker, I did notice that Manitoba has passed 
some legislation with respect to enabling the opportunity for 
ride sharing in that province, most notably in the community of 
Winnipeg, but potentially to be looked at at some of the other 
larger communities in that province as well, and ultimately in 
the surrounding areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it says here, and I quote, in a Winnipeg Free Press 
article of September the 18th of this year at 4 a.m. in the 
morning — they work early, these journalists — Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the Progressive Conservative government introduced 
legislation . . . the licensing and regulatory body governing 
the industry — and [this] will let municipalities set the 
rules by which vehicle-for-hire services could operate in 
the province [of Manitoba]. In April, the NDP opposition 
used legislative rules to push back the implementation of 
the Local Vehicles for Hire Act . . . until November. 

 
A little obstinate, Mr. Speaker, but it’ll pass nonetheless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also seeing support in our province to 
explore the opportunities, both rural and urban support here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I would point most notably 
to an article in Global News. And I don’t have the date . . . 
Pardon me, I do have a date, November 21st, 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

According to Saskatoon Mayor Charlie Clark, one of the 
barriers in the past to ride sharing has been the legislation 



3086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2017 

around insurance and licensing at a provincial level leaving 
major cities with their hands tied. 

 
Mr. Speaker, well we’ll do some work with respect to removing 
those barriers so our municipalities can further along with their 
decisions around the opportunities for ride-sharing applications 
that may be available. Or as I said, it may be as simple as the 
billboard in my seniors hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote Ray Orb from the SARM, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe lives not too far from where you live, Mr. 
Speaker. And I quote, “I like the idea if it makes our roads 
safer.” And I will allude to a few documents that I have that 
show that that just may be case in other jurisdictions where ride 
sharing has been introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go on to quote . . . And I think this speaks to at 
least the inference or the idea around this being one of the 
arrows in the quiver, if you will, or one of the opportunities to 
lessen the drinking and driving rates that we have in this 
province. And we need to exercise on every opportunity 
available to us, and this just may be one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
And again I quote: 
 

If a farmer wants to come . . . [down] and take his wife out 
for supper and have a glass of wine he could be more 
relaxed if he knew he had a ride home. People tend to stay 
home more now in the rural areas, so this idea . . . [may] 
bring back [some] social activity [out into areas of rural 
Saskatchewan]. 
 

“We have to make sure that . . . the availability of safe, 
convenient and reliable transportations options. And obviously 
recognizing that a lot of our smaller communities don’t have 
that right now.” Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, that was . . . I’d went 
on to quote Michelle Okere from MADD Saskatchewan who 
had done some work with respect to this being an opportunity to 
lower our drinking and driving rates here in the province as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also been support from certain police 
officers across the province, Mr. Speaker, and a number of 
police officers anecdotally in conversations that I’ve had as I 
travelled the province the last couple of months, Mr. Speaker. 
But I do, most notably, just quote a Regina . . . quote this article 
from 650 CKOM, Mr. Speaker, on November the 16th of 2017: 
“Superintendent Darcy Koch said he’s personally used Uber 
outside the Queen City, and . . . [am very] pleased when it was 
brought up in the legislature last month.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are opportunities for this to trim down 
Saskatchewan high rates of drinking and driving. And I quote 
again from Mr. Koch: “(Uber) is just another one of those 
services. It’s important to get home safe — that’s what our goal 
is.” And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that’s what our 
goal is as all Saskatchewan residents across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the opportunities in rural Saskatchewan 
. . . Traditionally when we think of ride sharing, we think of 
some of the larger centres and we think it might not work in a 
community where I live, Mr. Speaker, a community of 1,500 
people. We actually have a taxi operating in the community 

where I live right now. It wouldn’t be considered a 24-hour 
service such as we would be looking for from some of the 
ride-sharing opportunities, but it is a pre-book service, so you 
are able to pre-book and utilize that service. And I hope she 
does well enough to continue with that service into the future 
for the sake of the region in that area to actually have that 
service that we have not had before, at least on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ride-sharing opportunity may be an 
opportunity for her to actually enhance her service and to 
pre-book some of her rides online through an application. And 
you know, without talking to her or having her look at the 
opportunities there, I don’t think it’s fair for us to close those 
doors, if you will, Mr. Speaker, of her access to what might be a 
larger market for her business, and maybe even to expand that 
business outside of just that one community into others as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note an article with respect to moving into 
the community of Amherst, Massachusetts, a community of 
38,000 people about 25 miles to any major urban centre, Mr. 
Speaker, and over 90 miles from downtown Boston. And there 
are occasional rides from Uber that have come in and out of that 
community, Mr. Speaker, but they have now set up an actual 
Uber service in Amherst, which is a university, has a large 
university student population according to the document here 
that I’m quoting out of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a result there’s been, the public transportation has been 
greatly reduced in the months and the times when the students 
aren’t actually taking their classes, Mr. Speaker — maybe 
they’ve gone home for a week or two or for summer holidays 
— and they’ve found that the public transportation in Amherst 
just wasn’t what they required in that time when the students 
weren’t around. With the introduction of a ride-sharing service 
it has levelled out that service, Mr. Speaker, regardless of the 
month, and it seems to be meeting the market that’s required at 
that point in time. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out with respect to . . . And a reason 
for this, Mr. Speaker, there was some motions passed at a recent 
convention, and I’ll get to . . . But with respect to the 
opportunity of this having some impact on our impaired driving 
rates here in the province of Saskatchewan, which I think we 
have to exercise every opportunity that we feel we have with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I notice the NDP convention in 2017 just 
recently held here where there is, and I quote, one of the 
statements within one of the motions here against ride-sharing 
services was this: “Whereas little or no correlation with 
reduction in impaired driving rates is shown in areas where 
TNCs operate . . .” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I did have the opportunity to look at a few 
research papers here and that have been done that are showing 
something a little bit different, Mr. Speaker. And I look at one 
with respect to a very large community, the community of New 
York, done in January 2017 by Jessica Lynn Peck titled “New 
York City Drunk Driving After Uber,” her working paper no. 
13, Mr. Speaker. And I look at a few of the comments in the . . . 
I guess it would be the executive summary, the abstract at the 
front, but, Mr. Speaker . . . And I quote a few sentences out of 



November 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

here: 
 

A recent increase in the ease and availability of alternative 
rides for intoxicated passengers partially explains the steep 
decrease in alcohol-related collisions in New York City 
since 2011. I examine the specific case of Uber’s car 
service launch in New York . . . in May 2011, a unique 
example of a sudden increase in cab availability for 
intoxicated passengers. This study draws on a dataset of all 
New York State alcohol-related collisions maintained by 
the New York State Department . . . across New York State 
counties over time and the careful choice of New York 
State counties that provide an appropriate control group for 
New York City’s drunk-driving behavior. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to talk about they’ve experienced about 
a 25 to 35 per cent decrease in alcohol-related collisions rated 
using difference-in-differences estimations in standard errors 
clustered at the county level, 25 to 35 per cent reduction in 
impaired driving crashes, Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of 
ride sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go on. Some work done jointly between MADD, 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving, and Uber, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And the Uber app was created to ensure reliable access to safe 
rides whenever, wherever. But a first of its kind, a 
comprehensive study conducted by Uber and Mothers Against 
Drunk Driving reveals that Uber is more than just a convenient 
transportation option, but the choice, the reliability, and the 
flexibility it also affords it to be a powerful tool in the quest to 
protect families from drunk driving. 
 
Seattle. In May 2014, Uber set to answer a simple question but 
an important question, where they . . . Prior to Uber’s arrival, 
approximately 7.6 people per day were arrested for driving 
under the influence. They experienced a 10 per cent reduction 
in their impaired driving rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is, despite the NDP’s motion at the convention where 
they say there’s no correlation with the reduction in impaired 
driving rates shown in anywhere where these ride-sharing offers 
are available, Mr. Speaker, there are studies out there that say 
something quite the contrary, Mr. Speaker. So I think this is a 
great opportunity for us to enhance the customer experience not 
only in our urban centres, Mr. Speaker, but expand and make 
accessible this ride-sharing service out into rural areas, rural 
communities across the province, Mr. Speaker. The cost will be 
a free market. It’ll find its place, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
something that I encourage the provincial government and the 
municipalities and all of those involved across the province of 
Saskatchewan to participate in this discussion to enhance this 
opportunity as we move forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly support the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s decision to work with municipalities and 
smaller communities to establish a ride-sourcing network 
as another tool in efforts to curb drinking and driving in 
this province. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook has moved: 

That the Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s decision to work with municipalities and 
smaller communities to establish a ride-sourcing network 
as another tool in efforts to curb drinking and driving in 
this province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:36.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3064 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3065 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3065 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3065 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3065 
 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3065 
 Saskatchewan Public Servant Named One of Canada’s Most Powerful Women 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3066 
 Remembering Nolan Royer 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3066 
 Targeted Enforcement Operations Make Communities Safer 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3066 
 Project Red Ribbon  
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3066 
 Southeast Regional College Offers Online Courses 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3067 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Truth and Reconciliation Issues 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3067 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3067 
 Government Position on Abortion 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3067 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3067 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3068 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3068 
 Crime Rates in Saskatchewan 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3068 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3068 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisition 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3069 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3069 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3069 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3070 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3070 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3072 
 Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3072 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3072 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Questions Surrounding Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3072, 3083 
  Fiaz ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3075, 3083 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3076, 3082 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 3077 
  Wotherspoon (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 3078 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3078 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3079, 3082 
  Buckingham .................................................................................................................................................................. 3081, 3082 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3083 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3083 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3083 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Ride-Sourcing Network 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3083 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


