






















































Hansard: April 12, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 74A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 12, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2231 
 April 12, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
my colleagues and members of the Legislative Assembly here 
for granting leave for this very important and extended 
introduction. I am pleased to rise today to introduce a number 
of members of the Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneurship Program 
in, I believe, the west gallery here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today we have members, and I will list them and I’d ask them 
just to give a wave. I don’t know if they’re all quite here yet 
but, Mr. Speaker, we have members from the Mistawasis 
Business Club. We have Danika Dreaver. We have Chris 
Ochuschayoo, Ryan Dreaver, Konnor Johnstone, Korbin Lasas, 
Randall Strongarm, Kieran Moyah, and as well business club 
mentors Justin Bear and Yvonne Daniels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the Muskoday Business Club, we have — 
and again, I’d just ask you to give a wave — Braiden Crain, 
Tessa Tait, and business club mentor Sandi LeBoeuf. And from 
the Kinistin Business Club, we have Aiden Lumberjack, Julian 
Severeight, Wesley Brabant, and business club mentor Cyrus 
Smokeyday. From the One Arrow Business Club, Mr. Speaker, 
we have Stephen Littlepine. Mr. Speaker, also they are joined 
by Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneurship Program coordinator, 
Joe Taylor. 
 
And I won’t get into many of the details of this program, Mr. 
Speaker, as I know my colleague from Saskatoon University 
will be giving a member’s statement shortly on this. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneurship Program is a 
program that gives high school students the opportunity to 
meet, the opportunity to interact and learn from a diverse group 
of successful entrepreneurs, professionals, and individuals. 
 
It also gives the students, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to visit 
successful First Nations-owned and -managed businesses to 
hear first-hand about the opportunities and career options that 
are available to them in their life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also want to welcome Lisa 
Mooney from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And it’s 
my understanding that Potash Corporation, through a 
partnership with the Saskatoon Tribal Council, are a generous 
financial supporter of the Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneurship 

Program. 
 
We also have with us, Mr. Speaker, DonnaLyn Thorsteinson 
and Jasmine Gray here from Square One Saskatchewan, who 
have joined in to speak to this group of students here later 
today. 
 
I ask that all of my colleagues here, Mr. Speaker, join me in 
welcoming this group of young entrepreneurs to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join my colleague from Shellbrook in recognizing these 
youth and these entrepreneurs from the various First Nations of 
our province and to point out that, as one of the few Aboriginal 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in the Assembly, 
I’m very proud when we showcase some of the Aboriginal 
talent that we have throughout the community, whether it’s in 
sport, business, and politics. So I want to welcome all the young 
entrepreneurs and to point out that some of the successes that 
we’ve seen throughout the province are something that we 
should all celebrate. 
 
And I had the opportunity once, Mr. Speaker, to stop at the 
newly opened Misty Café. I often gas up at the gas bar, and one 
day they had neck bones and bannock. But the only problem I 
had is I already had lunch, and I couldn’t of course partake in 
the feast. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
Aboriginal entrepreneurs, from their various First Nations, to 
thank their instructors, and basically in my Cree language: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Welcome and enjoy your visit, and great success in your future 
endeavours as business leaders of Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m honoured to introduce Jim Demeray, the president 
of UnderstandUs to the legislature today. Jim, would you give 
us a wave? 
 
Jim is a graduate of the Hill School of Business, Mr. Speaker, 
from the University of Regina, and an important constituent and 
community leader. He has recently left his career in the 
restaurant industry to focus on growing UnderstandUs into a 
Saskatchewan-based mental health foundation that changes the 
current reality of health for our youth. 
 
UnderstandUs is a mental health initiative based out of Regina, 
and it strives to improve the health and understanding of 
individuals with mental health barriers, in turn removing the 
stigma attached to it. UnderstandUs produces awareness 
campaigns and educates youth through the classroom web shop 
and website resources. It’s a young organization, Mr. Speaker, 
that has the ability to connect to youth and make learning about 
mental health relatable and fun. 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming Jim 
Demeray to his legislature today, and thank him for his work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
honour to join with the minister opposite to welcome Jim 
Demeray to his Assembly. Certainly the work that Jim has 
taken on through UnderstandUs is incredibly important work to 
so many across our province, so many throughout our 
community, so important to our future.  
 
You couldn’t have a better suited person for this work. Jim is 
just a real quality person, a caring person, a thoughtful person. 
And I’m thankful, we’re thankful for his efforts on this front in 
addressing and making sure that mental health supports are in 
place, in addressing stigma, and making sure that young people 
have care and love and opportunity around them, and that 
they’re not suffering in silence is something that we all support. 
 
So on behalf of a grateful opposition, on behalf of a grateful 
province, I say thank you to Jim Demeray, to UnderstandUs, 
and to all those involved in mental health in our community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce in your gallery, former MLA for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, Joceline Schriemer. Welcome back to your 
Assembly, Joceline. 
 
Joceline helped this government form government in 2007, and 
changed from a long 16 years of the other side forming 
government. So we’re very happy that Joceline has retired now. 
She worked for the Saskatoon Police Service for several years 
along with her husband, Gary Broste, who is a former deputy 
chief of police for Saskatoon, serving our citizens in Saskatoon 
for several years. 
 
And they’ve also brought their grandson, who is sitting up there 
with the Captain America shirt on, Mr. Speaker. Cohen has 
joined us, and we were able to sneak him down on to your floor, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to snap a couple of pictures. And we’ll 
make sure that we get your permission for those pictures later 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I wanted to welcome them: Joceline, back to her Assembly; 
and Gary and Cohen to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to also welcome 
a former colleague — and join the Minister of Environment — 
Cyrus Smokeyday, up in the gallery. Cyrus was, years and years 
ago, my summer student when I was with SaskEnergy, working 
in the salvage operations in the stores department. So I wanted 
to welcome him and his group to his Legislative Assembly. And 
it’s good to see you, Cyrus. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the member from Sutherland and welcome Joceline back to 

her legislature. She did an outstanding job, and her husband. 
We’ve worked well in the, you know, in the city of Saskatoon, 
making sure the people of Saskatoon are safe, and the work that 
they did in the police service was really well done. And thank 
you, and good to see you here. And good to see you here with 
your grandson; that’s a wonderful thing. So we wish you all the 
best in the future, good health, and enjoy the day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 
welcome, in the west gallery, some folks here today who want 
to help the Minister of Health understand the cut that he’s made 
to the hearing aid plan, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully see a 
reversal there. 
 
Today we have two, we have many people here, but two very 
important people, Mr. Speaker. We have Zachary Baptiste and 
Mary-Jayne Morris, who are two children who are hearing 
impaired. And they know very well the services that the hearing 
aid plan has provided for them and the importance of them. 
Like to welcome their parents, Mary-Jayne Morris and Jayne 
Morris, and as well, Claudia Baptiste, who’s Zachary’s mom. 
 
We also have here today Sheryn West and Kumiko Yokoyama, 
who are parents of children with cochlear implants, Mr. 
Speaker. We have educators Barbara Scott, Wendy White, Fay 
Jacobson. And as well we have Marilyn Barrington who’s with 
the Saskatchewan Alexander Graham Bell Association for the 
Deaf. She’s a board member, but she’s also a retired consultant 
and a teacher of the hearing impaired. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I think I got everybody in that list but 
while I’m on my feet, there’s a couple of other people I’d like 
to mention as well. Lisa Mooney, the Minister of Environment 
introduced. I don’t see her up in the gallery. Lisa is with 
PotashCorp of Saskatchewan and is one of my dear friends, Mr. 
Speaker. So I don’t know if I’m just missing her, if she’s behind 
a ledge or something, but I’d like to say welcome to her as well. 
 
And I just would also, as the Health critic, would like to 
welcome Jim Demeray as someone who has a very personal 
vested interest in mental health. And also, as the Health critic, 
your work is really important and very valued. 
 
So with that, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 
to welcome these guests to this House. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to join with the 
Health critic in welcoming Zachary and Mary-Jayne and 
everybody that’s with them here today. We hope they enjoy the 
proceedings this afternoon, and I’d ask everyone to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to take the 
necessary steps to stop the federal government from 
imposing a carbon tax on the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Hafford, 
Speers, North Battleford, Richard, and Mayfair. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides vital 
services to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with its parcel service that serves farms 
and other businesses. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and the sell-off of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are concerned that 
this government neither understands the role that spiritual care 
providers provide in our health care facilities, nor do they 
understand the impact. Otherwise they would not have made 
this decision. 
 
They point out that this government unilaterally eliminated 
spiritual care within health region facilities with this budget. 
They point out that spiritual care helps patients and residents 
and their families towards achieving holistic wellness, and that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province within Canada to not 
fund this support for its citizens. 
 
The petitioners point out that the Sask Party did not inform the 
Saskatchewan people prior to the election just last year about 
their plan to scrap this funding to spiritual care. They point out 
that spiritual care provides a compassionate listening presence 
in times of crisis and the ability to respond to that spiritual and 

emotional needs of patients and residents. They point out that 
spiritual care supports families and patients and residents in 
making difficult decisions, and that spiritual care meets the 
needs of traditional First Nation, Inuit, and Métis people. And 
they also point out, Mr. Speaker, that professional, 
non-denominational, non-faith-specific spiritual care 
practitioners facilitate for patients and residents in obtaining 
comfort and support from within their own faith traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately stop the cuts to spiritual care programs in this 
province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I 
so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place to answer the call and direction by the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote for anyone from the Assembly to help 
her in her bid to get a second bridge built for Prince Albert, her 
hard work. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand in my place to 
offer that support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the need for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert has never been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and 
communities north of Prince Albert and the businesses that send 
people and products through Prince Albert require a solution. 
So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do, Mr. Speaker, day in, day out, we present page 
after page after page after page of this petition signed by people 
from all throughout the towns, cities, and villages of our 
province. And on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, I present 
the names of people that have signed from Melfort and Prince 
Albert, and I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, today I’m rising to present a 
petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent Crown 
corporation sell-off. The people who have signed this petition 
want to bring to our attention the following: Sask Party’s Bill 
40 creates a new definition for privatization, one that doesn’t 
exist anywhere, Mr. Speaker, which would allow this 
government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum, and which is of course outside of the Crown 
protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

In 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations returned 
almost $300 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. And we know our Crown 
corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Income Tax Act of Canada, we know 
that Crown corporations would be exempt from corporate 
income tax as long as 90 per cent of the shares are held by a 
government or province. And of course the Sask Party’s 
proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold 
without being considered privatized, and therefore expose us to 
huge income tax expenditures. So this short-sighted legislation 
risks sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than 
to the owners of those Crowns, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and Crown corporations instead of 
selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed the petition today 
are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the undersigned residents of the province want to bring to 
our attention the following: that the citizens of this province 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer now: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand today to present a petition to increase funding to Prince 
Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert mobile 
crisis has had to close its doors during daytime hours, resulting 
in a loss of resource to people in distress, because of a lack of 
funding. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that during the daytime hours, 
during the week, a lot of the ministry offices are open but most 
of those ministry offices have different mandates. And mobile 
crisis filled a gap when clients did not fit those different 
mandates, and they provide that crisis intervention services 
which now is missing in Prince Albert. And a lot of people are 
falling through the cracks because of that. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile crisis has also put 
stress on Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and 
other agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to 
provide counselling and intervention services to clients. I’ll read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to the 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across this province realize that this is 
an issue that needs to be dealt with in Prince Albert, and 
individuals signing this petition come from the communities of 
Humboldt, Vonda, and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition to reverse the cuts to Saskatchewan libraries. Those 
who’ve signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: 
 
Whereas the Saskatchewan government has cut funding for the 
regional libraries in half, or by 3.5 million, and eliminated 
funding for libraries in Regina and Saskatoon, this drastic 
funding cut will have a devastating impact on libraries, 
especially regional libraries, and the many people who depend 
upon them. 
 
Those who have signed this petition also wish to draw our 
attention to the fact that the drastic cuts imposed on libraries 
will lead to closures, program cuts, and reductions in hours, 
which will hurt the many people who use library services and 
the hard-working and dedicated public servants who work in 
libraries; and also to the fact that these cuts will have a 
disproportionate impact on rural communities where libraries 
are vital spaces. Potential closures or reductions in services will 
severely impact those communities. I’ll read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan renew its 
commitment to the invaluable programming, educational 
opportunities, and public spaces our libraries provide 
across this province and restore the $4.8 million for public 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 budget. 
 
These petitions of course are being signed by people all across 
this province. These particular pages today are signed by 
residents of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
And one in three Canadian workers have been impacted by 
domestic violence, and for many of them the violence follows 
them to work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the 
direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted such legislation and 
Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary institutions. With a cut of $36.8 million from 
post-secondary education, including a cut of $6.4 million from 
technical institutions, is a very significant decrease in funding 
for our post-secondary institutions. And with students already 
paying among the highest tuition fees in Canada and 
experiencing high levels of student debt, this will only make life 
more difficult for students and families and only increase the 
challenges that they face in achieving an education. Alongside 
that, we have a drop in funding of Saskatchewan student aid by 
$8.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I do so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 
 

International Day of Pink 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 
12th, 2017 marks the International Day of Pink. It is a day 
where communities across the country and across the world can 
unite in celebrating diversity and raising awareness to stop 
homophobia, transphobia, transmisogyny, and all forms of 
bullying. It is a day to say that we will not tolerate violence in 
our communities. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the Day of Pink is a day for 
expressing kindness, compassion, and courage. Each year on 
the second Wednesday of April, millions of people wear pink 
and take a stand. The Day of Pink is a symbol, a spark that 
empowers and inspires youth across Canada to create amazing 
social change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bullying is a complex issue and youth are 
demanding that we help provide solutions. We must listen to 
our youth leaders in our communities and the solutions they are 
offering. We must adequately fund anti-bullying workshops and 
programs for youth and adults. All of us must take the time to 
educate ourselves about the issues that LGBT [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender] youth are facing in our communities. 
Most of all, Mr. Speaker, we must show compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone can bully; anyone can be victimized by 
bullying, but together we can stop it. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join with me in standing up for our youth and help 
them in addressing bullying and discrimination in 
Saskatchewan on today’s Day of Pink and every day. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

All Nations Healin’ Thru Artz Talent Show 
and Fundraiser 

 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the pleasure of attending and bringing greeting to 
the All Nations Healin’ Thru Artz talent show and fundraiser 
with the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre and the 
Leader of the Opposition, who showed off his sweet jigging 
moves. 
 
This event gave all in attendance the important reminder that 
potential for indigenous youth is as limitless as our iconic 
Saskatchewan prairie skies. The event showcased the talents of 
the Thom Collegiate drum group, the Highway Express Band, 
and powwow and jig dancers. 
 
For years this event has showcased the talents of aspiring artists 
by providing opportunity to share their stories through both 
diverse and empowering creative means. Having this 
opportunity for indigenous youth is so important as it provides a 
space for new skills to be learned, cultural lessons to be shared, 
and new friendships to be built and strengthened. 
 
This year’s participants not only showcased their artistic talents 
but their admirable and strong work ethic. I’d like to thank the 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

heart and soul of All Nations Healin’ Thru Artz, Monica Fogul, 
along with the president of the board, Wendy Gervais, and all 
the hard-working staff and board members for a fantastic night 
of showcasing youth talent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
All Nations Healin’ Thru Artz on another successful year, and 
thank the organizers for the commitment to showcasing the 
talents of indigenous youth and Saskatchewan’s future. Thank 
you. Hay-hay. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Aging-Related Health Research in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 5th I had 
the pleasure of attending the reception for the Saskatchewan 
Health Research Foundation’s publication, Impacting Seniors’ 
Health - The Value of Aging-Related Research in 
Saskatchewan. This publication is a showcase of researchers 
and community members who are working together to address 
the issues affecting our senior population. Its goal is to create 
awareness of the aging-related health research that the SHRF 
[Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation] is funding and to 
demonstrate the positive impact this research is having on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Much of the research in this publication is made possible by the 
collaborative efforts of the University of Regina’s Centre on 
Aging and Health, and the University of Saskatchewan’s 
College of Kinesiology. Between these two institutions, great 
strides have been made in areas such as fall prevention, early 
Alzheimer’s treatments, and addressing health inequalities for 
seniors in rural and indigenous communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that the proportion of Canadians 
over 65 will surpass 20 per cent by 2030, and will reach 30 per 
cent by 2056. Without improving our current policies and 
training directions, as well as increasing funding to our health 
care system, Saskatchewan is simply not prepared to handle the 
increase in health care demands that often accompany aging. 
This is why the work of groups like the SHRF and the ingenuity 
of our university’s aging-related programs are so important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
recognizing the SHRF and our university-based researchers for 
all the work they do to improve the quality of life of our 
seniors. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
[14:00] 
 

International Day of Pink 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, April 12th, 
marks the International Day of Pink. Mr. Speaker, the world is 
coming together to celebrate gender diversity, to bring an end to 
discrimination, and stop all forms of bullying. There are 9.7 
million Canadians who are taking part in this day, wearing pink, 
and showing support. 

The theme of this year’s Day of Pink is Dialogues, encouraging 
all communities from youth engagement to LGBTQ [lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] inclusion 
in sport to come together within this initiative and begin a 
conversation on how we can all be leaders. 
 
Today is to empower youth, bring important issues like 
discrimination into conversation, helping us all understand each 
other better while minimizing the harsh effects that bullying can 
have on our communities. Mr. Speaker, we hope that today 
serves as a stepping stone and this conversation continues 
throughout the year. Workshops, flash mobs, and mobilized 
youth movements are expected to be seen all across Canada 
today, bringing awareness and hoping to end homophobia, 
transphobia, and bullying to these communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we must commit today and 
every day to the important lessons we learn from the Day of 
Pink, ensuring that this province is a safe and welcoming place 
for all to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating this 
Day of Pink and thank all the hard-working organizers who are 
raising awareness for gender diversity and inclusiveness. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Mankota Athlete’s Outstanding Hockey Career 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to stand in this Assembly today and bring attention to an 
extraordinary young woman from Mankota in my constituency. 
Kylie Gavelin started skating as a little girl. She loved skating 
so much, she participated in both figure skating and hockey. As 
she grew up and continued to participate in both hockey and 
figure skating until the drive for both became too demanding, 
Kylie made the decision to stick with hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at 12 years of age she started playing with the 
Wood River Ice Cats and her talents got noticed. In grade 11 
she moved to Weyburn in order to play AAA hockey with the 
Gold Wings. Her awards have become too numerous to list. As 
Kylie finished grade 12, she was selected to play on the 
Saskatchewan female midget AAA all-star team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kylie’s career in hockey did not end after high 
school. She enrolled at the University of Regina and just 
finished five seasons with the University of Regina Cougars 
while also traveling and playing with Team Canada. Now that 
her time with the Cougars has come to an end, Kylie plans to 
finish up her education at the U of R [University of Regina] in 
economics and business administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join me 
in congratulating Kylie on her accomplishments and wish her 
the best of luck in all that she has yet to come. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

PotashCorp Supports Aboriginal Entrepreneurship 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
happy to share with this Assembly that PotashCorp has 
announced a new commitment to Aboriginal entrepreneurship 
in our province. 
 
Today there are 27,000 indigenous entrepreneurs in Canada, 
which is a 30 per cent increase from the 1996 to 2001 period. 
We are seeing more Aboriginal-owned businesses and 
economic development corporations each day, recruiting and 
investing back into their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PotashCorp has committed to establish the local 
Aboriginal content as a minimum of 30 per cent of its 
Saskatchewan supplier spend by 2020. Important skill training, 
knowledge, and resources will be available for Aboriginal 
youth, with support from the Saskatoon Tribal Council as well 
as Aboriginal youth business clubs. These clubs will ensure 
more successful entrepreneurships while growing important 
connections to PotashCorp. 
 
They are committed to supporting indigenous youth in 
whichever venture they choose. The employment and 
procurement opportunities, in addition to this path to achieve 
proper support, include scholarships and internships within 
PotashCorp. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
PotashCorp for their admirable commitment to the indigenous 
youth in our province and their dedication to entrepreneurs 
nationwide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

New Passenger Bus Service in Yorkton and Regina 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, we had to make 
some tough decisions in our government’s budget, and one of 
those decisions was to wind down STC. In the midst of those 
tough decisions, on this side of the House we have a lot of faith 
in the ingenuity of the people and businesses of this province. 
We are already seeing entrepreneurs announce bus services in 
some of our communities. Earlier this week, my colleague from 
Martensville-Warman spoke about how AV transport will serve 
Martensville, Warman, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to bring to the attention of this 
Assembly that DiCal Transport, based out of Melville, is 
planning to offer a daily bus service between Yorkton and 
Regina. This local company already offers courier services to 
many communities across the province. They are finalizing the 
details of this service and which communities will be served. 
They are committed to having the route ready for June 1st. This 
new route will also involve employing more local people and 
provide a great opportunity to grow local services. 
 
We are pleased to see local entrepreneurs taking advantage of 
an opportunity and creating businesses that will serve regions of 
this province well with a passenger bus service that doesn’t 
need a government subsidy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating DiCal Transport on their planned 
passenger service, opening June 1st. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day when we ask 
for some transparency and some straight answers on the Sask 
Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal, we hear the 
same tired lines from the Economy minister. Yesterday though, 
the Premier took to his feet but his answers weren’t any better. 
The Premier hid behind FOI [freedom of information] 
technicalities. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, the problem with the Premier’s 
condescending and arrogant answer is that the Privacy 
Commissioner doesn’t agree. He said, and I quote, “I am not 
persuaded that the information in these documents would 
qualify as financial, commercial, or technical information.” He 
recommended that the GTH land documents be released in full. 
In fact he said that twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier shouldn’t need to check his political 
compass because if his moral compass still worked, he would 
do the right thing, come clean with Saskatchewan people, and 
release these documents. 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the member to use his words 
carefully when questioning the character of hon. members of 
this Assembly. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 
to my hon. friend that while I may not agree on a number of 
issues with him, I won’t impugn his motives and I won’t 
impugn his integrity in this place even as we disagree. And I 
would ask him to accord the same respect to members on both 
sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as to the question with respect to the arrangement 
with CP [Canadian Pacific], we signed a confidentiality 
agreement as previous governments have in the past with 
companies, and we feel duty bound to that confidentiality 
agreement. Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of the ruling from the 
Privacy Commissioner, but we believe that it’s important to 
maintain the integrity of the government’s position when they 
enter into these agreements either through the Crown 
corporations or through the ministries. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government, who began these negotiations in 
2007, agreed. I’m reading now from a briefing note from the 
NDP time with respect to this very negotiation with CP, as they 
were working with the city and CP for the relocation of those 
railway tracks to the GTH. Mr. Speaker, the briefing note to the 
NDP, July 2007, says, “The province remains respectful of the 
high level of confidentiality required by their private sector 
partner, CPR, as they are vulnerable to market conditions 
beyond their control.”  
 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, that was the position of the NDP on the same 
issue, exact same issue, in 2007. And, Mr. Speaker, we agree 
with that position. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Letter to School Divisions and Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier sort of glosses 
over that millions of dollars have been wasted and that a 
scandal has ensued and that this project has gone off the rails in 
many ways, Mr. Speaker. But you see in the Premier and that 
whole caucus an arrogance and a sort of feeling that they know 
better than Saskatchewan people.  
 
Let’s look just at the Education minister. He wants to take 
control of local school boards, but he can’t even keep track of 
his own ministry. There’s been really nothing but confusion 
since he sent out a letter from his ministry urging . . . or 
imposing massive cuts on school boards. 
 
He now says the letter is “wrong,” but he also says he didn’t 
read it. Mr. Speaker, he’s now asking school boards to wait for 
more clarity, but says he doesn’t have it. He doesn’t even know 
how much has to be ultimately saved in salaries: “That’s one of 
the reasons we need to seek some more clarity before we go 
back to our employer partners.” And “That’s a question for the 
Finance minister.” 
 
I’m asking the Premier, how can he ram through these 
damaging cuts and attacks on Saskatchewan’s classrooms, 
Saskatchewan workers, and Saskatchewan families when his 
caucus clearly doesn’t know what’s going on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
certainly be happy to answer the member’s question. I want to 
point out that in his preamble he referenced the millions of 
dollars the government’s prepared to invest in the GTH, and 
even with respect, potentially, to relocation of the railway as 
we’ve talked about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also now reading from a briefing note from 
the NDP government on this very same project. Members 
opposite like to forget the fact that the project began, including 
authorization for the funds, under the previous government — 
the right move, I would point out; I think it’s the right move. 
But important to be clear with the fact that this briefing note 
notes that in April the province — that’s the NDP government 
— the province approved $33 million to be invested in the 
project. In part, by the way, that was about relocating, and it 
was also part about establishing the GTH. And again, I 
wouldn’t argue with that position; I think that was the right 
thing to do. 
 
With respect to the member’s question, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we have said, and it’s in the budget, we’ve noted that we have 
to find 3.5 per cent savings in terms of the public sector salary 
compensation expenses right across government, right across 
public service in the province, in Crowns, in health care, and 
education. Mr. Speaker, I have said publicly that we want to let 
collective bargaining determine how that’s achieved. We will 

not be prescriptive. We will not limit the bargaining tables to 
consider anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter that’s referenced was wrong, as the 
Deputy Premier has indicated. And the Deputy Premier has 
indicated that the position’s been clarified. I do so again here 
today on the floor of the House. This is an important matter, 
Mr. Speaker. We want all of our third party partners to 
understand, and those bargaining tables to realize, 3.5 per cent 
must be found in savings right across government. And we will 
not be prescriptive how they’re found; we will not dictate to the 
collective bargaining tables. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not quite clarified. The 
minister’s letter went out to every school division, demanded 
that they break contracts with teachers, teaching assistants, 
principals, custodians, and every school division worker across 
the province. And the minister couldn’t remember when he read 
it: “I don’t know. I can’t answer that.” And “Would it possibly 
have been sometime yesterday? I don’t know.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I asked if any school boards had 
responded to the letter by the deadline, he said, no. And then he 
said, maybe. And then he said, “I’m told by the officials that 
they were, and they said about half. I haven’t looked at them.” 
Mr. Speaker, after all of this, he still hadn’t looked. 
 
Then the minister, that minister presented a bill that takes 
control away from elected school board trustees because he 
thinks that some of them aren’t fit to do their job. Mr. Speaker, 
after all we’ve seen, from where does the minister get the gall to 
look down on anyone and judge whether they’re doing their job 
correctly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we spent a long time in 
committee last night. I’d like to give the member the 
opportunity to stand on her feet in the House today and 
withdraw some of the statements that she’s made. 
 
We made it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that we do not 
advocate or we’re not asking any of the divisions to breach any 
contracts. There is absolutely nothing wrong with having people 
sit down and have a meaningful discussion about how we can 
meet the targets that we have set. The targets we have set are 
aggressive targets. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to meet those 
targets, and we’re going to meet them by doing some hard work 
at the bargaining table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for her to stand up and say, we’re not fit to do 
something . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, their record is not 
something they should take any pride in whatsoever. 
 
Since we have formed government, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
increased funding, operating funding from $944 million in 
2007, total funding is now up to $2.02 billion, an increase of 
114 per cent. In ’07, operating funding was 1.41; now it is up 
32 per cent to 1.86 billion. Capital, 18 million to 119 million. If 
the member has more questions, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got more 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

particulars to give to her. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He was clear about one 
thing last night, and that is that he wants to be able to overrule 
the voice of elected trustees. He doesn’t trust the people of 
Saskatchewan to hold their local representatives to account, and 
it’s an affront to democracy. 
 
Here’s a list for the minister: trustees’ conflict of interest, 
disqualification of trustees, board meetings, quorum for school 
division meetings, voting at school division meetings, general 
duties and powers of the division board, special and annual 
meeting of electors, submission of school division budgets, and 
changes to school division boundaries. Also protections against 
school closures. 
 
[14:15] 
 
These are just a few of the rules and protections that the 
Education minister is ripping out of The Education Act and 
putting into the hands of government with Bill 63. Can the 
minister tell the people of Saskatchewan why he’s silencing 
local voices and making it easier for the Sask Party to shut 
down our kids’ schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies 
for wanting to find savings with regard to busing, common 
procurement, having a salary grid, having some common admin 
costs, looking at variety of different things to make sure that we 
commit all the resources necessary to keep our schools open, 
healthy, happy, and thriving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about the variety of 
things that she’s done. She claims to have listened to the 
consultation when she accuses us of listening in the most literal 
sense. She used . . . and I’m quoting from her, “The minister 
has claimed to listen to consultations around the province and I 
think this is only the case in the most literal sense.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I do like to listen in the most literal sense. I 
like to hear what people have said, and that’s why we’ve agreed 
to a number of things with the Saskatchewan school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some of the literal things that 
she said. She talked in her maiden speech in this House about 
Lang School. Do you know what list Lang School is on? On the 
176 been closed. She is the last MLA that will come out of the 
Lang School in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Financial Situation of Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, this whole budget and all these 
bills are about giving themselves more power and silencing 
local voices. They’re not even listening to SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] anymore, 

Mr. Speaker. The Premier and the minister can go on and on 
about fairness, but what’s fair about telling our cities, towns, 
and villages how to govern themselves, especially when the 
advice is to mismanage and waste things as badly as the Sask 
Party has? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been three weeks since the budget, and most 
of the cities, towns, and villages affected by the Sask Party cuts 
have had no official communication from the minister about 
what to expect. 
 
Maybe the minister would properly understand the implications 
of these cuts if she had consulted before cheerleading for this 
devastating budget. At very least, she should be talking to them 
now. Can the minister put a hold on these damaging cuts and 
engage in genuine consultation with the elected leadership of 
our cities, towns, and villages in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and there is 
no doubt there was difficult decisions that needed to be made in 
this budget. And one of those decisions was that two and a half 
per cent of the deficit, about that much, would be shared with 
our municipal partners. And as such, we’re looking for $33 
million from our municipal partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have, along with three other ministers, have met 
with the mayors of the two major cities since the budget, as well 
as the president of SUMA, as well as the mayor and the city 
caucus Chair. And, Mr. Speaker, my office has taken each and 
every call from any municipality that has any questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Hearing Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government cuts first and 
measures later, but it’s Saskatchewan families and our kids 
most in need who are being left short. The cuts to the hearing 
aid plan are mean-spirited and just plain wrong. They 
haphazardly announced this cut in the budget, but have no idea 
how big this impact will be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, families who know far better than the 
minister the impacts these cuts will have will tell you they are 
significant. Access to hearing services for children and for 
adults will be slashed. The amount of time people have to wait 
to see an audiologist will skyrocket, and so will the costs and 
the stresses to families. 
 
This government cut the entire program and, along with it, 10 
audiologists. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to how very deep 
these cuts are, the minister is either unaware or doesn’t care. 
Which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recognize concerns that many people have with this change, but 
I’d like to clarify, Mr. Speaker, that many of the services 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

around hearing, there’s some misinformation out there. The 
cochlear implant, the bone-anchored device — those sorts of 
programs, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to continue. 
 
And the audiologists that provide those services will continue. 
The numbers that the member opposite provided on numbers of 
audiologists are not correct. Seven audiologists will continue 
under those programs. Five will be laid off as a result of 
changes to the hearing aid program.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t unusual in Canada with Saskatchewan 
moving in this direction. Seven provinces don’t provide those 
sorts of services for hearing aids. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
clarify, people need to understand, under the existing hearing 
aid program, hearing aids are not free in Saskatchewan. They’re 
still purchased from the hearing aid program. 
 
There’s already more audiologists practising in the private 
sector in Saskatchewan than there are in the hearing aid 
program. And again, while we recognize people have some 
concerns, rest assured the programs around it will continue. 
This is only the hearing aid program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the folks in the gallery today are 
not assured. There are 10 audiologists in the hearing aid plan in 
Saskatoon and Regina. Are they being cut or are they not being 
cut is the question? These folks here today would like an 
answer. 
 
We are only one of two provinces, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 
have a universal early hearing detection and intervention 
program currently, or in the works. Mr. Speaker, the limited 
services that we do have for this early screening are supported 
by — wait for it — the audiologists at the hearing aid plan. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the program that the Sask Party just cut. When it 
comes to access to audiologists and hearing services, the Sask 
Party is speeding up our province’s race to the bottom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have to take my word for it. There was 
a young boy at a rally last week who wore a sign that said, “The 
problem isn’t that I can’t hear, it’s that you won’t listen.” So 
will the minister finally listen and will he acknowledge how 
terrible his cuts to these important services are? And will he 
reverse those cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I said in my previous answer, seven audiologists will be 
retained to provide services: the cochlear implant, the bone 
anchor device, and, Mr. Speaker, the newborn screening that the 
member opposite was speaking of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out again, when I said about 
some misinformation from the budget, that the screening 
program for infants has not changed. The member can certainly 
criticize, and we certainly are always looking at different types 
of programs and how we can improve services within the 
current economic situation. But, Mr. Speaker, that program, 
which will continue — the budget has had no impact on it — is 

the exact same program that was under the previous 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to her original point about the people who are in 
the gallery and are concerned, if they wish, I would be more 
than pleased to meet with them after question period and 
discuss their concerns. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Teacher Education Programming 
in the North 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister chose not to 
listen to northern leaders and students and cancelled NORTEP 
[northern teacher education program] and NORPAC [Northern 
Professional Access College] funding, she promised that, and I 
quote, “Students will be able to finish the programs under the 
same terms and conditions they had when they entered.” Mr. 
Speaker, it’s just weeks later and that promise has already been 
broken. 
 
While the current program covered the costs of books and 
tuition for students with northern status, student costs for the 
new program at Northlands College are listed at $6,900 per 
year, with no mention of any financial assistance. Current 
NORTEP students are being told they need to reapply, and they 
don’t even have a guarantee that they’ll be readmitted into the 
new program.  
 
Will the minister acknowledge the damage being done to 
northern education, and will she reverse the decision to cancel 
NORTEP’s funding and finally put students first? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
were frankly disappointed by the press release, which contained 
several mischaracterized and uncited quotes that the member 
opposite is referring to. And I would urge the students to 
contact us directly, Mr. Speaker. Certainly my door remains 
open. 
 
We remain convinced that the parties will come together in the 
best interests of students and iron out all the details. It’s still 
very early in the process, Mr. Speaker. The universities are 
meeting with Northlands this very day. And the best interests of 
students is certainly what we had in mind when we asked 
Northlands to deliver expanded teaching education 
programming to northern students and not cut it. 
 
And Northlands university programming is already up and 
running in La Ronge, Creighton, Buffalo Narrows, and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. They have big plans. It’s full of good faith, Mr. 
Speaker. It will welcome new and returning students with open 
arms and has said so, and it’s open for enrolments as we speak. 
Supports and housing, the intention has always been for as 
seamless a transition as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago this minister 
quoted a press release from Northlands that said that those 
programs would stay intact and that those students would have 
the same access. And she promised that this change would 
somehow make education better, saying that the funding would 
go directly to northern students. Instead, Mr. Speaker, students 
are facing massive tuition fees and the possibility of not being 
able to finish their degrees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, students are wondering why what the minister said 
is not matching what she’s done. NORTEP and NORPAC have 
been highly successful programs, training hundreds of teachers 
who remained in the North after finishing their degrees. It’s no 
exaggeration to say that the minister’s shutdown of this 
program has put the entire northern education system at risk. 
Will the minister admit that this cut is a serious blow to 
northern education? Will she put education first and end this 
terrible sell-off of our northern education program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, that commitment has been 
made absolutely clear by Northlands that those students will be 
seen through, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And you know, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin professes 
great concern about students and student supports, as he should, 
but it is interesting in light of some of the comments he made 
during what was a bit of a leadership tour last week, Mr. 
Speaker. For one thing, he spoke out in favour again of the 
carbon tax, which would cripple this province, including the 
livelihood of all students and their families, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But he also left the impression that the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship had been cancelled, when the exact 
opposite is true. He was all over the map, Mr. Speaker. He 
talked about getting very minimal details, and yet hidden away 
in the second sentence of our news release on budget day, it 
stated explicitly that high school graduates from Saskatchewan 
will continue to receive $500 a year in direct tuition relief 
through the Sask Advantage Scholarship. The member opposite 
also said, “I still don’t know exactly what’s going on, and I 
want to dig into it more.” 
 
Let me help, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Advantage Scholarship, a 
universal scholarship, receives $9 million in funding this year, 
part of $137 million in student supports committed to in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Support for Meewasin Valley Authority 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are big changes 
under way at the Meewasin Valley Authority because of the 
Sask Party, and I’m just not talking about the one member we 
all heard about yesterday that was kicked off the board. No, Mr. 
Speaker, the changes are because of the cuts the Sask Party has 
zoned in on the jewel of our city. The Sask Party has forced the 
Meewasin Valley Authority to cut programs and staff that make 
Saskatoon great. Meewasin is cutting their staff for the summer, 

abandoning important conservation sites along the river that 
paddlers and hikers have used for years. 
 
With the changes they are ramming through, the Sask Party is 
removing the requirement for stable, predictable funding from 
the province. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t want to fund Meewasin, 
so they got rid of the rules that required them to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just like the school boards, libraries, and 
municipalities, these cuts are Sask Party cuts. Why is the Sask 
Party forcing Saskatoon to pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and thank the member for the question. Although as he 
goes through the information, Meewasin issued a news release 
yesterday outlining how they’re working their way through the 
budget challenges. Yes, they received a 17 per cent cut, but 
they’re working their way through it. 
 
Some programs have to be modified. I’m told that the contest 
for the arrival of the pelicans, for example, is now being taken 
over by a radio station. And others that are more serious are 
being looked at. 
 
The important thing is Meewasin is committed to working 
through the challenges. This government is committed to 
working through those challenges. We are working together. 
And, Mr. Speaker, of course the city of Saskatoon has a 
tremendous potential because of the revenue sharing that they 
share. Back in 2007, the city of Saskatoon received $17.8 
million in revenue sharing. They now receive $46.4 million. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase of 161 per cent. Again we are 
committed to working with Meewasin to get through these 
challenges. Thank you. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Government Strategies to Attract Business 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, certainly Meewasin takes care of 
a beautiful river. It’s obvious though that the river that that 
minister’s more familiar with is the denial. 
 
The Premier recently came under question for offering up tax 
breaks and office space to oil companies in Calgary, Mr. 
Speaker. Monday night in committee, I asked the Minister for 
Central Services if the Sask Party had figured out what it would 
cost to host some of those companies in government-owned 
buildings should anyone take the Premier up on his offer. The 
minister said, “. . . we would find a way. We would manage it 
here, manage it there; that’s what we do. And we have the STC 
building now,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister can’t tell us how much taxpayers will be on the 
hook for, but when it comes to bankrolling the Premier’s 
corporate head office fishing trip, she can say that we have the 
STC building now, Mr. Speaker. Scrap and sell off this 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

important public service for cancer patients, seniors, rural 
communities, and more, all to make room for the big 
corporations that bankroll that Premier’s party. Mr. Speaker, 
how does that make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
make no apologies for trying to attract businesses to the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what we have done since 
2007, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve done it in a number of ways. 
Sometimes we take Peter Lougheed’s advice and we ask 
companies to locate here. Sometimes we do it through 
competitive taxes, and sometimes we do it through 
infrastructure . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes we’ve 
done it through partnership and innovation. Sometimes we’ve 
attracted investment and new jobs through the infrastructure 
program of the government, like the bypass that’s created 8,200 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. And though we have a lot more work to do, 
the net result is that since 2007 there are 60,000 more jobs in 
the province than there were when we began, Mr. Speaker, and 
there’s now 1.15 million people living here. 
 
Moreover, I would point out that in the last two months we’ve 
seen — and this is unique for the last little while — two straight 
months of year-over-year job growth, including two reports ago 
where we led the country, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of the growth 
plan that we pursued. We give credit to the economy, Mr. 
Speaker, but policies do matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the relocation initiative, new 
growth tax incentives were improved in budgets two years ago. 
The member was here. He would have been participating in that 
budget debate. Those new growth tax incentives can be used by 
a company if they locate here and create new jobs for whatever 
they want, including relocation expenses, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
revenue neutral to the province. 
 
But I would just say this: as long as we have the opportunity to 
serve on this side of the House, we will pursue investment and 
jobs for this province. We will do it on the strength of a growth 
plan that offers competitive taxes, infrastructure investment, 
Mr. Speaker, and, I would say, a plan that has turned the worst 
job creation record that we had under the NDP into the second 
best in the country. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 68, 
The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 

introduction of Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 
2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Why is the Opposition House Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave for a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
request . . . In question period the Minister of Advanced 
Education quoted from a document attributing remarks to the 
member from Meewasin. Could that minister be so kind as to 
table that with the Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I find that point of order out of order because 
the request for tabling of documents does not need to be placed 
in a point of order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 63 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur 
l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter into 
the debate on Bill 63, The Education Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an Act that certainly warrants some attention 
and has captured the attention of many people around this 
province. I think, as I’ve talked about before, Mr. Speaker, there 
is always good cause to look at the context in which any piece 
of legislation is presented in this legislature and the reasons 
why and some of the events leading up to the presentation of a 
bill such as the one that we have before us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. This is a very, very 
important bill in the history of this province. In fact it’s 
transformational. This, if passed, signals the issuing in of a very 
new era, a very different era with regard to school board 
governance and how school boards are run in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
School boards in this province have a very long and 
distinguished history going back to the very beginnings of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I know that many members on both 
sides of this legislature, really this is where they started their 
political careers was as representatives on local school boards. 
And this is something that is valued, I would expect and would 
hope, by members of both sides of this Assembly. 
 
What this bill before us, Bill 63, proposes to do is to turn 
essentially everything that we currently know and value with 
regard to school boards on its head. I’m quoting the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] when I say, “This 
bill would take out of what is now required to happen in the 
light of day and allow that to be done in the dark.” 
 
Specifically this takes a number of current responsibilities for 
locally elected school boards and places them in regulations, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is something that is deeply concerning, 
deeply concerning all in of itself, but certainly even more 
concerning when we look at sort of the broad history of what 
school boards in this province have been through in recent 
history. I’ll go back to 2009, Mr. Speaker — that was the first 
year that I was elected to the Regina Public School Board — 
and some of the changes that we have seen since that time. 2009 
was another one of those very big shifts with regard to school 
board governance in the province but, I would argue, not nearly 
even as big as this shift if this bill were to pass. 
 
In 1909 — 2009 rather, a century ahead from there, Mr. 
Speaker — in 2009 what happened was, through legislation, the 
boards lost their ability to set their own mill rates, so essentially 
made them financially beholden, in terms of the amount of 
money anyway, to money that they received from the provincial 
government as they had then assumed the ability to set mill 
rates — so through education property tax as mill rates set by 
the government and grants from the provincial government. But 
they retained their ability to set priorities around how they spent 
that money, and that has continued to this day. 
 
But what hasn’t happened between 2009 and today in the 
province with regard to school boards is there hasn’t been a 
whole lot of clarity. And it’s really been marked by uncertainty 
and a lot of promises about a funding model, Mr. Speaker, a 
funding model that I know the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association requested some predictability, adequacy in that 
model, amongst other requests. And that hasn’t necessarily been 

something that we’ve seen. So we haven’t quite fixed that, and 
we’re on to this very new era with passage of this bill. 
 
In 2014, to give a little bit of history, there was some work to 
align priorities within the education sector, and work was 
undertaken to come up with an education sector strategic plan. 
And this was a process that required a certain amount of 
co-operation and collaboration around the province, and shares 
a certain level of, enjoys a certain level of support from a wide 
variety of people within the sector — not unanimous support, 
but there is some acknowledgement that this is a sector plan and 
these are the goals of the sector. 
 
One of those goals within that sector . . . There were a number 
of targets around graduation rates, the gap between First 
Nations and non-First Nations students, First Nations and Métis 
students and non-First Nations and Métis students in the 
province. Literacy, numeracy, graduation rates, Mr. Speaker; a 
readiness for children leaving the kindergarten system — all of 
those goals were there. And there was also a goal in that 
strategic plan, there remains a goal for some efficiencies within 
the sector, and in fact the number that was placed on that was 
$5 million back in 2004. This is a plan that extends to 2020. I 
don’t have the report in front of me, but I believe I trust my 
memory on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happened up until last year, the boards have now found 
about $20 million in efficiencies, and some of that have been 
difficult decisions, I’m sure, for boards. But they have taken up 
that challenge and surpassed it, so instead of finding $5 million 
in savings from within the sector, they have found 20. 
 
But that wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, for this government. We 
learned last night in committee and the night before, that a new 
target has been set and that target is now $60 million within the 
sector. This is a sector that is not shrinking in terms of students. 
Many divisions have . . . We continue to see about 2,000 
students, additional students into the system every year. And 
this growth has not in my memory been ever fully supported, 
but now we’re looking for an additional accumulated $60 
million within the sector.  
 
And just in case that wasn’t enough and the boards . . . I’m not 
sure why there wouldn’t be a reason to trust that they would act 
in good faith — they, as I noted, have found $20 million in 
savings up to this point. The minister has proposed this bill 
which allows the minister to direct all financial decisions of our 
publicly elected school boards which seems more than a little 
heavy-handed, Mr. Speaker. It fundamentally changes the 
nature of boards and their role within our public education 
system. It essentially makes them agents of the minister in 
terms of his ability to direct financial decisions and many other 
decisions. I think that there was a list that I went through 
previously. I’m just going to read from some of them. 
 
This bill gives the Minister of Education the power to issue 
directives to school divisions with respect to the number of 
approved trustees. So the number of trustees which, of course, 
we just had school board elections last fall here in the province 
and people went out and voted in a democratic process for their 
trustees. Well that now can be determined by the minister — 
the number of approved trustees, their compensation levels, the 
spending of capital and operating funding provided by the 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

government. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But here’s the thing, Mr. Speaker. Now essentially all of the 
funding, operating and capital funding is provided by the 
government because also introduced as a budget bill is a change 
to taxation which would . . . Currently school boards . . . The 
education property tax levy is collected by municipalities, 
submitted to school boards, and they remit to the provincial 
government. 
 
This bill would bypass boards altogether in that process, which 
is not entirely the problem except in that they’re requesting that 
that be properly accounted for, and there’s some concerns about 
that. And frankly I understand where their concerns lie given 
the lack of transparency and clarity and consultation that we’ve 
seen characterize this, well, this budget, the sector, and frankly 
the conducting of business by that government at this time, Mr. 
Speaker. So that essentially means that all of the money that 
school boards are responsible for now can be directed by the 
minister. 
 
And it also removes the following rules out of the Act and into 
the regulations. And, Mr. Speaker, as we know here but perhaps 
folks at home aren’t as aware of, when you remove sections 
from the Act and put them into the regulation . . . When they’re 
in the Act they’re protected, so to make changes we have to go 
through the legislative process. There’s room for public debate 
as we’re having now. Once they’re moved into the regulations, 
they can be changed by an order in council. So while this body 
is not sitting, the cabinet can decide and remove any of these 
powers. 
 
So I’ll make a list of those powers that are now currently able to 
be changed without any oversight by this legislative body: 
trustees’ conflict of interest; disqualification of trustees; board 
meetings; quorum for school division meetings; voting at 
school division meetings; remuneration for trustees; the general 
duties and powers of the division school board, so essentially 
school boards, Mr. Speaker; school closures, as we’ve noted; 
special and annual meetings of the electors; and the submission 
of school division budgets; changes to school division 
boundaries — which was something we just went through, a 
process in this province where people indicated very clearly, 
and the minister has admitted that it was reported back by the 
education panel, certainly by Mr. Perrins, that there’s absolutely 
no appetite for those boundary changes. But we don’t get a say 
anymore, Mr. Speaker, if this bill passes. And also gives the 
minister . . . gives the cabinet, rather, the ability to dictate the 
establishment of new school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is completely against what we heard from 
people around this province in terms of what they wanted to 
happen with regard to local voice in education. It was signalled, 
and the minister has not denied this. In fact this bill was 
presented, this budget was presented, packaged in a way as, we 
listened to people and we’ve retained local voice. But, Mr. 
Speaker — the minister may want to look at my quote here — 
but they retained local school boards only in the most literal 
sense. What they have done is really quashed local voice with 
this bill, were this bill to pass. 
 

There’s a quote, and I want to make sure that I attribute it 
correctly. I believe it is from Shawn Davidson who is the 
president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association], who stated, we don’t want to just be the face of 
public education; we want to be the voice of public education. 
And that is certainly what people across this province signalled. 
They will be there to essentially implement the minister’s cuts, 
to sit at those tables with employee groups and be blamed and 
responsible for these devastating cuts. 
 
We’re not just talking about the minus 3.5 mandate which will 
be devastating to the sector, but in addition the finding $54 
million from this sector, from a sector that already is struggling 
to maintain service on the front lines. And this despite the fact 
that they will stand to collect an additional $67 million through 
education property tax in this budget. 
 
So we have some very significant concerns about this, in fact to 
the extent that we are asking that this be shelved altogether. 
This is disingenuous to suggest that this bill would keep local 
voice in education. School boards have indicated very clearly 
. . . I know that we saw a rather lengthy scrum with the 
president of the SSBA yesterday, indicating his very significant 
concerns with this piece of legislation. I’ve started to hear from 
certainly my own constituents and other bodies around the 
province, but also constituents from the members opposite. And 
I know we’ve been out in constituencies around this province, 
some that are held by our members, but really held by members 
on all sides of this Assembly. And we’re hearing very clearly 
that they want local voice in education. 
 
They thought when the budget came out and they saw that press 
release, we’re retaining local voice, you know, they breathed a 
bit of a sigh of relief. But when we see the details of this bill, 
people are starting to recognize that this is not what they were 
promised in any way. This comes in the context of devastating 
cuts within the sector that will impact our classrooms. And just 
in case there’s any doubt that school boards, were this bill 
passed, are going to implement them, the minister has assumed 
that he will just take over those decisions and take over the very 
existence of school boards, right out of The Education Act and 
put them into the regulations. 
 
So for that reason and many more, we will be paying very, very 
close attention. We will continue to meet with our partners 
throughout the sector to have consultation, meaningful 
consultation. There’s enough to go on, just in the report back of 
the Perrins report and the report of the panel, that really 
contradicts the measures that we’re seeing in Bill 63. It is our 
hope that this bill would be repealed, that it would be shelved, 
that there would be some admission on part of government that 
this is wrong headed and this is not at all what people were 
asking for when they were consulted over the last several 
months in this province. 
 
I will have an opportunity to continue this discussion with the 
minister and his officials in committee. I will take every 
opportunity to speak out against this bill and to speak with 
people around the province, to mount pressure both inside this 
Assembly and outside this Assembly. Because, make no 
mistake, this fundamentally changes the face of public 
education in our province, and it is very clear that this is not the 
direction that the people of this province want to take. Yet here 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

it is before us. 
 
It’s along another theme in this budget where we have seen an 
increasing willingness to take over the powers from other 
organizations and levels of government, to pursue rather 
relentlessly the spending reserves of other organizations now 
that this government has spent all of their own and more. And 
we really think that this is a very wrong direction, a drastic and 
wrong direction for the government to take, and frankly they 
have no mandate to do so. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we send this bill 
to committee, and I will continue discussion there. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 63, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 
that Bill No. 63, The Education Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 64 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 64 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
stand and provide some comments with regards to Bill No. 64, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act of legislation has been discussed quite 
thoroughly, oftentimes every day in sitting here. And I’ve had 
lots of communications with many municipal leaders across the 
province and their concerns about the changes to this legislation 
and the hastiness of it, and the fact that there was very poor 
communication within the government to the municipal level of 
governments. And so we’re really concerned about some of the 
purpose of this bill, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s really important 
that we get a lot of discussion on it. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I want to kind of talk a little bit about the 

history of the . . . It’s called grants-in-lieu. Some places it’s 
called payments-in-lieu. But, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure you well 
know, many communities . . . There was 109 that are being 
impacted with this change and they have agreements that were 
signed and made years and years ago, some from the 1930s, 
’40s, ’50s. This has been decades of agreement within the 
province and these municipalities. 
 
The history of that is that urban municipalities, while they were 
becoming more progressive and more modern, they were 
looking at ways of providing power for their residents. And 
once they started establishing some power within their 
communities, they started providing some power to some of the 
local communities, local people around their communities, and 
were working out those agreements. 
 
And when, I believe, the best premier of this province came 
about, Tommy Douglas came in power, he decided that this was 
something that needed to be provided across the province. And 
so he got a group of people together and it was called Sask 
Power Commission at that time, Mr. Speaker. And so they got 
together and they went across the province and they looked at 
how could we provide power across this province and in a 
Crown corporation aspect so that the people of this province 
own this corporation. And so they came up with a plan and they 
presented it to him and he said, let’s go. Let’s go with this. 
 
And so then these organizations went to these communities that 
were already providing this power and said, can we work out a 
deal because we want to have a consistent power grid across the 
province? And so this Sask Power Commission was then made 
into SaskPower Corporation that we have now to this day. And 
so they went to these communities and they made these deals 
with these communities, and these agreements, these negotiated 
agreements, Mr. Speaker. And yes, there’s a little bit of 
different language in each of these agreements in all of these 
communities if you take a look at them, and I’ve had an 
opportunity to look at many of them. 
 
But the whole purpose of these negotiated contracts basically 
remain the same: that the province would take over the creation 
of power in the province, but they would provide these 
communities a payment-in-lieu for being able to use their land 
or their buildings or whatever. And so these agreements were 
made. It was a consistent revenue stream that these 
municipalities had, and never did they think that this was 
something that could possibly be on the table, because they feel 
that there really was little to no consultation with regards to that 
from this government. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once budget day came along, these 
communities were really floored that they were going to lose 
this revenue stream, and with no consultation. Like when 
usually you make a deal with someone, you sign a contract; you 
honour that contract. But if something comes about and you 
can’t honour it anymore, you usually sit down with the leaders 
that you created that contract with and come up with a plan. 
And there has been no plan that’s been established. There’s 
been no talk about maybe even the government paying out their 
contracts, you know, or giving a financial payment-in-lieu for 
all of this. It’s just basically, let’s create a law so we can 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

eliminate it. And it really doesn’t seem very fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So like I said, a lot of the municipal leaders feel that there was 
really no consultation. And the minister did have a meeting, 
though, with some of the members of SUMA. And I’ll read a 
quote that was from one of the SUMA members: 
 

We were hopeful the meeting with the four cabinet 
ministers on March 29th was a first step in a meaningful 
consultation and further discussion with the provincial 
government. But less than two days later, before we could 
bring forward any suggestions, Minister Harpauer issued a 
press release. The decision to cap the payments-in-lieu cuts 
— but only for nine of the 109 hometowns, and only at 30 
per cent of the revenue-sharing amount — came out of 
nowhere for us. 

 
This was a quote from Vice-president Mike Strachan of SUMA. 
So basically they had a meeting, Mr. Speaker, and the leaders 
felt that, you know, oh well we might have gotten towards 
something. But then they were just blown away when they saw 
a media release that there’s going to be these caps placed only 
to the nine of the 109 communities. 
 
Then it says here: 
 

To add insult to injury, within a week of agreeing to work 
with and listen to Saskatchewan hometowns, to find a 
better solution, the government introduced Bill 64. The bill 
would cancel all municipal services agreements — 
payments-in-lieu — and take away municipalities’ right to 
legal action against the government or the Crowns in 
question. 

 
And Mike Strachan quotes here, “We thought we were partners 
in building Saskatchewan, but this isn’t how partners act.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that they had a meeting and 
the minister said, look, we need to come up with these savings. 
And the municipal leaders said, okay, we get it. We’ll come 
together. We’ll come up with a plan. We’ll talk with all of our 
leaders and see what we need to put on the table to make up that 
savings. So they worked endless hours of trying to come up 
with a plan. And then all of a sudden there was a media release 
that they were going to make the caps to those nine 
communities, and then there was the bill that was released in 
the House here with no consultation, Mr. Speaker. And to me 
that’s poor governance, to do that and just sweep the rug right 
out from underneath their feet. 
 
And so the impact of this is going to be greatly felt. And so the 
vice-president, Rodger Hayward, says: 
 

Almost a hundred towns stand to lose their 
payments-in-lieu. Introducing this bill was a clear sign to 
hometowns that the provincial government is not interested 
in meaningful consultation with the order of government 
that’s spent the last decade on the front lines of growth. We 
were doing our fair share during the boom, providing 
crucial services and creating the quality of life we all 
expect in Saskatchewan. We were paying, not profiting. 

 
Because, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the population of the 

province has increased and a lot of the people who have come 
to the province have been living in the urban settings. And so a 
lot of these urban settings have had to make adjustments to the 
increase, and they were happy with that and they were willing 
to do that and they were going to do their part. And so a lot of 
the money that they had in their budgets and stuff . . . like they 
had to build new facilities. They had to accommodate for all 
this growth in our province, which was good. But now they feel 
like, again, like the rug was pulled right out from underneath 
them. 
 
And so although the cities were happy that at this time 
municipal revenue sharing has stayed consistent . . . and that 
was the whole purpose of introducing revenue sharing, was to 
have a consistent flow of revenue. But they’re saying now that, 
and this was a quote from vice-president Bob Maloney, “The 
province has been using revenue sharing as an excuse to keep 
passing responsibility down to municipalities.” 
 
And so they’re feeling really that their voice was not heard. 
They might have had a meeting, but they weren’t listened to. 
And so this is really concerning, Mr. Speaker. And so no one 
expects that the province will get the stakeholders’ pre-approval 
of the budget, but certainly with a decrease in revenues that’s 
this substantial, that maybe a little bit of consultation with the 
municipal leaders should have been the way to go about this. 
Because having no consultation is a complete insult. And 
during a time of austerity that we’re facing right now, you 
really need to ensure that you have your primary stakeholders 
onside. And I think everybody’s ready to tighten their belt 
buckle a little bit, but when you get a large substantial revenue 
taken away, that’s a huge hit. 
 
But we’ve got to remember, this isn’t just a gift that was given 
by the province. This was contracts that were signed and agreed 
to. And so this is legal, binding agreements that this 
government is thinking that they can just pass this bill and just 
be done with it. And that’s just not how things work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I want to talk a little bit about the impact that these changes 
to the grants-in-lieu are going to have, these sudden changes. It 
wasn’t even, let’s work on a plan here. It was, this is what we’re 
doing. You’re losing all this money. We haven’t told you how 
long this is going to last, if this is going to be this year or 
forever. We’re not giving you any information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of these communities . . . it’s been 20 days 
since the budget, 12 days in a fiscal year already started, and a 
lot of these communities haven’t even gotten any information 
from the ministry’s office about what this impact will look like 
for them. How much are they losing? How much will their 
municipal revenue sharing for sure be? There’s been no plans in 
place. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that within this budget the 
payments-in-lieu has been a huge, hard hit for the communities, 
but those aren’t the only decisions that this provincial 
government has done that is going to result in major cuts and 
major changes to municipalities. Mr. Speaker, we also know 
that the libraries, a lot of them are getting 50 per cent cut or at 
least a big, substantial percentage of their budget, and they’re 
being told to look at their municipal government for funding for 



April 12, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

that. 
 
And then we have STC that’s going to be eliminated and 
virtually privatized, which is a broken promise. But that’s going 
to have a huge impact on a lot of these communities as well, 
about what are they going to do for transportation and for their 
residents or even their goods and all that. 
 
We also have, we have the city . . . the rinks, the grants for the 
rinks. That’s going to be a huge hit. I talk for my hometown 
which is a small village, that they don’t have many residents 
there and they’re going to lose $5,000 from the rinks. And also 
their municipal revenue sharing went down because of the 
recent census, because their population has gone down, because 
a lot of people have been moving to the bigger urban centres. 
So these small villages and towns, Mr. Speaker, are really 
suffering and struggling with a lot of the decisions in this bill, 
or in this budget. But also the urban parks have gotten a big hit. 
 
And then the 1 per cent PST [provincial sales tax] is going to 
have a big, big issue in people’s budgets, but also the 6 per cent 
on people who . . . construction materials. So if people are . . . 
[inaudible] . . . cities and towns and such are looking at . . . I 
was talking to the administrator from my hometown and he said 
that they were wanting to build a new fire hall. And so that’s 
going to add the cost to that, you know, so the bottom line. So 
this is really going to be impacting on already hard-hit urban 
municipalities. 
 
And so I wanted to talk about a few . . . Like I know the city of 
Prince Albert, they said that if they were to try to make up for 
all the money that they’re losing because of this budget, they 
would have to raise taxes 8 per cent. And they chose not to do 
that on this budget, but they did say that residents need to 
expect that that’s going to be a large tax hike next year. 
 
There’s also been talk about a lot of the police budgets in a lot 
of these communities are going to be cut. And we’re still 
waiting to hear from . . . the results from when the group of 
members went across the province to talk about crime in our 
province. And we know crime is getting out of hand. It’s an 
issue, especially for a lot of these communities, these 
small-town communities, the towns and villages and RMs [rural 
municipality]. And so if their budgets are shrinking and they’re 
going to have less money to put towards policing, that’s going 
to have a big impact on the communities as well. 
 
And I was watching the Regina City Council, and they had — it 
was a full chamber there — and they had lots of people coming 
to present because they’re worried about programs that are 
going to be cut here as well. And they had a big contingent of 
people coming from the Leslie lawn bowling greens, and they 
talked about how it’s a matter of thousands of dollars to keep 
that lawn bowling green open, but it is one of the items that are 
on the table, you know, and that’s something that’s really 
important to many residents here. 
 
And the Snowbuster program and the PlayEscapes program is 
also being considered as maybe needing to cut those programs 
as well. 
 
The PlayEscapes program, Mr. Speaker, this is a program that is 
really valuable, especially to some of the more inner-city kids 

and families for recreational options. And when we’re talking 
about cuts to parks and cuts to libraries and then now cuts to 
these programs, like families who are the most vulnerable are 
really going to be the ones who are going to be struggling the 
most from this budget. And so this program was free for the 
community. There was 1,553 registered participants, but they 
also had a lot of unregistered people dropping in. And they have 
about 900 visits a day. And so this is a program that’s really 
important, but the city really needs to make some tough 
decisions, you know, and so those are the types of things that 
are on the block. 
 
And in Saskatoon as well, they said that with all of the cuts 
from this budget, they’re losing about $59 million, and that’s 
huge. And so some of the provincial cuts were from Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority, Tourism 
Saskatoon, Meewasin Valley Authority, and the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit. And then the Saskatoon Public Library lost 
$650,000, Mr. Speaker. And the provincial contributions to the 
West Nile virus, the mosquito control, and the Dutch elm 
disease is hundreds of thousands of dollars, you know, that’s 
going to be lost. And so the big cities are struggling, but we 
can’t forget about the villages and towns and everybody who is 
going to be having to be heavily impacted by this. 
 
And I think the biggest insult to injury with this bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that they’ve added a clause here so people 
can’t even, you know, pursue legal action because of losing 
their rights to these signed contracts, these signed agreements. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And you know, we have a process of litigation so that people 
who feel that they have been wronged by our government have 
an opportunity to stand in front of someone who’s an impartial 
adviser, the judge, and come up, give your piece, and then they 
give their piece, and then they make a decision on whether this 
was the right or wrong choice. 
 
But obviously this government knew this was the wrong 
decision, and it was not a proper decision because even in the 
minister’s statements here, and I’ll quote: 
 

The amending legislation was necessary to provide the 
government the option of redirecting the revenues to the 
General Revenue Fund and also to clarify potential legal 
situations that may have been raised by those impacted 
communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is wrong in all so many levels, like to take 
that right away from people. If you’re making a decision, good, 
but make a decision that you know is legally binding and is the 
right decision. 
 
And this is coming from a government here that, you know, 
they’re feeling that a decision the federal government is 
imposing on them is wrong, and they’re talking about seeking 
maybe litigation if this is being imposed to them. But then yet 
they’re going to take the rights away from our municipal 
governments for them to have that same exact ability to voice 
their concerns. It just doesn’t seem right, and it just doesn’t 
seem like it’s the right decision to make. And using your power 
and authority to get what you want is the wrong thing, and it’s 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2017 

not democratic society. This was not something that was 
brought up at the election. People did not vote on this, and now 
taking their legal, their rights away is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so obviously you can see I’m pretty passionate about this 
issue. Talking to all the community leaders, it’s been 
heartbreaking hearing the decisions they’re going to need to 
make and the fact that they feel that they haven’t been heard or 
listened to. And these leaders are so very important in our 
province here, Mr. Speaker, and so I’m going to continue to 
have those meetings with them. 
 
But I’m looking forward to having more discussion with 
regards to this bill in committee. We’re going to have some 
good discussion about it, and I’m looking forward to that, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m going to move this bill off to committee, and 
I’ll cease my remarks right now and have more discussion 
there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
64, The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 64, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:19.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2231 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2231 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2231 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2232 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2232 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2232 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2232 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2232 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2233 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2233 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2233 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2233 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2233 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2234 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2234 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2234 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day of Pink 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2235 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2236 
 All Nations Healin’ Thru Artz Talent Show and Fundraiser 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2235 
 Aging-Related Health Research in Saskatchewan 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2236 
 Mankota Athlete’s Outstanding Hockey Career 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2236 
 PotashCorp Supports Aboriginal Entrepreneurship 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
 New Passenger Bus Service in Yorkton and Regina 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 
 Letter to School Divisions and Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2238 
 Financial Situation of Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2239 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2239 
 Provision of Hearing Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2239 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2239 
 Provision of Teacher Education Programming in the North 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2240 
 Support for Meewasin Valley Authority 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2241 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2241 
 Government Strategies to Attract Business 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2241 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 
 



 

POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2242 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2242 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 
  Merriman (referral to Human Services Committee) ........................................................................................................... 2245 
 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2245 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2248 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


