






















































Hansard: March 22, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 62A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1829 
 March 22, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome 
everyone to the Chamber and remind our guests not to take part 
in debate, which means no applause, and please refrain from 
using electronic devices, which includes phones and cameras. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would request leave of the House to make a few comments and 
then ask for a moment of silence in the wake of the events in 
London today. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Response to Attack in London 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to 
members for leave, and to our guests as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many reminders in this Chamber of the 
relationship that we have as a country and, in particular, this 
room has to the palace of Westminster, to the parliament in 
London. There is an invisible thread that ties Westminster, the 
mother parliament, to us, and more importantly there are bonds 
of affection and affinity and shared values that we have with the 
people of the United Kingdom, a shared love of freedom and of 
democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Winston Churchill once said, courage is the first 
of human qualities because it is the quality that guarantees all of 
the others. Mr. Speaker, today I know people across this 
country and across the province of Saskatchewan and in this 
House will be praying for courage for those who are fellow 
citizens of the Commonwealth in the United Kingdom in 
London. We will also be praying for their resolve, and ours, to 
ensure security, to protect freedom and liberty. And we will 
also be praying, Mr. Speaker, that they would find a peace that 
passes understanding. 
 
And so in honour of those three who were killed today and 
others that were hurt and many others who are scared, there and 
in other places around the world, I think it would be fitting were 
we to begin this day with a moment of silence. And I would 
request that we do that at this time. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to respond. 
 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
in to the statement of the Premier and to certainly thank 
everybody for taking a moment of silence in response to this 
horrifying attack, this horrifying tragedy, on a great ally and on 
a house of democracy, the UK [United Kingdom] parliament 
here today. Certainly our thoughts and our care are with the 
victims’ families, and our thoughts are with all those that will 
have been a part of responding to this tragedy as well. 
 
We stand in solidarity, solemn solidarity, with parliamentarians 
in the United Kingdom. We stand together with our allies. We 
stand together as a province and a country at times like these. 
 
Sadly, we’re also reminded of recent tragedies in Canada where 
our house of democracy in 2014 experienced a similar tragedy, 
or recently where a place of prayer in Quebec City experienced 
a horrifying shooting as well. 
 
These cowardly and these horrifying attacks and tragedies must 
always cause us to stand together. They must always cause us to 
be reminded of why we need to work for democracy and why 
we need to always work for safety and for security and, 
importantly, for peace and unity. As the official opposition, we 
stand with the Premier, all the people that are here today, in our 
entire province, our country, with the people of the United 
Kingdom. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 
there are a number of guests that have joined us here today as is 
the tradition, the proper tradition on budget day. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, notwithstanding the fact that each is worthy of their 
own individual introduction, I think it’s important that we 
provide a more general one as we have done in past years. And 
so on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
significantly on behalf of the Minister of Finance, I just want to 
say to all of those who’ve attended, thank you for coming 
today. 
 
More importantly, thank you for what you have been doing in 
the days before this one. No doubt you have been engaged, 
some of you with your associations, some of you as individuals, 
with the members on either sides of the House trying to 
provided input and feedback, working to provide input and 
feedback into the budget process. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a bulwark of our democracy here. That’s a strength of our 
system, and it’s on full display here in this room today in our 
chambers. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 
House to join with me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier here today 
to welcome all of those that have joined us in their Assembly 
here today, on Treaty 4 territory, in the homeland of the Métis. 
And simply we’re joined by people from all across our province 
that work tirelessly day after day to strengthen and build our 
province.  
 
And it’s on behalf of the official opposition, a grateful official 
opposition, thank you for being here today. But most 
importantly, thank you for what you do each and every day to 
serve Saskatchewan, to build Saskatchewan, to extend 
opportunity in Saskatchewan. Thank you for what you do on 
those fronts. So on behalf of a grateful opposition, on behalf of 
a grateful province, I ask all to join with me to extend a very 
warm welcome and a very sincere thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014 the minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing 
detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while keeping people 
safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” The petitioners 
point out on that same day the minister of Health said, “We 
want to ensure that individuals with mental health and 
addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
They point out that this government has repeatedly indicated 
that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps individuals out of 
hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. Mr. Speaker, on this 
side of the House we could not agree more. But the petitioners 
point out that these ministers are now trying to place the 
responsibility for repairing budget deficits on those 
experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and who 
are living from day to day without proper services. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016; 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 

to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these citizens believe 
that we have a better solution right here in Saskatchewan, a 
Saskatchewan-made solution if you will, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s right down at Boundary dam 3. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a far better way to reduce CO2 emissions 
globally and in our province than what any carbon tax will do. 
The potential for that plant, Mr. Speaker, would be the 
equivalent of taking 250,000 cars right off our highways by the 
reductions from that plant. And with the number of coal plants 
that are being built around the world, Mr. Speaker, this can 
certainly be a global solution. Technology and innovation is a 
better course. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Shellbrook, Leask, Parkside, Blaine Lake, Canwood, Prince 
Albert, Stump Lake, Debden, Kinistino, Cochin, Glaslyn, 
Medstead, Livelong, Turtle Lake, Birch Lake, Martensville, 
North Battleford, Gordon, Mervin, Spiritwood, Edam, Chitek 
Lake, Waterhen Lake, Rabbit Lake, Saskatoon, Glenbush, 
Eatonia, and Bellevue. Mr. Speaker, I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
standing in my place to answer the call and direction of the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote for anyone, someone to 
help her in her petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and communities north of 
Prince Albert and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. So therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately planning and quickly 
commencing the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do day after day, Mr. Speaker, we stand up here and 
present petitions from people that have signed these pages from 
all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, Mr. 
Speaker, the people are primarily from Prince Albert. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent 
Crown corporation sell-off. The people who’ve signed this 
petition wish to bring to our attention the following: that the 
Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

that allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 
49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay 
for schools, roads, and hospitals. And over the last decade, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s well over $3 billion. Those dividends should go 
to the people of Saskatchewan, not private investors. Also our 
Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan people 
across the province. 
 
So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately stop the 
passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act and 
start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations instead of 
selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
The people who’ve signed this, by the way, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Moose Jaw, Qu’Appelle, Regina, and 
Bienfait. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. The 
undersigned residents want to bring to our attention the 
following: that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 2016, the 
Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to the 
$30,000 in supplementary funding. And on June 21st, 2016, 
provincial government members, including the two members 
from Moose Jaw, voted in favour of this bill, resulting in cuts to 
Wakamow and subsequent job losses. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: wherefore your petitioners humbly pray 
that your honourable Legislative Assembly call on this 
government to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory 
funding to the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from right 
across the province, but largely from Moose Jaw. I do so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has 
had to close its doors during the daytime hours, resulting in a 
loss of resource to people in distress. Mr. Speaker, we have a 

high suicide rate in Prince Albert. We are the third-largest city, 
and we need a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week service, crisis 
intervention service. The daytime closure of the Prince Albert 
mobile crisis unit has put stress on the Prince Albert Police 
Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may not be 
trained and/or qualified to provide counselling and intervention 
services to clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this issue is really important for all residents of 
this province. And these petitions right here today have been 
signed by residents from Regina and Yorkton. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in the province. Those who are 
signing this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property taxes, and this is not 
something that’s done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC 
[British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future and 
yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and it 
is appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and, Mr. Speaker, 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina 
and Qu’Appelle. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition calling for a reversal to the cuts to the Aboriginal court 
worker program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners wish to bring to 
your attention the following: that the Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-17 provincial budget. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that this has been a highly effective 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

program. It’s an investment that works to keep people out of 
prison, works to make communities safer. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the petitioners are well aware that while the government was 
busy cutting the funding to this program, they were also 
pointing to it as part of their response to the calls to action for 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
highly unfortunate to say the least: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions, in addition to those 
from around the province, has been signed by individuals from 
Regina, Saskatoon, Air Ronge, La Ronge, Cupar, Melville, 
North Battleford, Prince Albert, Manor, Oxbow, Moose Jaw, 
Cowessess, Sedley, Melfort, Swift Current, and Shell Lake. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
again today to present another petition to ensure job security for 
victims of domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious 
distinction of having the highest rates of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence follows them to work. Mr. 
Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation and Ontario 
is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last week the opposition tabled a private 
member’s bill calling for the implementation of this exact 
measure in addition to two other measures we’d like to see 
implemented. We are hopeful that the government will take that 
on shortly. 
 
Individuals who are signing this petition today come from 
Ituna, Melville, Midale, Radville, Weyburn, and North 
Battleford. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to present 
a petition to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern 
Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program], as it’s known, has been a very 
successful program for 40 years, with high graduation rates and 

almost all of its graduates staying in the North and staying in 
the teaching profession. It’s been an opportunity for people in 
the North to have good jobs and for youth in the North to have 
great role models. But the proposed changes, Mr. Speaker, 
jeopardize support for tuition, support for books, and support 
for accessible, affordable student housing. 
 
It’s not too late, Mr. Speaker, to honour the five-year agreement 
that was signed and preserve this program that’s been doing 
such great work for the last 40 years. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, and continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Pinehouse, La Ronge, Air Ronge, Sucker 
River, La Loche, Weyakwin, Cumberland House, Battleford, 
Cole Bay, Canoe Narrows, Timber Bay, Green Lake, Canoe 
River, Beauval, Debden, Sandy Bay, Stony Rapids, Brabant 
Lake, Dundurn, Buffalo Narrows, Stanley Mission, 
Montmartre, Raymore, and right here in Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Honouring Freda Ahenakew 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 
renaming of the 20th Street branch of the Saskatoon Public 
Library in honour of Cree language advocate Freda Ahenakew. 
I was pleased to attend the official renaming ceremony on 
February 10th at Station 20 West. 
 
Carol Cooley, CEO [chief executive officer] and director of the 
Saskatoon Public Library, said that Ahenakew’s work 
preserving the indigenous languages, particularly Cree, has had 
profound and lasting effects throughout Canada. 
 
Ahenakew returned to high school as an adult to set an example 
for her 12 children. She went on to university, earning a 
Bachelor of Education degree and a Masters of Arts degree. Her 
graduate thesis, Cree Language Structures: A Cree Approach, 
was published and has been reprinted 18 times. She received 
numerous honours and awards. She was invested in the Order of 
Canada in 1998 and awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
in 2005. 
 
Dolores Sand, Freda’s daughter, said, and I quote: 
 

The family of the late Dr. Freda Ahenakew is extremely 
pleased that our mother, kohkum, and cāpān is to be 
honoured for her life’s work by dedicating a library in her 
name. 

 
The renaming is part of the library’s commitment to respond to 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission calls to action, and 
was done after consulting with indigenous elders. Mr. Speaker, 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Ahenakew 
family and the Saskatoon Public Library on this wonderful 
acknowledgement of Freda Ahenakew, an incredible indigenous 
role model. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

New Schools Completed in Saskatoon Westview 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand today to highlight this government’s commitment to our 
education system, with the completion of two new schools in 
my constituency of Saskatoon Westview. Ernest Lindner, 
Saskatoon Public, and St. Lorenzo Ruiz, Saskatoon Catholic are 
the two new schools in Hampton Village. They are both 
wonderful facilities which will be home to over 1,000 students 
and 90 child care spaces when they open in September. 
 
I’ve toured the schools surrounding Hampton Village in 
Dundonald and Westview, and I can say that these schools will 
also benefit from smaller classroom sizes and less pressure on 
resources. 
 
I am proud of this government’s record when it comes to 
education. Our record is one of opening 40 new schools, 
including 21 this year along with 25 major renovations, while 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] record when revenues were 
tough was closing 176 schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous member for my constituency, the 
previous leader of the opposition, along with the rest of that 
party, voted against the budget that included the capital funding 
for these two new schools in my constituency. Soon the 
Minister of Finance will present the budget to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Will they continue to vote against new schools 
that keep young families in Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, we 
will find out. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Players’ Benches Installed for Outdoor 
Hockey League 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Outdoor Hockey 
League is an initiative of the Ehrlo Sport Venture program, a 
community outreach project to enable inner-city recreation by 
reducing barriers to participation in sport and physical activity. 
The Cathedral Knights are one of nine outdoor hockey league 
teams in Regina that offer barrier-free recreational hockey to 
neighbourhood kids. 
 
This past year Ehrlo Sport Venture, along with the Cathedral 
volunteers, partnered with the city of Regina, NuFab Building 
Products, Great Canadian Oil Change, Rapid Lawn Service, 
Century West Homes, the Cathedral Community Association, 
and Central zone board to install players’ benches at the Leslie 
Park rink. Mr. Speaker, the players’ bench project at Leslie rink 
is an example of what can be achieved when government, 
community groups, corporate sponsors, and volunteers all come 
together. 
 

Ehrlo Sport Venture has been working with the city of Regina 
to assess maintenance needs at all nine outdoor rinks. Mr. 
Speaker, the Cathedral rink celebrated the installation of the 
players’ benches on Hockey Day in Canada on February the 
18th. I was honoured to attend this ceremony along with 
Andrew Stevens, our local councillor; Erin Weir, MP [Member 
of Parliament] for Regina-Lewvan; and Amanda McConnell, 
coordinator of Ehrlo Sport Venture; along with project 
sponsors, volunteers Peter Joyce, Mark Johnston, Jeff 
Woodward, as well as Cathedral players and parents. A 
ceremonial puck drop was followed by an outdoor scrimmage, 
hot dogs, and hot chocolate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing the Cathedral 
Knights as well as the players, coaches, volunteers, and 
sponsors. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Advances in Provincial Health Care  
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
a moment to reflect on how far health care in this province has 
come over the last decade. Since taking office in 2007, our 
government has invested almost $1.3 billion in health capital 
facilities and equipment, more than double the investment made 
in the previous nine years. This includes the Humboldt District 
Health Complex, the new Moose Jaw hospital, 13 long-term 
care facilities, the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan, and the 
new Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford. 
 
In addition to health care facilities and equipment, Mr. Speaker, 
our government has already nearly doubled funding for health 
programs and services. Unlike the NDP, our government has 
not forgotten about rural Saskatchewan. That is why there are 
now 750 doctors, more doctors practising in Saskatchewan, and 
over 3,000 more nurses of every designation. 
 
Innovative approaches such as collaborative emergency centres 
and Telehealth are emerging as ways of ensuring continued 
access to health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP record is closing 52 hospitals, long-term 
care beds, and 176 schools. They continue to vote against our 
budgets, which include building new hospitals, highways, and 
schools. Will they continue to vote against investments in 
health care? We will find out. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Government Investment Practices 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite like to ask, where has the money gone? Well we are 
happy to answer that and talk about our record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has paid off $2.2 billion of 
provincial debt, which has saved our province millions in 
annual debt servicing costs. Saskatchewan leads the country 
with the lowest government debt per capita. By keeping this 
debt low, we ensure the ongoing competitiveness of 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

Saskatchewan’s economy. Mr. Speaker, our government has 
also reduced taxes, saving Saskatchewan people $6.7 billion. 
One hundred and twelve thousand people have been completely 
removed from the provincial tax rolls. We provided 
Saskatchewan people with a plan to lower taxes, repay 
operating debt, cut red tape, and invest in much needed 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is where the money has gone. It has gone into 
investing in Saskatchewan families and their future. 
 
Now the members opposite have voted against every single one 
of those investments. They voted against every budget that has 
included new hospitals, new schools, better highways, and 
lower taxes, and yet they have never once presented an 
alternative. 
 
When the Minister of Finance reveals the upcoming budget, 
will they continue to vote against responsible financial 
planning? Will they perhaps finally present an alternative, or 
will they keep playing politics? I guess we’ll find out. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Status of Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to talk about the largest infrastructure project this 
province has ever seen, the east Regina bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
This freeway consists of 14 interchanges, 60 kilometres of 
four-lane highway — 40 of it brand new — as well as 55 
kilometres of new service road. It is designed to move traffic 
efficiently and effectively to and from our capital city. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s on time, it’s on budget. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, this will increase the safety for 
those entering this new freeway, especially those from the 
communities of Balgonie, Pilot Butte, White City, and Emerald 
Park. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the interim leader comes in here 
day after day and misrepresents the facts. I could see it, Mr. 
Speaker, if he didn’t know better, Mr. Speaker, or he was 
completely out of touch, which some may think. Mr. Speaker, 
but I will say that that member asked for a detailed briefing 
from the Minister of Highways. He knows better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will close by asking the provisional leader to do 
one of two things: either start representing the facts honestly to 
the people of Saskatchewan or ask the NDP to move their 
leadership ahead so he can be surgically removed as a leader, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the last two leaders that sat in that chair. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Provincial Budget Will Meet Challenges 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although our 
economy has been through some tough challenges in the past 

few months, we have seen strong indications of its resilience. In 
February we had the highest growth rate in Canada, with 8,000 
jobs being created in Saskatchewan. 
 
In March we were rated as the most attractive jurisdiction in the 
world for mining investment by the Fraser Institute. 
Manufacturing sales totalled 1.36 billion in January, an increase 
of 3.4 per cent from the previous month and the highest 
percentage increase in Western Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan workers had the highest month-over-month 
percentage growth in average weekly earnings among the 
provinces in December. In January, Saskatchewan had the 
second-highest month-over-month retail sales growth rate in the 
country at 3.7 per cent, compared to the national rate of only 2.2 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s attractive investment policies 
and continued investment in our economy has once again 
helped to keep Saskatchewan strong. It is however important to 
know that the economy and the provincial budget are two 
different things. While our resilient economy is showing signs 
of strength, our budget challenges remain with low commodity 
prices. That is why our government will be putting forward a 
budget today that will be meeting these challenges. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, after not being straight 
about our province’s finances and not releasing a third quarter 
financial report, we’re all looking forward to seeing the facts 
and what the Sask Party and that Premier have been hiding from 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that everyone wants to know 
— and that they deserve to know some facts about — is the 
Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal. I 
know the . . . We all know the usual lines that come from the 
Sask Party. In fact any casual observer of this Assembly can 
probably almost recite those tired, irrelevant lines. 
 
But I want to get past that. This isn’t about the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] investigation into the matter. It’s not 
about the scathing auditor’s report. It’s a simple question that 
only the Premier can answer, a question that the Premier sadly 
dodges day after day. When did he, the Premier, first learn that 
the original seller of the land involved in this scandal was the 
landlord to the former minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, first of all that 
question has been answered. I’ve answered it. But more to the 
point, Mr. Speaker, members on this side, myself included, we 
generally don’t know the specifics and the names around 
transactions if they never took place. This deal that he asks 
breathlessly about every day in question period, this specific 
transaction, never happened, Mr. Speaker. And if he wants to 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

confirm that, he should go to the auditor’s report. 
 
The auditor’s report indicates that that transaction never 
happened, Mr. Speaker. I dare say there are a number of 
transactions, land transactions, in the province that might 
involve the government, and if they don’t go ahead for 
whatever reason, I probably don’t know the names of those 
people either. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s pathetic and weak. 
The Premier has not once answered that question. As for the 
actual transaction, the landlord of the former minister made $6 
million in this deal. You can try to deny that; it’d be like 
denying the state of the finances as he does day after day. 
 
And you know, again we see a Premier that won’t answer 
simple questions, and it’s the same in the Public Accounts 
Committee, where even the . . . You know, he found his voice 
here today. But the former Highways minister was sitting in the 
room as a member of the committee just yesterday, and the 
Sask Party members refused to even allow him to answer some 
simple questions about what he knew as the Highways minister 
that was there, you know, as the scandal was going down. 
 
You know, the former Highways minister has recently been 
welcomed back into the caucus, so why does the Premier not 
trust him to answer simple questions about this scandal? And 
how on earth is it acceptable to refuse to allow ministers to 
answer questions at committee? What is he so desperately 
trying to hide? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, they can dismiss the work 
of the auditor all that they want. The fact of the matter is the 
auditor looked into this matter in great depth. The auditor had 
access to all of the documents that she requested access to. The 
auditor had access to all of the individuals involved in this 
transaction. The auditor did a very thorough job, and the auditor 
issued a report, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of that very thorough 
job. 
 
I would quote the auditor as she said on an open-line radio 
show with respect to the very thorough job that she did. And I 
would quote her, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red 
flags. Because this is land transactions, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again no answers, no accountability, no 
transparency. Saskatchewan people deserve to know why their 
$11 million went to these two Sask Party supporters. You 
know, and they need to know this because we have a Sask Party 

Premier who’s threatening the very jobs and their contracts, Mr. 
Speaker, the contracts with those that are working in our 
classrooms, those in our hospitals, those in our care centres. 
And he’s disgracefully fired the lowest-paid public servants in 
the province. 
 
At the same time, the Premier tells them that he won’t even 
look into the contract with the multinational conglomerate 
based in France and beyond. That’s the $2 billion contract for 
the Regina bypass that went from the original price tag of $400 
million. A billion and a half is apparently perfectly normal, and 
apparently humorous for a Premier that can’t manage and 
couldn’t get the job done during the best years, Mr. Speaker. 
The Premier says Saskatchewan companies and workers should 
be happy with whatever subcontracts the conglomerate decides 
to hand to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is this right and fair? How is it that this 
billion-dollar-plus overrun is safe from scrutiny by 
Saskatchewan people while Saskatchewan people’s jobs are on 
the chopping block? And will the Premier finally answer the 
question: of that $2 billion in the billion-dollar-plus overrun, 
how much of the money is staying with Saskatchewan 
companies? How much is going to France and beyond? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is just so much wrong 
with that preamble, as there is day after day. No wonder he’s 
the interim leader; no wonder there’s help coming from 
Saskatoon Meewasin, Mr. Speaker. It can’t happen a moment 
too soon because, Mr. Speaker, day after day in this House, we 
have the leader, the interim leader of the NDP stand up and 
provide for the Assembly facts as he would present them that 
are just fundamentally not true. 
 
The project that he refers to, when it was $400 million, was tiny 
in scope, much smaller in scope. We worked with the 
communities involved, with the city of Regina, and expanded it 
into be the most significant, largest infrastructure project in the 
history of the province — a bypass, a true bypass around the 
city. And so therefore the scope increased. 
 
There’s no information hidden. It’s available on the Internet, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s been a public and transparent 
value-for-money audit. The project is on time and on budget. 
It’s creating 8,200 jobs here in the province. There are literally 
dozens of Saskatchewan companies that are participating in that 
work, Mr. Speaker. The member ought to drive out and talk to 
some of the employees that are working out there. The Finance 
minister’s offered to take him out, and he’s actually pretty busy 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would just say to the Leader of the Opposition, to the 
interim leader of the NDP, it’s the biggest infrastructure project 
in the history of the province. It will benefit the city that he 
represents and the constituency he represents. It’s time to put 
down the talking points and do what’s right for his constituents 
and for the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that diatribe certainly 
didn’t answer the question about how much. How much exactly 
of that $2 billion is being sent out of province or shipped 
overseas? But that’s nothing new, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
know how to stimulate the economy for future growth, and they 
are the government that blew through the dollars when times 
were good. They sold out to foreign contractors and consultants, 
and meanwhile they are now attacking working Saskatchewan 
people. They’ve cut jobs. They’ve cut schools. They cut our 
hospitals and cut our care centres. 
 
It’s that cabinet that made the decisions that got us here, Mr. 
Speaker, not the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s those cabinet 
members who signed off on the scandal, and it’s those same 
cabinet members who are refusing to accept any responsibility 
for their failures by taking a 20 per cent pay cut for their 
ministerial bonuses. After all of the hiding and broken 
promises, the desperate sell-offs, the schemes, and the cuts, 
after ten years, why does that minister refuse to accept 
responsibility for the Saskatchewan Party’s financial mess? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s very important 
to correct the preamble of the hon. member opposite, the 
Finance critic for the NDP, Mr. Speaker. She actually took a bit 
of a shot at the economic policies of the government, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s interesting because, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
this: when we had the honour of forming government . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Now the member might want to 
listen to the answer to the question that she’s asked. When, Mr. 
Speaker, we took over from members opposite, when we had 
the honour of forming government, we took over from an NDP 
government that presided over — now get this — the worst job 
creation record in all of the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All these years later — I guess eight or nine years later, Mr. 
Speaker — what’s the change? Sixty thousand more jobs than 
were here in 2007, and the second-best job creation record in 
the country. The last jobs report was out on Friday, and what 
did it have to say? Notwithstanding the commodity price 
challenge we face, notwithstanding the headwinds in the 
resource sector, this province, your province, the province of 
Saskatchewan led every other province in the country, creating 
8,000 new jobs, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record on this side of 
the House. 
 
We’ve seen statistics that also support and burnish the record of 
the economy of the province of Saskatchewan in terms of retail 
sales, manufacturing sales, Mr. Speaker, and most importantly 
of all, one of the fairest measures of the success of a jurisdiction 
is the question, are more people moving in than moving out? 
Under the NDP we lost a generation of people to other 
provinces. Today, Mr. Speaker, we have more people living in 
the province today than we’ve ever had, presided over 
population growth that brought us to 1.15 million people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks in this House, day 
after day, we’ve talked about how the Sask Party’s projected 
deficit just kept growing. It started as a surplus before the 
election, and then a $200 million deficit, then a $400 million 
deficit, then an $800 million deficit, then $1.2 billion deficit. 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has run more deficit budgets than 
surpluses. They’ve blown through billions with their 
mismanagement, their scandal, and their waste. 
 
But it’s the people of Saskatchewan who they are forcing to 
pay. Two billion dollars spent on the Regina bypass, one and a 
half billion on the carbon capture boondoggle, and millions 
going to the pockets of Sask Party supporters in their GTH 
scandal. 
 
Saskatchewan people are losing jobs. There are cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and to our hospitals and care centres. Mr. Speaker, 
when, when will the Sask Party just admit that they blew 
through the savings and wasted too many opportunities? And 
when will they admit they were wrong and apologize to 
Saskatchewan people about their mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in the history of the 
province, the government’s finances that she’s assailing from 
her place in the legislature received a AAA credit rating. It 
never happened under any other government; it’s happened 
today in the province of Saskatchewan. I think it’s a reasonable 
indicator of the financial affairs in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also point out for members opposite, and they’ll be 
aware of this, that we have seen three years now, successive 
years, of resource revenues dropping by over a billion dollars 
— by over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, roughly 8 to 9 per 
cent of the province’s budget. Mr. Speaker, there were forecasts 
from any number of private sector forecasters that would 
indicate that strengthening was expected in those revenues, 
certainly by now and going forward into the next fiscal year, 
and they’re not happening. They’re not happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so some governments in this country have chosen 
to ignore that fact. Some very near to us have decided to ignore 
that fact and just indefinitely . . . that share the member’s 
political ideology and brand, I would say. They’ve decided to 
just punt, to just kind of kick the can down the road and 
indefinitely deficit finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to take a different approach on this 
side of the House and in a few minutes, the people of 
Saskatchewan will hear the plan. And it’s more than a budget; it 
is a plan for this province to deal with that, to balance the 
budget and also, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our economy that’s 
created that, well, nation-leading job creation record, that’s 
provided for that, Mr. Speaker, that that economy remains 
strong for decades to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
the last election that Premier and those ministers hid the budget 
from the people of Saskatchewan. The Premier hid his planned 
cuts. The Premier hid the deficit. The Premier hid his plans for 
our Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that the election is over, can the Premier 
please share with us the details of the Regina bypass contract, 
the full contract? The people of Saskatchewan have a right to 
know the full value of that contract. And when will the Premier 
and the minister stop protecting the commercial interests of a 
foreign conglomerate? Do your job and put the best interest of 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan taxpayers’ interests, first. 
When will the Premier release that full contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the information the member 
seeks is carefully hidden on the Internet. He can avail himself 
of all of that information. The Internet, Mr. Speaker, I assume 
it’s available to members on that side of the House as well. If it 
isn’t, Mr. Speaker, we can provide perhaps some Wi-Fi 
capacity. 
 
They keep referencing, Mr. Speaker, the conglomerate. What 
they have not yet acknowledged, of the 134 businesses 
involved, Mr. Speaker, in delivering services and building the 
bypass, the Deputy Leader of the NDP might want to know that 
of the 134 companies involved, 95 are from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think those companies would want to hear from that 
member. He might want to call those businesses and apologize. 
So should the interim leader of the NDP. But it would take a 
long time to make those calls. He would have to call 4Refuel 
Diesel Supply in Saskatoon, A&B Rail in Regina, Aaron Taylor 
Kary in Regina, Abell Pest Control in Saskatoon, Access in 
Regina, Acklands Grainger in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot on the list here. I’ll keep going 
through them. We’re still not through the A’s yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is Alliance Pipeline, Amec Foster Wheeler crusher 
control, Anlin Welding and Steel Fabrication, Apperley 
Electric, Armada Homes. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
Ninety-five of the 134 companies involved in the bypass are 
taxpaying Saskatchewan businesses that have been smeared, 
frankly, run down by members opposite. They owe them an 
apology. We’re going to continue with the bypass project, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — It’s a bit rich coming from the Premier that 
hid the budget from the people of Saskatchewan and had an 
election first because he didn’t have the courage to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan the true state of the finances. And 
there’s not one single amount of money on the Internet that he 
made reference to, Mr. Speaker, not one dollar amount. And 
people of Saskatchewan have a right to know what have we 
spent on $2 billion of expenditure in Saskatchewan’s history, 

which is a large infrastructure project. 
 
And I did glean out from the site that the Premier made 
reference to, Mr. Speaker, and in bold letters it says this could 
be the largest overrun in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to infrastructure work, Mr. 
Speaker. I made that last part up, but that point, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the people of Saskatchewan have the right to know. What 
does the contract say and how much of the money is staying 
here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we should give the Deputy 
Leader of the NDP a round of applause because he just said one 
of the frankest, most honest things I’ve ever heard said in the 
Assembly. He just said, in terms of that quote he attributed to 
the 1,600 pages that are on the website, he said that he might 
have made that part up. I think he said, I might have made that 
. . . Well it’s absolutely lost on the Deputy Leader why that 
might be a problem, Mr. Speaker. Because if he’s going to 
make a question and predicate it on a statement that he 
attributes to the government website, and then says, but I may 
have made that stuff up, it might actually hurt his credibility, 
Mr. Speaker. Now I’m not sure . . . We on this side of the 
House have had an inkling that that’s what’s been happening 
for a very long time by members opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is there are 1,600 pages on 
the website, 1,600 pages disclosing this particular deal. And if 
he goes and looks at the deal, he’ll find out that there’s other 
Saskatchewan companies: Aussie Welding and Manufacturing 
from Holdfast; Banff Contractors from Saskatoon; Bobcat in 
Regina; Brandt, Mr. Speaker; Broda Construction out of Prince 
Albert. Broda Construction — a what? — about a 100-year-old 
Saskatchewan company that has been employing Saskatchewan 
people in P.A. [Prince Albert] and here in Regina and around 
the province for all of those years, they deserve better from 
members opposite. They deserve better, to be smeared as some 
sort of foreign conglomerate. Ninety-five out of 130 companies 
are from Saskatchewan. They deserve respect from members on 
this side and that side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that that government 
does better than not answer questions is to preside over 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. No one does it better, Mr. 
Speaker. One simply needs to look no further than the $1.5 
billion job-killing carbon capture boondoggle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are on the hook for this 
money. It provides only a fraction of our power. It has been 
plagued by problems, has cost $1.5 billion so far, and we know 
that those costs just keep growing. We just found out that a $70 
million test facility is not paid for yet. But the Sask Party will 
just drop that cost on the backs of Saskatchewan people too. 
The head of SaskPower himself isn’t even clear that we can use 
this $1.5 billion plant to generate power in the next few years. 
This is ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. How in the world can this 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

government justify this massive cost to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that project, Boundary dam 3, 
is very important not just to the Government of Saskatchewan, 
not just to southeast Saskatchewan where you’ll find a lot of 
people working in the coal industry and a lot of people working 
in the coal-powered industry who would like to think that they 
have a future in terms of cleaner energy, a mix, not just here in 
Saskatchewan but globally as well. Mr. Speaker, those folks 
down there, as evidenced by the fact that IBEW [International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers], the union that took 
exception with this line of questioning in the past, the folks 
down there are proud of the fact that Saskatchewan can play a 
leading role in the technological solution on climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our belief that when you’ve got 2,000 coal 
plants on the books around the world in places like China and 
India, that Saskatchewan and indeed Canada can focus on 
leading technology that will actually do something about the 
problem — not shift it around with different fiscal schemes, not 
tax it and hope it might work when we know those taxes 
haven’t worked, Mr. Speaker. And that’s probably where we 
differ with members of the opposition, honestly and 
respectfully. 
 
They would rather move away from the technological solution 
and towards a carbon tax. The potential future leader of the 
party has endorsed Prime Minister Trudeau’s plan to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. I haven’t heard the 
leader, the interim leader of the NDP reject it categorically. We 
can only assume that that’s the plan of the NDP were they ever 
to return to this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. In a province 
like Saskatchewan, dependent on agriculture, oil and gas, and 
manufacturing, we can never go to that day when a government, 
an NDP government would have the chance to impose a carbon 
tax or agree with the federal Liberal government’s imposition of 
a carbon tax in this province. That’s where this government 
stands. That’s where we’ll continue to stand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier tries to act like people 
all over the world love this thing. But no one has signed up to 
be in any level, any level of their fan club — not one. The 
minister needs to learn lessons from his colleagues who were 
plagued by scandal. He needs to be more open, transparent 
about the realities that this project is facing. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to know just how much money they have 
sunk into this carbon capture mess. 
 
They do know that it’s caused their power bills to go up four 
times in the last two years. They do know that they’re paying on 
average $120 extra per year on their power bill, but they aren’t 
being told why. Mr. Speaker, this just-trust-us approach won’t 
cut it, not when the Sask Party has steered us wrong too many 
times before. This project is making businesses pay more and 
it’s costing us jobs. So can the minister please, please take 
responsibility for this project which has become a $70-a-tonne, 
job-killing carbon capture tax? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again we reject the 
preamble of the member opposite. The fact of the matter is that 
the International Energy Agency is keenly interested in and 
supportive of the world-leading work that’s occurring in 
Saskatchewan, something that members on that side of the 
House I would hope would be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s very important to note that the approach from the 
Government of Saskatchewan is one of balance when it comes 
to climate change. We do believe we need to reduce emissions 
here in Saskatchewan. We do believe SaskPower needs to move 
towards renewables, and we have set a bold target for 
SaskPower to achieve that, Mr. Speaker. Part of that clean 
energy mix we know in the future will be cleaner coal, Mr. 
Speaker, a plant that currently is operating two times cleaner 
than natural gas, Mr. Speaker, and has the interest of people in 
the United States and people around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The alternative is to look at what the NDP have favoured both 
nationally and here in the province, which is a carbon tax or a 
cap and trade. We know that would disproportionately hurt the 
province of Saskatchewan. Well the Finance critic who signed 
the Leap Manifesto, the Leap Manifesto at their convention in 
Edmonton, and they would like . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well she endorsed the Leap Manifesto. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
particular manifesto, if it ever had the chance to be 
implemented, would wipe out our oil and gas industry. It would 
wipe out the coal industry. It would wipe out pipelines in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. And we are never going there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s rather astounding what 
we see here today: a Premier not showing an ounce of 
contrition; a Premier that hasn’t been straight to Saskatchewan 
people on front after front; a Premier that couldn’t get the job 
done during the best years in Saskatchewan’s history; a Premier 
that didn’t save a dime for the future and drained the rainy day 
fund; a Premier that left Saskatchewan vulnerable; a Premier 
who, in this Assembly just last year, said to all the people of 
Saskatchewan, looking in the whites of their eyes, that the 
deficit was going to be $400 million. 
 
Of course that was nonsense. He wasn’t straight with 
Saskatchewan people — $1.2 billion and who knows what; 
maybe we’ll find out here shortly. A Premier that looked in the 
whites of the eyes of Saskatchewan people as it relates to their 
Crown corporations, put hand over heart and said he promises 
not to privatize our Crown corporations. When he learns that he 
can’t win a referendum, was he breaking his word? What does 
he do? He does indirectly what he can’t do directly. We have a 
Premier that’s not being straight with Saskatchewan people on 
front after front. 
 
We have a budget that’s going to be presented here today — a 
Premier that’s run deficit after deficit after deficit; a Premier 
who said one thing on budget day and as the ink rolls in, the 
reality is something else; a Premier that’s threatening 
Saskatchewan people with his desperate sell-off of our Crown 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

corporations. 
 
My question to the Premier today: will he be straight, will he be 
straight today with Saskatchewan people? Will he finally start 
to come clean on his GTH scandal? And will . . . Oh, he can 
guffaw all he wants about the hard-earned dollars that he’s 
ripped off from Saskatchewan people, but we’ll keep fighting 
for answers. And will the Premier do the right thing, finally take 
to his feet and apologize to Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — My friend, the interim leader of the NDP, is 
demanding apologies. He sits beside his own hand-picked 
Deputy Leader, who admitted in this Assembly moments ago 
that he was making stuff up, that he was not being straight with 
members in the House on an important day like this when the 
galleries are full. Mr. Speaker, there might be an apology that’s 
required, but he might want to look to his right and seek that 
apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just share this with my hon. friend. 
Notwithstanding the challenges we’ve faced which has seen 
resource revenue drop by about a billion two for three years 
running, Mr. Speaker, consider this. And that has depleted the 
rainy day fund, there’s absolutely no doubt about it. But what 
happened before that, before . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — But, Mr. Speaker, before and during those 
three years, what was happening with the resources of this 
province? What decisions was the government making with the 
strong economy that we were seeing and with additional 
revenues? 
 
Well how about we cut taxes cumulatively by $6.7 billion? 
That’s what the government did, Mr. Speaker. We dropped over 
100,000 low-income people off the tax rolls completely. That’s 
what we did, Mr. Speaker, with those resources. 9.6 billion in 
infrastructure, doubling what members opposite did when they 
were sitting on their own pile of money for the eight years 
ahead of the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are today in the province of Saskatchewan 
. . . He wants to know where the money went. He claims to 
want to fight for the public sector. How about a nod to the fact 
that today, as a result of actions on this side of the House, there 
are 3,000 more nurses of every designation practising in the 
province today. There are 750 more doctors practising today 
than members had when they were in office. 750 more teachers, 
Mr. Speaker, working in the province today because we have 
more students. There are 40 new schools in Saskatchewan 
today, after this time in government. Compare that with 
members opposite who in tough times — and good times — 
closed 176 schools, Mr. Speaker, one a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s where the resources have been invested in — tax 
reduction, infrastructure investment that has created the 

Saskatchewan advantage, an advantage that incredibly has our 
economy leading Canada in job creation just last Friday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We know we’ve got work to do and we’re going to hear more in 
a few moments from the Minister of Finance about the plan we 
have to get to balance, and the plan we have to keep this 
province strong. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary 
estimates accompanied by a message from Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for the message from 
the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2018, and supplementary 
estimates — March of certain sums required for the service 
of the province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 
2017, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, colleagues, 
and guests here today. I am honoured to rise today to present 
our government’s 2017-18 budget, my second as Minister of 
Finance for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before I begin my remarks, I’d like to join the Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition in welcoming all of our guests here 
today, and delighted you could join us. I have some friends and 
people that assisted greatly in getting me into this place here 
today joining us, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately my mother 
couldn’t be with us today. She’s visiting one of my sisters in 
British Columbia, and other members of my family had to 
work, so they couldn’t make it. But I am delighted to be joined 
by some good friends here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is facing a challenge. Today’s 
budget is about meeting that challenge. 
 
It has now been two and a half years since the price of oil 
started to drop in the fall of 2014. Now, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t 
the Finance minister then, but I vividly recall the worry of oil 
dropping from $100 to $80 a barrel, as a member of the treasury 
board. Today, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you I would like the 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

opportunity to again worry about $80 oil. It has spiralled down 
to under $30 eventually, before starting its very slow and very 
modest climb, with stumbles along the way. But even as this 
was happening, other parts of Saskatchewan’s diverse and 
resilient economy have remained relatively strong. 
 
The latest unemployment numbers released just two weeks ago 
showed Saskatchewan with the strongest job growth in all of 
Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, the economy is different than the 
budget. So as low oil and potash prices continue to last longer 
than many had initially forecast, Saskatchewan’s resource 
revenues have declined by over a billion dollars a year, 
depleting reserves and the rainy day fund. 
 
And so our budget challenge is clear. We must move away from 
our reliance on resource revenues. We must return the budget to 
balance. Mr. Speaker, today’s budget is our government’s plan 
to do exactly that. Our plan will return the budget to balance by 
controlling and reducing spending, by modernizing and 
expanding the tax base, and ensuring our economy remains 
strong. Our plan includes a number of revenue measures to help 
meet the current financial challenge and provide greater revenue 
stability while at the same time maintaining the Saskatchewan 
advantage of low personal income tax and business tax rates. 
 
And our plan controls and reduces spending while continuing to 
invest in programs, services, and infrastructure for the benefit of 
all Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, this budget sets our 
course, our plan for returning to balance and keeping 
Saskatchewan’s economy strong for the 1,155,000 people who 
now call this great province home. 
 
After careful consideration, our government made the decision 
that returning to balance in one year would’ve been too drastic 
of a shock to the economy and to the delivery of government 
programs and services. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, a deficit of 
$685 million is budgeted for this coming fiscal year. A smaller 
deficit of $304 million is forecast for 2018-19, and we will 
return to balance in three years with a $15 million surplus 
forecast for 2019-20 and a $183 million surplus forecast for 
2021 fiscal year. 
 
Now the total revenue with this budget is forecast at $14.17 
billion, up 1 per cent or 141 million from last year’s budget, but 
up $471 million from our third quarter forecast. Expenses 
forecast at $14.8 billion, up 342 million from last year’s budget 
or 2.4 per cent, but down $183 million from our Q3 [third 
quarter] forecast. 
 
This year’s budget and each year of our four-year medium term 
forecast also includes a $300 million contingency to protect 
against unexpected in-year revenue declines, potential expense 
pressures due to higher utilization, and unforeseen costs related 
to natural disasters such as floods and/or forest fires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we developed this budget and our four-year 
fiscal plan we needed to take a hard look at everything we do 
across government. We needed to ensure the sustainability of 
high-quality public services and programs, in particular those 
core services that Saskatchewan people expect and deserve 
from their government. In those areas, our job as government is 
clear: to provide the best possible services to Saskatchewan 
people at the lowest possible cost to taxpayers. 

In order to control spending, it was critical to focus on 
priorities. That means we will continue to fund important public 
services while at the same time always looking for more 
cost-effective ways to deliver these services. It also means that 
in some areas government funding will be reduced, suspended, 
or eliminated entirely. Those decisions were needed to meet the 
challenges of controlling spending in this budget and putting 
Saskatchewan on track to balance the budget within three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government currently spends about $7 billion a 
year on public sector compensation, so any meaningful effort to 
reduce spending must include an overall reduction in that area. 
This budget includes a $250 million reduction for compensation 
across the entire public sector, starting in the 2017-18 fiscal 
year. That’s about 3.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On March 7th the Premier announced that our government 
would start at the top by the Premier, ministers, and MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] taking a 3.5 per cent pay 
cut. We have been clear: we will not ask our public sector 
workers to do anything we are not prepared to do ourselves as 
elected officials. Staff in the Premier’s office and ministers’ 
offices will take nine unpaid days off this year, reducing their 
pay by about 3.5 per cent. The reduction to MLAs’ and political 
staffs’ salaries will save about half a million dollars a year, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a good start, but we must go much further. 
 
We expect the 3.5 per cent compensation savings across 
government to be achieved through negotiations with the unions 
that represent in-scope employees. The 3.5 per cent 
compensation savings will also be required of government’s 
out-of-scope employees. Now there are many ways to achieve 
these kinds of savings across government, Mr. Speaker, but we 
are not prescribing any specific measures. Instead, our 
government is setting a savings target as the funder of public 
sector compensation. We are hopeful that various employers 
and their respective bargaining units will work together to 
achieve these savings through negotiation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are announcing in this budget that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company is being wound down 
by the end of May 2017. Over the past 10 years STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] ridership has declined 
significantly and costs have gone up. For many years STC has 
only been able to continue operating with a large annual 
subsidy from taxpayers and that subsidy has grown every single 
year. Ten years ago the STC subsidy was $25 per passenger. 
Today it is $94 per passenger. Eighty-five million dollars would 
have been needed from government to continue operating STC 
for the next five years. Given other priorities like health care, 
education, social services, and infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, STC 
has become simply an unsustainable model. 
 
Our government recently announced the wind-down of 
executive air service which was used primarily to fly members 
of cabinet to meetings and functions around the province. Since 
our government took office we have reduced the use of 
executive air by 73 per cent, but it no longer makes sense to 
continue the service, Mr. Speaker. This decision is expected to 
save up to $1 million annually for taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government thanks the hardworking and 
professional staff of both STC and executive air for their many 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

years of dedicated service to the government, but more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are other reductions throughout government. In Health 
some services that were provided by the regions and are 
available from the private system are being phased out or 
reduced: The Hearing Aid Plan, podiatry services, orthotics, and 
equipment to help with sleep apnea. Coverage will continue to 
be provided by government for low-income residents for those 
services, however chiropractic services will no longer be 
covered for anyone. 
 
Long-term care fees will increase to some residents, based on 
income. About 50 per cent of residents will not be affected and 
the province will continue to subsidize 83 per cent of the overall 
cost of long-term care here in the province. 
 
The community rink affordability grant has been suspended. 
Regional park funding has been reduced by 50 per cent and 
funding to the Meewasin Valley Authority has been decreased 
by $409,000. 
 
There will be a legislative and governance change related to 
Wascana Centre Authority to strengthen the park. Government 
is assuming responsibility for Wascana Centre Authority and 
integrating it into the Provincial Capital Commission. This 
change will strengthen the park and benefit the capital city and 
the entire province, Mr. Speaker. The partners, which include 
the City of Regina, the university, and government, will all 
continue to have input into decisions.  
 
And while we continue to renew infrastructure in our provincial 
parks, continue to invest in our arts community, and continue to 
grow a creative economy, there will be reductions in those areas 
to help us to meet this financial challenge. Funding to regional 
libraries is being decreased by $3.5 million and funding for 
Regina and Saskatoon public libraries is being eliminated, a 
reduction of $1.3 million. And the Saskatchewan advantage 
grant for education savings or SAGES will be suspended 
effective January 1, 2018. 
 
Now while government funding has been reduced in all of those 
areas, it is important to look at the strong funding base we have 
established across government. Health care, education, and 
social services and assistance make up about three-quarters of 
the overall budget. Since 2007, our government has increased 
funding in those three areas by $4.4 billion or 72 per cent. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now health care is our number one priority in spending for this 
government, Mr. Speaker. This budget invests $5.6 billion in 
health care, up $39 million or point seven per cent from last 
year. Over the past decade, health funding has grown by almost 
$2 billion or 53 per cent. This budget includes a new 
$12 million investment to address over-capacity pressures and 
emergency department wait times in Regina and Saskatoon, as 
well as $24.4 million to address services pressures and 
operating costs in those health regions. This budget also 
commits $83.7 million for health capital, up 12.3 million or 
17 per cent compared to last year. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will also receive more than 

$170 million, a $3.3 million increase in funding, to provide 
treatment to more cancer patients. The health budget includes 
3.4 billion in funding for regional health authorities. This is an 
increase of 1.2 per cent over last year and 58 per cent more than 
the RHA [regional health authority] allocation in 2007. 
 
Now health system transformation and the shift to a single 
provincial health authority will support our government’s 
efforts to meet the challenges our province is facing. Savings of 
between 10 million and $20 million will be gained over time 
through reduced administration and increased efficiencies 
beginning in 2018. But the true value is that the change is 
driven by our government’s commitment to improve front-line 
care for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now total funding, total education funding, Mr. Speaker, 
including pre-kindergarten to grade 12 and post-secondary 
education, is budgeted at $3.6 billion, down 45 million or 
1.2 per cent from last year. Our government continues to invest 
in student success in the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 
system by providing more than $2 billion for the education of 
our young people. That’s 6.7 per cent less than last year, but 
much of this decrease is due to a $262 million decrease in 
funding for 18 new joint-use schools in nine locations in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, and Martensville. And what is the 
reason for that funding decrease, Mr. Speaker? It’s because 
construction of these 18 new schools will be completed 100 
days from today, and those 18 new schools will be open to 
students this fall. 
 
In addition, there is $2.1 million in this budget to begin 
planning for two new school projects in Rosthern and Weyburn. 
This budget provides Saskatchewan’s 28 school divisions with 
$1.86 billion in school operating funding. In addition, this 
budget provides nearly $56 million in child care funding, 
providing for 889 new spaces to be created across the province. 
This will bring the total number of new child care spaces 
created in the past 10 years to more than 6,500. 
 
Earlier today our government received and released the final 
report from the panel on education governance renewal. I’m 
pleased to advise, Mr. Speaker, that we accept all of the 
recommendations in the report. This means we are keeping 
elected school boards in Saskatchewan, and there will be no 
major school division boundary changes. Legislative changes 
will be made in the coming year to clarify roles within the 
education sector and create efficiencies. We will also find ways 
to better engage with First Nations and Métis on education. 
 
There was also a clear message in that report, Mr. Speaker, that 
more must be done to control spending in the education sector. 
As a result, our government will introduce amendments to The 
Education Act that will create a framework for shared services 
and consistency in areas such as procurement, busing, payroll, 
and the salary range for school division administrators and 
elected trustees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also continues to invest in our 
post-secondary students. High school graduates from 
Saskatchewan will continue to receive $500 per year off their 
tuition for up to four years through the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship, and post-secondary graduates will 
continue to get their costs back through the graduate retention 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

program, which provides up to $20,000 in income tax credits to 
graduates who live and work in Saskatchewan. Post-secondary 
students will also continue to benefit from more than $46 
million in key financial supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past decade our government has invested 
$8.3 billion in post-secondary institutions and student supports. 
However, in recognition of the fiscal challenges facing the 
province, overall spending at the Ministry of Advanced 
Education in this year’s budget will be reduced by $44 million 
or 5.8 per cent. Post-secondary institutions will receive a 5 per 
cent reduction, $30 million in total in base operational funding. 
 
Despite this reduction, this budget continues to provide strong 
support for Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions, with 
$649 million in operating and capital funding. And starting in 
August, students applying for loans will access upfront 
provincial grants targeted to those students who need it the 
most. When combined with the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship and federal grants, the new system will cover most, 
in some cases all, of a lower income undergraduate student’s 
complete tuition costs. The new, more transparent system will 
let students know how much they can borrow for their 
education and how much they can expect to receive in grants. 
 
Social services and assistance funding is expected to be $1.4 
billion in this budget, Mr. Speaker, an increase of $113 million 
or 9 per cent over last year, a record amount. In the past decade, 
funding in this area has grown by more than $450 million or 51 
per cent. This level of funding demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to supporting at-risk children and families, people 
with disabilities, seniors, and low-income people. 
 
This budget increases funding for disability programs by $2.3 
million to more than 209 million. This increase will support 
individuals with intellectual disabilities to participate in their 
communities. An overall increase of more than $67 million for 
income assistance will help address larger caseloads and more 
complex cases. 
 
This budget also provides increased funding for the seniors’ 
income plan, the personal care home benefit, and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. We are continuing to 
invest in our current income assistance programs to meet the 
needs of Saskatchewan people. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize that these programs are outdated and at times 
overly complex. We need a new program that’s simpler for 
clients and workers, that focuses on the basic needs of our most 
vulnerable people, and it is sustainable for the future. Work is 
well under way on an income assistance redesign that will 
transform our current programs and help us achieve these goals. 
 
Now social services’ budget also includes some reductions. The 
first home plan for recent graduates will be suspended, saving 
$8 million. Changes will also be made to some benefits in the 
transitional employment allowance, the Saskatchewan 
assistance program, and the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability program, saving 10.6 million. 
 
Our goal is to focus our resources on helping those who have no 
other means of support. The changes we are making this year in 
social services will help us to meet the basic needs of a growing 
number of people while we transform income assistance to 

better support those in greatest need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while three-quarters of every tax dollar will 
continue to be spent on health care, social services, and 
education, this budget funds important programs and services in 
other areas as well. Investing in infrastructure continues to be a 
priority for our government. Overall this budget includes $3.7 
billion for investment in Saskatchewan infrastructure. In 
addition to providing much needed highways, hospitals, 
schools, and bridges for our growing population, capital 
projects create well-paying construction jobs here in the 
province, which helps keep our economy strong. 
 
In this budget, 1.6 billion is being invested in infrastructure by 
government ministries and agencies, and our commercial 
Crown sector is investing 2.1 billion. This year’s 1.1 billion 
allocation to the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 
constitutes the second-largest highways budget in 
Saskatchewan’s history. This level of funding demonstrates our 
government’s commitment to provide infrastructure that grows 
our economy and improves safety for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
This year’s budget includes $500 million for the Regina bypass 
and 343 million to start or continue construction on other 
transportation projects across the province. This budget also 
invests more than $53 million to build, operate, and maintain 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan, as well as 
more than 20 million for urban and rural municipal road 
projects and airports. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that there is still more work to be done, 
but our government’s record is clear. With this year’s budget, 
we’ve now invested more than $7.4 billion to improve more 
than 12 000 kilometres of roads and highways in our province. 
 
Major Crown projects in the coming fiscal year include $1.3 
billion at SaskPower, primarily to renew distribution and 
transmission systems along with expansion and renewal of 
electricity generation assets to meet customers’ growing power 
needs. Investment of $302 million is projected at SaskTel to 
increase and upgrade its wireless and wire line networks, 
improve customer service through network growth and 
modernization, and continue the rollout of Infinet, its high 
bandwidth broadband service. SaskEnergy is forecast to spend 
$292 million to ensure safe and reliable service that meets 
continually growing customer demand. And SaskWater plans to 
invest $81 million in 2017-18 to address aging infrastructure 
and customer growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, capital spending in this province is up 
dramatically since our Premier and this government took office 
in late 2007. Annual private and public capital investment has 
increased by nearly 75 per cent in Saskatchewan. We’ve gone 
from annual capital investment of 8.3 billion in 2007 to 14.5 
billion forecast this year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the total capital 
investment in private and public projects in Saskatchewan since 
our government was elected in 2007 to the end of this year will 
be $158 billion. 
 
That massive capital investment by both government and the 
private sector is a tremendous vote of confidence in the future 
of our province. 
 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

Mr. Speaker, this budget maintains the municipal 
revenue-sharing formula introduced by our government shortly 
after taking office to address the long-standing underfunding of 
municipalities by the previous government. This year 
Saskatchewan municipalities will receive almost $258 million 
in revenue sharing, more than double what they received a 
decade ago, based on our formula of one point of PST 
[provincial sales tax] revenue from 2015-16. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we are asking municipalities 
to share in our efforts to meet the current financial challenge. 
This budget will discontinue SaskPower and SaskEnergy’s 
grants in lieu of taxes to municipalities. Because this change 
disproportionately impacts the city of Regina, measures will be 
taken to mitigate that impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one area where our government has heard concern 
in recent months, up to as recently as last week’s SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, is the need to reduce crime, particularly property 
crime in rural and remote areas. That is why we have allocated 
$1 million for initiatives to respond to the recommendations of 
the caucus committee on crime reduction. This report will be 
released in the coming weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government made every effort to control 
and reduce spending while still providing the level and quality 
of government services that Saskatchewan people expect and 
deserve. But those efforts alone were not enough to deal with 
the resource revenue shortfall. We still needed to reduce our 
reliance on resource revenues. We needed to expand the tax 
base, but to do so in a way that maintains our Saskatchewan 
advantage. 
 
As a matter of fact, the 1999 Saskatchewan personal income tax 
review said that income taxes have a greater negative effect on 
the economy than consumption taxes, and reducing personal 
income tax rates while increasing consumption taxes would 
achieve economic efficiency and growth. That makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the approach we have taken. 
 
So while some taxes will increase, there are also gradual 
reductions to income taxes for every Saskatchewan taxpayer in 
support of our government’s plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, in 
this budget, effective midnight tonight, provincial sales tax is 
being raised by one point, from 5 to 6 per cent, to help meet the 
current financial challenge. Saskatchewan will continue to have 
the lowest provincial sales tax rate in Canada amongst 
provinces that have a provincial sales tax. 
 
The PST base is also being expanded, effective April 1st, by 
eliminating or reducing a number of exemptions to provide 
greater revenue stability. The PST will now be applied to 
children’s clothing, restaurant meals and snack foods, insurance 
premiums, construction services, and permanently mounted 
equipment used in the resource sector. 
 
The exemption for used cars will continue but the value of a 
trade-in will no longer be deductible in determining the PST on 
the purchase of a new vehicle. However, Mr. Speaker, the 
exemptions for basic necessities including groceries, heating 
fuels, residential electricity, prescription drugs, and reading 
materials will continue. 

[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we shift our tax base toward a greater reliance 
on consumption taxes, we will reduce taxes on income and 
productivity. This budget lowers all three Saskatchewan income 
tax rates by a half point on July 1, 2017 and by another half 
point on July 1, 2019. And for those individuals and families 
whose income is below the level where they pay income tax in 
the province, the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit will be 
enhanced by $100 per adult and $40 per child. Mr. Speaker, that 
means that every Saskatchewan taxpayer at every income level 
will see a decrease in their income tax rate and those whose 
income is too low to pay income tax will see an increase in the 
low-income tax credit they receive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s worth remembering that since 2007, this 
government has delivered the largest tax reductions in 
Saskatchewan history and removed 112,000 low-income 
residents from the income tax rolls altogether. Even with this 
PST increase, every Saskatchewan resident at every level of 
income will still be paying significantly less in income tax and 
PST combined than they did in 2007 under the previous 
government. A single person with $40,000 income will pay 
$749, or 20 per cent less in taxes in 2007 . . . than in 2007, 
while a family of four with $50,000 family income will pay 
$2,366, or 77 per cent less than they did in 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also lowers the general corporate 
income tax rate by a half point on July 1, 2017 and by another 
half point on July 1, 2019 to 11 per cent, from 12 to 11, while 
maintaining our manufacturing and processing tax rate 
reduction as well. When these changes are fully implemented, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will have the lowest corporate tax 
rate and the lowest tax rate on manufacturing and processing in 
the entire country, giving Saskatchewan a tremendous 
advantage to attract new business investment and jobs to our 
province. 
 
In addition, in this budget we are following through on our 
election commitment to introduce North America’s first tax 
incentive for patents. The new Saskatchewan commercial 
innovation incentive will reduce the corporate income tax rate 
to 6 per cent on taxable income earned from the 
commercialization of patents and qualifying intellectual 
property. This incentive will be provided to companies that 
contribute substantially through job creation and new 
investment to economic development here in Saskatchewan. 
The incentive will provide a lower tax rate for a period of 10 
years. Companies will be able to extend the benefit period to 15 
years if the qualifying intellectual property was substantially 
developed here in the province. It’s another Saskatchewan 
advantage that will attract investment, opportunity, and jobs to 
our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget also reforms the research and development tax 
credit to better target smaller and medium-sized Saskatchewan 
innovation companies. And the oil processing investment 
incentive encourages processing of our oil resources in the 
province with royalty credits on new production. 
 
There are a number of other revenue measures in this year’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Effective April 1, the current partial fuel 
tax exemption for bulk purchases of gasoline is eliminated, and 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

the exemption for bulk purchases of diesel fuel is being reduced 
to 80 per cent of purchases. As well there will be changes to the 
labour-sponsored venture capital tax program in 2018. 
 
The budget also eliminates the employees’ tools tax credit, 
effective for the 2017 taxation year, and education and tuition 
tax credits effective July 1 of this year. Unused education and 
tuition amounts carried forward from previous years can still be 
claimed, but new credits cannot be earned after June 30th. 
 
The annual indexation of personal income tax system is being 
suspended starting with the 2018 tax year. And effective 
midnight tonight, tobacco tax rates will increase by 2 cents per 
cigarette, from 25 cents to 27 cents with corresponding 
increases for cut tobacco. Effective April 1, wholesale liquor 
markups will go up across the board by between 4 and 6.8 per 
cent. 
 
Prior to 2013, Mr. Speaker, credit unions received preferential 
federal and provincial corporate income tax treatment by way of 
a lower tax on a portion of their income. In 2013, the federal 
government began a five-year phase-out of its preferential tax 
treatment. This budget begins the phase-out of the preferential 
provincial tax treatment over four years, beginning in 2017, for 
credit unions. This budget also raises the corporation capital tax 
rate on financial institutions from 3.25 per cent to 4 per cent, 
effective April 1. 
 
The budget also sets out the education property tax mill rates 
for 2017. Mill rates for all classes of property have been 
lowered. However, because of reassessment and increased 
property values across the province, actual tax revenue 
collected through education property tax will increase by about 
9.8 per cent. 
 
The EPT [education property tax] change for each specific 
property will vary based on the reassessed value of that 
property. The education property tax system was redesigned 
and property taxes were lowered significantly in 2009. As part 
of that redesign, the government committed to a 60/40 split for 
the funding of education — 60 per cent coming from the 
government grants and 40 per cent from EPT. In recent years, 
education property tax has remained unchanged while education 
costs have continued to increase. This budget restores that 
60/40 balance. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, measures being taken this year will add a 
projected $900 million in incremental tax revenue, significantly 
decreasing the province’s reliance on resource revenues to fund 
government services. When taken as a whole, the impact of 
these measures on real GDP [gross domestic product] on our 
economy is minimal. The negative impact of the tax measures is 
largely offset by the positive economic impact of the income 
tax reductions combined with government spending, including 
ongoing investment into infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when resource sector challenges remain, 
there are signs of confidence and renewal in our economy. A 
few weeks ago Saskatchewan was named the best place in the 
world to invest in mining. Number one in the world, Mr. 
Speaker, up from number two ranking just last year. 
Competitive tax regimes, efficient permitting procedures, and 
certainty surrounding environmental regulations and land 

claims were among the reasons for our province’s top rating. As 
a government, we’re doing everything we can to encourage 
industry and ensure we are competitive and friendly to 
investment in mining and in all the other sectors of our 
economy. 
 
Our agriculture industry has also become a big part of 
Saskatchewan’s economic success story. Even with the late 
harvest and significant amount of crop left in the field from last 
year, Saskatchewan producers took off the second-largest crop 
in our history, more than 35 million tonnes. Crop production 
has surpassed 30 million tonnes for four consecutive years as ag 
exports have doubled over the past decade. 
 
And our province continues to grow. When our government 
was first elected, even before we were elected, we set a goal of 
growing Saskatchewan’s population by 100,000 people in 10 
years, Mr. Speaker. It was a goal that was called impossible by 
some. 2017 marks our government’s 10th year in office and our 
population has grown by over 160,000 people in the past 10 
years. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are tabling a plan to ensure that that 
growth continues. The challenge we are facing is clear. In 
2014-15 our province received $2.6 billion in resource revenue. 
Just two years later in 2016-17, falling resource prices have cut 
that amount in half to just 1.3 billion. Our projections show that 
resource revenue will remain at about the same level in the 
coming year. That’s a $1.3 billion hole in our budget at a time 
that our province’s population and demands on government 
services continue to grow. That’s a challenge. How do you 
close a $1.3 billion gap while ensuring Saskatchewan’s 
economy remains strong and our province continues to grow? 
There was no quick fix or easy solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget meets the challenge by taking a number of 
significant measures, including some difficult but necessary 
measures on both the revenue and the spending side. We know 
that moving too far too fast could jeopardize the economic 
strength of our province, so this budget will meet the challenge 
by returning to balance over three years. 
 
On the spending side, we have made decisions about the size 
and the role of government in order to ensure that important 
government services are affordable and sustainable in the long 
run. 
 
On the revenue side, this budget represents a fundamental shift 
in our tax system toward consumption, but away from income 
and productivity, and away from our reliance on resource 
revenues. So while this budget does include an increase to the 
PST, it also delivers an income tax reduction for every 
Saskatchewan income tax payer at every income level. This 
fundamental change in our tax system will help close the 
revenue gap while at the same time keeping our economy 
strong. 
 
It is important that we return to balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
And it is important that we continue to ensure a strong and 
growing economy. Mr. Speaker, this budget will meet that 
challenge and will keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well here 
we are. After months of the Sask Party hiding the state of the 
finances, dropping hints, and floating trial balloons, their budget 
has finally been released. And on every page there’s another 
broken Sask Party promise, a tax hike, or a cut that will hurt 
Saskatchewan families trying to get ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has forgotten who they’re working 
for. This is the budget of an arrogant government that learned 
nothing from a decade of wasting Saskatchewan people’s 
hard-earned money. They blew through the savings and racked 
up massive deficit after deficit, on and on — 6 out of 10 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. With their scandals, they arrogantly and 
recklessly spent the people of Saskatchewan’s money, and now 
it’s those people, families, and workers that are being forced to 
pay for this government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
To sum it up, the Sask Party have once again failed 
Saskatchewan people. They said they would cut the debt. Well 
there’s a projected debt of $18 billion, Mr. Speaker. They have 
managed to double the debt since 2013. That’s four years. It’s 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over and over again the Sask Party has promised to not raise 
taxes. Well there’s a billion dollars worth of tax increases here 
in this budget, Mr. Speaker. On top of an increase to the PST, 
everything from power bills to children’s clothes, restaurants, 
fishing licences, and even a case of beer will cost the people of 
Saskatchewan more. 
 
The only people coming out on top will be Saskatchewan’s 
wealthy and well-connected, who will get a $38 million tax 
break. They’re also giving a break to the biggest Saskatchewan 
corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, families got cuts too. The Sask Party gave 
them cuts to parks, cuts to health care, cuts to the STC, which 
people across the province depend on for travelling, accessing 
medical appointments, and shipping important packages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, less than a year ago, the then-minister responsible 
said STC is a needed service and it was safe from a sale. Now 
they’re scrapping it and throwing those workers onto the 
unemployment lines, all out of the blue and without asking 
permission of the owners, Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a bad sign for our other Crowns like SaskTel. 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has things so backwards in this 
budget that instead of stimulating the economy, they’re actually 
starving it. They’ve cut $1.3 billion out of the economy, and 
they aren’t investing enough in renewable energy, and they 
aren’t investing enough in diversifying the economy. And 
they’re actually punishing economy stimulators like the 
construction industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe the Finance minister and the Premier 
remember their days as staffers, those days full of excess and 
waste, those days of buckets of fun for insiders. But they 
apparently forgot how it all ended. And they forgot that after 
the dust settled on their mismanagement, all of their scandal, 
and of course their waste, another government came in and had 
to clean up the mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the Sask Party didn’t expect a third term. 
It’s the only thing that makes any sense because this 
government had a decade of record resource revenues, and they 
drained $2 billion from the rainy day fund and billions in 
surpluses left from the former government. Mr. Speaker, they 
blew it all in the sunniest times, during some of the best years 
this province has ever, ever seen. And they spent every single 
dollar that came in, and billions more. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
terrible financial management that has become a hallmark of 
this government, mismanagement like their $1.5 billion carbon 
capture boondoggle that has led to four separate rate hikes in 
just the last two years. Families are paying $120 more just to 
keep their lights on. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Scandal like the Sask Party’s GTH scandal and the Regina 
bypass that has ballooned to nearly $2 billion from an original 
cost of $400 million. Just imagine, Mr. Speaker, just imagine if 
the Sask Party had decided not to blow over $2 billion in waste 
on those two projects alone. But then, Mr. Speaker, maybe their 
friends may not have liked that. And that might be why they are 
now refusing to make any changes to our outdated campaign 
finance laws. 
 
You see, the Sask Party’s all too keen to allow out-of-province 
corporations to hand over millions in dollars in donations. And 
until recently, the Sask Party had no problem attacking 
Saskatchewan workers with threats of wage reductions while 
their leader took half a million dollars in top-ups from large 
corporations and out-of-province donors. Mr. Speaker, these 
practices fly in the face of democracy, and they raise very 
serious questions about just who this government is looking out 
for in the midst of all these cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago that Finance minister stood in this 
House and told us that they would balance the books. He told 
the people of Saskatchewan not to worry. He said they wouldn’t 
have to make cuts. He said they wouldn’t have to raise fees or 
taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, every single one of them campaigned 
on those same promises. But then, just after last year’s election, 
they changed their tune and they revealed that there was a $400 
million deficit. And then just a few months later, that number 
grew to 800 million, and then it was over a billion. 
 
Now while the Sask Party’s been letting the deficit grow, 
they’ve been leaving Saskatchewan people behind. Close to 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2017 

40,000 people are out of work, twice as many as when they 
came into government. Mr. Speaker, instead of investing in job 
training, post-secondary education, and stimulating the 
economy, they have cut it all. And in this budget they are 
making the same mistakes all over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bankruptcies are still on the rise. Jobs are being 
lost from health care, education, and from both the public and 
the private sectors. Now the Sask Party has blamed these job 
numbers on low commodity prices, but year after year during 
this downturn they have stood idle and refused to diversify our 
economy. They did nothing to create jobs and put 
Saskatchewan people back to work. In fact, instead of getting to 
work, the Sask Party has been throwing around phrases like 
“transformational change” and “everything’s on the table.” Well 
their cuts have meant that teachers have been fired, health care 
workers have been fired, and now they’ve even fired the 
janitors that work in this building. 
 
This is a government that after promising they would not sell 
off our Crowns, they openly mused for months about selling 
SaskTel. And then once they realized that there was no way 
they could ever win a referendum, they then introduce a bill that 
would allow them to sell off 49 per cent of SaskTel and each of 
our other Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we see they didn’t even want to wait for that 
bill to unilaterally shut down STC. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unacceptable, and it’s wrong for this government to think that 
they can take the Crowns that belong to everyone and just take 
them away and wind them down or sell them off without talking 
to the owners, all of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that loves to cut before they 
figure out what the real impacts will be. We saw that when they 
announced that they would be cutting health regions. The 
minister couldn’t even tell us how much money the cuts would 
save, and the Sask Party also didn’t know how much money 
they were saving when they callously cut funding to the 
province’s most vulnerable by slashing the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. And 
now they’re doing the same thing again with the cuts in this 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t know the full impact of raising the 
costs of children’s clothes and restaurant food by 6 per cent. 
And they don’t really know what, if anything, will be gained by 
throwing away over $200 million in tax breaks for corporations. 
Ready, shoot, aim. Mr. Speaker, they’re gambling with the 
day-to-day lives of Saskatchewan people and the future of our 
province. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, they act like taking a 3.5 per cent pay cut on 
MLA pay just so they can use it as an excuse to cut the pay of 
Saskatchewan workers by the same amount is somehow 
leadership. Well Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, cutting 3.5 per 
cent of a minister making $145,000 a year is much different 
than cutting 3.5 per cent of a teacher’s aid making $24,000 a 
year. That’s not leadership, Mr. Speaker. It’s unacceptable. 
 
Now real leadership would be for the Finance minister and the 
rest of cabinet to admit that this deficit is their fault. Real 
leadership would be for cabinet to apologize to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to agree to cut their pay by 20 per cent and to 
commit to reducing the number of MLAs in this Assembly. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, a first step to real leadership would be to 
finally enact the legislation that they promised Saskatchewan 
people: balanced budget legislation that is necessary because 
they scrapped the growth and financial security fund Act. Mr. 
Speaker, they scrapped the legislation in a clear move to avoid 
accountability. They drained the rainy day fund, and then they 
violated that Act by running a series of deficits. But instead of 
accepting any responsibility for breaking the law, they just 
threw the law out. Mr. Speaker, in yet another story of a 
promise broken, they committed to have a new law in place by 
last fall. They promised they would hold themselves 
accountable, but after looking at this budget, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
clear that they have learned nothing. 
 
How can Saskatchewan people trust a government that goes 
back on their contracts with teachers, that cuts funding to our 
kids’ classrooms, and continues to threaten to take local voices 
away from education? How we can trust a government that cuts 
health care, plows ahead with desperate sell-offs, and cuts 
supports to the province’s most vulnerable? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has spent the past year 
hiding the true state of the finances from the Saskatchewan 
people. How can we trust a government that hid in their budget 
an attack on our cities, a cut of tens of millions of dollars in 
grants in lieu of payments by public utilities? It punishes our 
communities, and it will hurt Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, with its skyrocketing debt, massive 
tax hikes, callous cuts, and lack of strategic investment leaves 
too many behind and does nothing to build hope in the future. 
This isn’t the budget that Saskatchewan people and their 
families want, and it certainly isn’t the budget they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would urge Sask Party members to finally look 
in the mirror. Take some responsibility and stop making 
Saskatchewan people and their families pay the price for the 
Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. Mr. Speaker, 
I always hold out hope for members opposite, that some might 
rise in their place and share with us what they are really hearing 
from their constituents. But at this point I would like to move 
that this debate now be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That the debate on the motion “That the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the 
government” be resumed on Thursday, March 23rd, 2017. 



March 22, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That the debate on the motion “That the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the 
government” be resumed on Thursday, March 23rd, 2017. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, I 
would like first to thank all of our guests that came here today 
and for everyone for following the rules of the Assembly. And 
now I would like to extend the invitation to our guests to join 
the members for tea in the Legislative Library, which is right 
outside the main doors to your right, or in room 218, out the 
doors and to your left. 
 
At this time I will place the question. The Government House 
Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House is now adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:25.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Response to Attack in London 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1831 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1831 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1831 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1831 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1832 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1832 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Honouring Freda Ahenakew 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1832 
 New Schools Completed in Saskatoon Westview 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1833 
 Players’ Benches Installed for Outdoor Hockey League 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1833 
 Advances in Provincial Health Care  
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1833 
 Government Investment Practices 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1833 
 Status of Regina Bypass Project 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1834 
 Provincial Budget Will Meet Challenges 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1834 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1834 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1834 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1835, 1837 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1837 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1836 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1836, 1839 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1838 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1837 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1838 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1845 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1846 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	STATEMENT BY A MEMBER
	Response to Attack in London
	STATEMENT BY A MEMBER
	Response to Attack in London

