






















































Hansard: May 03, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 82A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2377 
 May 3, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, I wish to inform you that Mr. Speaker will 
not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Sitting in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce some 
special members of our community here today. Every year the 
World Class Players Cup holds a soccer tournament in Regina 
featuring numerous players from our community who are 
representing different countries of the world. 
 
This year, for the first time, Syria was represented in the 
tournament with a team sponsored by an anonymous donor. As 
you know, since 2015 Saskatchewan has welcomed almost 
1,500 refugees from Syria, 590 of them in Regina. Most of the 
soccer team is made up of Syrian refugees. Participating in this 
tournament was an opportunity for the entire team and their 
supporters to enjoy a sport that is very popular in Syria while 
interacting with various other cultures and members of our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to let you know that today in the 
House is 19 members and volunteers of the Syrian soccer team, 
including their coach, Khaled Alshater. Accompanying them 
from the Open Door Society, Getachew Woldeyesus, manager 
of settlement and family community services, and a special 
welcome to Naeila Alshatir and Dr. Ahmad Moustapha. I invite 
them all to stand, and welcome again to your legislature. And 
again, we’re so proud of you. And there’ll be a member 
statement later, Mr. Speaker, but thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the member opposite and welcome this team to 
their Assembly. These individuals are an inspirational group, 
Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure to meet with them briefly here 
today, Mr. Speaker, and to welcome Team Syria, the inaugural 
team, to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 

They participated, as was mentioned, in the World Cup. The 
World Cup here in Regina is really a remarkable thing, and it 
brings together those from all around the world that are building 
their lives and building Saskatchewan and coming together 
through sport, reflecting some of the best aspects of sport and 
some of the best aspects of who we are as a province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m thankful to each of those individuals, each of those players 
on the team for building their lives here in Saskatchewan. I’m 
thankful for the contributions that they provide. I’m thankful for 
how they’ll shape and define our bright future, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m also thankful to welcome the leadership from Open 
Door Society here today. So I join with the member opposite to 
welcome Team Syria, these very fine leaders and builders of 
Saskatchewan, to their legislature. 
 
And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, seated in the east 
gallery is a group of brilliant young people who care deeply 
about our province, our communities, who we are, and people. 
These are young people that we all rely on to work together to 
build our province. And I just want to say to each and every one 
of them, thank you so much for your commitment to the people 
of this province, to our province. Thank you for the support to 
all of us in this Assembly, and looking forward to all the work 
ahead. So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
young leaders to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to join 
my colleague and welcome these, my Muslim friends from 
Syria. And thanks for Dr. Ahmad Moustapha. Of course, this is 
a great country, great province, and giving us peace of mind and 
freedom and security. Of course, a lot of opportunities here. 
And you’re welcome in your Legislative Building. Thanks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Legislative Assembly, two of my family 
members, Greg and Alex Ross. So Greg and Alex have the 
opportunity to come down to Regina, visit with family, and also 
visit with some members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is a very important year. It’s an anniversary year for Greg. 
Forty years ago in August, Greg moved up to Pinehouse Lake 
and he’s just become a real member of that community. He 
served as a mayor for two terms, on council numerous terms, 
and just been really committed to his community. At one point, 
Terry asked Greg if he was ever considering moving home, and 
Greg said, I am home. 
 
So you know, we’d love to have him here, but he loves his 
community of Pinehouse. And we’re so proud of the work that 
Greg and his son and, well, his whole family does for that 
community. So please welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll recognize the member from 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, for an 
extended introduction? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, my friend, Pam Arcand, in the east gallery and her 
youth care worker, Trinity Allen, who works for Egadz. Can 
you give us a wave? Pam and I have had the occasion to meet 
because she has an interest in politics, Mr. Speaker, which after 
today we’ll see if that’s strengthened or diminished. But I’d just 
like to tell you a little bit about Pam. 
 
Pam is a hard-working individual that has a drive to complete 
high school next year. She recently obtained her driver’s 
licence, which was a huge milestone for Pam. I can tell you, as 
a mom of a daughter who just a few years ago got a driver’s 
licence, that was a milestone for me too. It was, I think, the best 
parenting milestone ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Pam plays the guitar and has been taking lessons for quite some 
time. Her family is very musical, and that seems to be in Pam’s 
genes as well. She enjoys going to the movies and spending 
time with her friends and family, and a highlight for Pam is 
going out to Watrous with her grandfather for the weekend. He 
has a place out there, and she loves to stay there with him. And 
Pamela also enjoys watching Grey’s Anatomy. 
 
So with that, I would like all my colleagues to welcome Pam 
and Trinity to their Legislative Assembly. It’s their first visit 
here, so let’s give them a warm welcome. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 
through you to the members of the legislature, it is my honour 
to introduce the former member for Kelvington-Wadena, Ms. 
June Draude. June is currently the regional coordinator for 
Autism Society Canada. 
 
Ministers of the legislature will well remember the clicking of 
red, high-heeled shoes in the hallway as a precursor to advocacy 
on critical issues of the day for the constituency. She continues 
to be a guiding light today as a mentor and good friend. Please 
join me in welcoming June back to her legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite. I see June Draude 
seated just back here. I can now make eye contact. It’s a 
pleasure on behalf of the official opposition to welcome June 
Draude back to her Legislative Assembly. Certainly she’s 

someone that had a good relationship with many within this 
Assembly on both sides. And all of our best to June, and thank 
you for being here today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the House, sitting in the west gallery I’d like to introduce 
a school group from the town of Kenaston. There are 17 grade 7 
and 8 students also accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Sandra 
Lutz, and parent chaperones, Tammy Powder, Bonetta Beck, 
Lana Simonson. And also accompanying them is the bus driver, 
Norma Yelich. 
 
I also want to welcome them here. I’m looking forward to 
having a photograph and answering any questions you may 
have of the following proceedings. Thank you, and welcome 
here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce you and members of the House to David Sparling 
who’s sitting in the gallery up here. He’s been my legislative 
intern this past while and has done an outstanding job. And they 
finish up not too many weeks from now, but we want to 
recognize all the interns. But David has done an outstanding job 
for me, researching and attending meetings and all of that kind 
of thing. He’s an outstanding intern. 
 
He has an interesting bit of a bio. You know, he has done an 
awful lot of work. He graduated with a degree in political 
science and a minor in history. And of course that came out 
particularly during the summer, last summer, when he worked 
at the Diefenbaker Canada Centre and the different 
responsibilities there, and he brought that to our work together. 
 
So I just want to ask all members to welcome David to his 
legislature. And I ask all members in joining me in thanking 
him for his good work. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce Rachelle Bistritzan. We were just talking 
about how difficult her last name is to pronounce just yesterday 
at the intern supper. 
 
As my colleague just mentioned, our time with our interns are 
nearing the end. This is the last week that I have the opportunity 
to be with Rachelle. And they have a few more weeks within 
their internship, but I really enjoyed my time with Rachelle. She 
came to Prince Albert, and I really do think she enjoyed her 
time there. We had an opportunity to meet with a lot of leaders 
in the community and some of the community-based 
organizations. And she learned a little bit about Prince Albert, 
and I hope that encouraged her to come and visit again. 
 
But I also really appreciate the opportunity to learn from the 
interns, and especially Rachelle. And she knows a lot about the 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

community-based organizations within Regina, and she’s 
volunteered and did a lot within the community. She’s very 
smart, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was nice to learn a little bit 
from her political science background. But she’s also very 
compassionate. And I know she’s going to be a strong leader in 
the future. And I look forward to seeing exactly how well you 
excel in life, and I hope we could keep our relationship together 
in the near future. 
 
They’re getting an opportunity to go to northern Saskatchewan 
in the next couple of weeks, and I know they’re going to really 
enjoy their time there. But also the member from Batoche is 
going to give them a tour of our historical site of Batoche. And 
I grew up not too far away from there, so I know they’re also 
going to enjoy that as well. 
 
So again, I really appreciate the opportunity of learning from 
our interns, and I hope Rachelle also appreciated her 
opportunity with me as well. I know some days were crazier 
than others, but again thanks, Rachelle, and I’d like all members 
to welcome Rachelle to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap off and sell off of 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like us all 
to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
provides a vital service to many seniors, workers, families 
throughout the province, and that by scrapping STC out of the 
blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 
about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps to drive the economy with a parcel 
service that serves farms and other businesses. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed and supported by thousands and thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to present a petition again opposing the Sask Party’s 
cuts to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to me, just 
a couple of days ago in committee we had a brief conversation 
about spiritual care and the minister told me this wasn’t a 
service provided in all health regions, so they chose to cut this 
valuable service. So instead of expanding something that was 
working and working well for people, the government cut it. 

That was their way of addressing inequity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that with the 2017-18 budget, the Sask 
Party has eliminated funding for spiritual care services within 
our health region facilities, Mr. Speaker. They point out that our 
province will be the only one within Canada to not fund this 
support for patients, residents, and their families seeking 
wellness. The petitioners point out the Sask Party hid their plan 
to scrap funding for spiritual care within health region facilities 
during the 2016 election. Mr. Speaker, just a year ago they said 
nothing about this. 
 
The petitioners point out that spiritual care responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis, 
and that spiritual care supports families, patients, and residents 
in making difficult decisions. And lastly they point out that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents in obtaining comfort and support, regardless of their 
faith or belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Hanley, Dundurn, Outlook, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Ogema, Pangman, Bengough, Hardy, Viceroy, Ceylon, and 
Parry. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to stand in my place today to offer support and answer the call, 
and under the direction of the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote to have support for this petition. Anybody in the 
Assembly who wants to stand and support her would be most 
certainly appreciated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a petition from the 
city of bridge, where the people of the area want a second 
bridge for Prince Albert and north. And, Mr. Speaker, the need 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer 
than it is today. Prince Albert and many, many communities 
north of Prince Albert, and many businesses in Prince Albert 
and north of Prince Albert that send people and products to 
Prince Albert require a solution. So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan, and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition — 
as we present page after page, day after day, week and week, 
and month after month, from many parts of our province — the 
people that have signed this particular page are primarily from 
Prince Albert. And I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the undersigned residents of the province want to bring to 
our attention the following: that the citizens of this province 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people signing this petition today 
come from the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
to stand in my place today to present a petition to increase the 
funding to Prince Albert mobile crisis. Due to a cut in funding, 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its door during 
daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in 
distress. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this week is Mental 
Health Week, I feel it’s very important to identify the role that 

mobile crisis plays in Prince Albert with regards to helping 
individuals who are having mental health issues or symptoms. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, mobile crisis unit workers are trained to 
identify individuals who are struggling with mental health. 
They’re aware of the services that are available in the 
community for individuals needing services. And they’re also 
trained in using the suicide risk assessment tool that evaluates 
the client’s risk of suicide. And we know with the high rates of 
suicide we have in the province, but not only in the province but 
in Prince Albert and the North, it’s really important to have 
these crisis intervention workers available when they need the 
support. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital staff, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer a 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Like I’ve said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, individuals across 
this province realize how important it is to provide crisis service 
for 24 hours every day of the week in the third-largest city of 
this province. And so we have individuals who signed this 
petition; they come from the communities of Redvers, Carrot 
River, and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to stop Bill 63. 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wish 
to draw our attention to the following: that they are opposed to 
the changing of The Education Act with Bill 63 as it currently 
reads until the government takes part in active and good faith, 
transparent conversation with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association; that there shall be transparency and agreement 
upon all, if any, changes in The Education Act; and that it is 
imperative that the government recognizes that there must be 
appropriate time frame in which the elected board members are 
able to convey all information of decisions affecting their 
communities. 
 
They wish that the government would recognize that the local 
school boards are the voice of Saskatchewan communities and 
that decisions should remain with such elected boards. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan repeal Bill 
63 and preserve governance of elected school boards. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures are rolling in from all around the 
province, as are hundreds upon hundreds of emails calling for 
exactly the same thing. The particular people who have signed 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

this petition today reside in McTaggart, Trossachs, Yellow 
Grass, and Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reverse to cuts to the Lighthouse 
program in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners in the 
prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
immediately reverse their recent cuts to funding that allow 
extremely vulnerable people to access the services of the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit in Saskatoon; and revisit their 
imposition of a strict and narrow definition of 
homelessness in November of 2015 which forced the 
Lighthouse to cut back its hours of essential service in 
February of 2016; and to take immediate steps to ensure 
that homeless people in Saskatchewan have emergency 
shelter, clothing, and food available to them before more 
lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good cities of Saskatoon and Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for survivors of 
domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious 
distinction, Mr. Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
One in three Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 
their workplace. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to 
the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation similar 
to our private member’s bill that we tabled a few weeks ago and 
Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the individuals signing this petition 
today come from Swift Current, Wymark, and Ponteix. I do so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 

institutions. Mr. Speaker, post-secondary students in this 
province already face among the highest levels of tuition in the 
country and growing levels of debt. We have seen a precipitous 
drop in the number of students from low-income families that 
are accessing higher education, the lowest rate in Western 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that context we see the introduction of a 5.6 per cent cut to 
the budgets of universities and colleges, the largest cut in the 
history of those institutions. Alongside that we see a cut of $8.2 
million for student aid and scholarships, the elimination of the 
SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings] 
grant that allows families to save in advance of education, and 
the elimination of the tax credits for tuition and books, Mr. 
Speaker. All of these decisions make it more difficult for 
students and their families to afford education. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing today’s petition are from 
Regina and Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards Ceremony 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This past 
Saturday, April the 29th, I was delighted to attend the annual 
Saskatchewan Book Awards Ceremony in Regina along with 
my colleague from Regina Douglas Park and the member for 
Regina Rochdale. 
 
Established in 1993 by the Saskatchewan Writers’ Guild, 
Saskatchewan Publishers Group, and Saskatchewan Library 
Association, the Saskatchewan Book Awards have become a 
pillar of Saskatchewan’s literary scene, and the awards 
ceremony attracts more than 1,000 guests every year. This 
year’s ceremony was hosted by James Daschuk, the 
award-winning author of Clearing the Plains. Fourteen awards 
were presented throughout the evening, representing a vast 
number of genres and the diverse and socio-cultural 
backgrounds that Saskatchewan authors and publishers bring to 
the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s award winners were truly talented and 
inspiring local writers. One of the biggest winners of the night 
was the recipient of the Regina Public Library Book of the Year 
Award, and that was world-renowned author and Saskatoon 
resident Yann Martel, with his book The High Mountains of 
Portugal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s literary community currently 
includes more than 300 authors and 30 book publishers, and 
their contributions to the fabric of our province are 
immeasurable. Exposure to Saskatchewan literature promotes 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

an understanding of the history of our province, and it 
encourages people to engage with local narratives that can 
foster a lifelong love of literacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
Saskatchewan’s book of the year awards for a lovely evening in 
support of literacy in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

English as an Additional Language Conference 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This past 
week I was fortunate to bring greetings to the Saskatchewan 
Teachers of English as an Additional Language and Teaching 
English as a Subsequent Language Conference held in 
Saskatoon. 
 
The work of Saskatchewan TEAL [Saskatchewan Teachers of 
English as an Additional Language] and TESL [Teaching 
English as a Subsequent Language] Saskatchewan is admirable, 
for they bring educators and students together who are 
passionate about English as an additional language. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new Canadians who have arrived in 
Saskatchewan play a very important role in our economy. 
Therefore, developing appropriate resources for both educators 
and learners has been a major priority of this government since 
2008 when the settlement service delivery model was 
introduced. 
 
I would like to highlight this government’s dedication to our 
new neighbours, as this year’s budget earmarked $33 million to 
support the needs and services of English as an additional 
language learners and educators. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
support will go towards teachers, facilitators, settlement 
workers, consultants, and resources. Along with this support, 
the government also provides free over-the-phone interpretation 
in 24 languages to support school staff in communication with 
the parents of their students. 
 
I thank Saskatchewan TEAL and TESL associations for this 
conference, as it gave educators the opportunity to collaborate 
and share new ideas on how to deliver services more efficiently 
and effectively. I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
the organizers of this conference on a successful event and 
thank them for their dedication to the English language being 
available and accessible for all. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 

Walk for Multiple Sclerosis 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend I was proud to 
participate in Canada’s 27th annual walk for multiple sclerosis. 
The Saskatchewan Blue Cross organizes MS [multiple 
sclerosis] walks throughout communities in our province, and 
my son and I were pleased to be able to walk with hundreds of 
people through Saskatoon’s beautiful Meewasin Trail. The 
event raised more than 150,000, exceeding our city’s goal. 
 

Mr. Speaker, MS is a devastating neurological condition that 
can result in vision loss, muscle spasms, mobility problems, and 
various other symptoms. Canada has the highest rate of MS in 
the world and Saskatchewan the highest rate of MS in the 
country with over 3,500 people in the province currently 
suffering. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, MS remains a mystery. We still 
don’t know the exact cause nor do we have a cure. And that’s 
why it’s so important that we strive to improve the lives of 
those living with this condition and to support the institutions 
that can do the research to truly understand what is happening 
with MS. 
 
The money raised from efforts like the walk for MS are 
invested in world-leading research, much of which is happening 
right here in our province. There’s some truly innovative work 
taking place at the University of Saskatchewan’s MS clinic, and 
local fundraising efforts are getting us that much closer to 
finding a cure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the MS Society of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Blue Cross on organizing another successful 
walk for MS campaign, and thanking all those who came out 
this year to walk and raise funds for this valuable cause. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

New Elders’ Complex in Pinehouse Lake 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to let members 
know that the elders’ complex built by Pinehouse Business 
North is on time and on budget. This complex is a fantastic 
addition to the community of Pinehouse Lake and was truly a 
community effort that will serve their elders well for years to 
come. 
 
The housing complex is more than 12,000 square feet, has 12 
units, common areas including a kitchen, and public seating 
areas. This facility was also responsible for creating 26 local 
jobs and further utilizing contractors from Pinehouse Lake. 
 
It was a locally driven project built by a local company. 
Pinehouse Business North started in 2007 and is owned by 
Aboriginal people from Pinehouse Lake, with an emphasis on 
local employment with the dividends being enjoyed right within 
the community. Further, they specialize in labour services and 
construction in the mining industry, focusing on Aboriginal 
employment and building excellence. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me 
in thanking Pinehouse Business North for their work in the 
community and congratulate Pinehouse Lake on the completion 
of their elder living complex. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

Saskatchewan Resident Aims for Spot in  
Astronaut Corps 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
to share some exciting news about a former constituent of mine. 
Jason Leuschen, a graduate from the University of 
Saskatchewan engineering program, has advanced to the next 
phase of astronaut recruitment for the Canadian Space Agency, 
with final selection happening this June. Only two people will 
be selected as new members of the Canadian astronaut corps. 
He is currently one of 17 finalists dreaming of being Canada’s 
newest astronaut, having been selected from nearly 4,000 
applicants. 
 
Jason grew up on a farm near Bruno, Saskatchewan. He is 
currently training with the Royal Canadian Air Force to be a 
helicopter pilot. He remembers his childhood in Saskatchewan 
as being his inspiration for his pursuit, saying, “I fell in love 
with the sky, growing up on a farm in the land of the living 
skies.” 
 
The idea of becoming an astronaut was cemented for Jason after 
he met Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau at the Canada-Wide 
Science Fair. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Jason on his 
success in this process so far, and I want to let him know that a 
whole province is behind him as he aims for one of the two 
available spots in the Canadian astronaut corps. I invite all 
members to join me in supporting Jason on his exciting journey. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Local Syrian Team Plays in Soccer Tournament 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is an open and welcoming province. In 
December of 2015, I had the pleasure of welcoming the first 
plane of Syrian refugees into Regina. Assalamu ’alaykum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests in the gallery lived in refugee camps 
for many years before making it to Canada. It would be 
unimaginable for many people to understand what they’ve been 
through. Although they’ve lost so much, their love of sport 
never faded. There’s a lot we take for granted, Mr. Speaker, and 
having a safe place to play is one of these. 
 
After collecting donations from the community, led by Khaled 
Alshater, this group entered into the 2017 World Class Players 
Cup soccer tournament, representing their home country of 
Syria. Mr. Speaker, the team is made up of mostly Syrian 
refugees you see in your gallery here today. With strong support 
from their cheering fans, they made a lasting impression and an 
impact on the tournament for all who attended. They had a 
wonderful tournament and are looking forward to participating 
next year. The organizers of the team are now looking into 
starting up a kids’ soccer camp, open to all children to come 
and learn new skills and gain new friendships. 
 
Let us all remember how fortunate we are to live in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Syrian refugee soccer team on a successful 
tournament, and wish them all the best as they settle into their 

new communities. Welcome home. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River. 
 

New Potash Mine Opens 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, for the 
first time in nearly 40 years, a new potash mine is open in 
Saskatchewan. The Premier, myself, and the Minister of Energy 
and Resources, other colleagues, and dignitaries from across the 
globe were at the newly named Bethune mine site.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the name K+S might be familiar to some of the 
older people in Saskatchewan. In the ’70s, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government of the day pushed the companies 
and their predecessors to K+S out of the province by 
nationalizing their mines. The result was stalled investment for 
decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are thrilled that K+S broke ground in 2012 to 
build this new state-of-the-art mine in my constituency. 
Expected to produce 2 million tonnes of potash per year, this 
$4.6 billion project is well positioned to be successful for 
decades.  
 
Our government has made it clear that Saskatchewan is open 
for business. These 400 workers employed at the new mine and 
the whole province can count on our government to make sure 
that Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and invest.  
 
Also, I would like to note that the K+S president, Ulrich Lamp, 
announced yesterday that they will be making a $1 million 
donation to STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air 
ambulance. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating K+S, their employees, and the local community 
on the grand opening of the Bethune mine and thank them for 
their generosity. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the backroom talks, the 
side deals, the corporate giveaways — there’s no shortage of 
evidence that instead of serving Saskatchewan people, the Sask 
Party are putting themselves, big corporations, and the wealthy 
and well-connected first, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s just look at the basic facts behind their growing GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal. Yes, the previous 
government had a plan to create a transportation hub. Yes, that 
land included moving the CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] rail 
yard. But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party formed government and 
two years later they turned that plan into a Sask Party scandal. 
They gave the corporation 300 acres for free. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier at least admit that giving away 
300 acres of land for free was the Sask Party’s decision? He 
was the Premier, and for him to suggest otherwise is simply not 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

true. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend 
is getting real close to admitting what happened when the NDP 
were in power, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll help him again, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re aided by cabinet documents. 
 
It’s strange when you have a cabinet meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
Typically when members opposite were in government and you 
have a cabinet meeting, someone’s writing all the decisions 
down including, Mr. Speaker, the fact that in April of 2007, 
when members opposite were the governing party, Mr. Speaker, 
$33 million was set aside for the project that would relocate 
these CPR tracks. Now $33 million is a lot of money that they 
approved to go to CPR. Here’s the good news: it didn’t take 
anywhere near that to get the job done, Mr. Speaker. When we 
took over government and looked at the file, we were able to 
get that done for a lot less. 
 
Here’s another reference from a cabinet document: 
 

For the ministry to finalize negotiations and formal 
agreements with the Government of Canada, CPR, and the 
city of Regina regarding their respective contributions 
required, an estimated contribution from the provincial 
government [that would be the NDP government] of $33 
million. 

 
We thank them for the decision to initiate the project, Mr. 
Speaker. We are grateful we were able to get it done for a lot 
less than that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of 
Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Good spin, but of course the facts are 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. And they gave away 300 acres of land 
for free. And now they’re scheming in backrooms to sell off our 
Crown corporations. No wonder they rushed last week to force 
forward and pass Bill 40. 
 
The Minister Responsible for Sask Tel has been taking part in 
non-meeting meetings in his office. Still, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has denied any plans to sell off our Crown 
corporations. Last week they looked us in the eye and said they 
weren’t aware of any plans to sell off SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance]. This was just last week, Mr. Speaker. 
Well last night the minister responsible said, “Yes, I’m aware of 
some high-level discussions that have taken place.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went from nothing’s for sale to discussions on 
SaskTel and SGI, and people are advertising that they’ve won 
STC routes that the Sask Party says aren’t for sale. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s past time. Will the Premier come clean with his scheme to 
sell off our Crown corporations? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we introduced Bill 40 into this House in October of last year. 
We introduced Bill 40 in this House in October of last year. 
When it was introduced, we indicated that we would be open to 
partnerships if they strengthen Crowns, if they keep utility rates 
low in the province, if they protect the jobs in the province, if 
they ensured head office strength in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This was in October of last year. Well the 
Deputy Leader’s saying, say it. If he would stop talking, he 
would hear me say it. I’ve been saying it since last October, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And moreover, long before I arrived on the scene, premiers 
have been saying exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker, exactly 
the same thing. For example, Premier Romanow. Premier 
Romanow noted in an article in the Leader-Post, April 20 — 
the reporter was James Parker, someone we know reasonably 
well — the then NDP premier said SaskTel may start looking 
for a partner. Here’s what then NDP premier Romanow said: 
 

Supposing they [some other company] had some great 
Internet scheme or idea which would be both a good thing 
for the people of Saskatchewan and profitable for SaskTel. 
 
And in the arrangement of the partnership, some swapping 
or exchanging of shares was part of the parcel of the 
payment process. I’d look at it then. 

 
That’s what the NDP said in 2000 under Premier Romanow, not 
about selling a controlling interest in the Crowns but about 
seeking a partnership. And if it strengthened the Crown, it made 
sense for the bottom line for the Crown and the employees, 
Premier Romanow said he’d look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the NDP agree that that’s a pragmatic 
approach? We will keep control of the Crowns, but we ought to 
be open to strengthening them with partnerships, the kinds of 
which Premier Romanow advocated in 2000. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan has a major trust issue. This is a Premier a year 
ago that looked in the eyes of Saskatchewan people and told 
them that selling off the Crowns was not on. He took that 
pledge. Of course he wasn’t straight with them, and he has no 
mandate. 
 
[14:15] 
 
We have ministers over there that are now scrambling to get out 
of this tangled web, some of them that are starting to come 
clean. Last night the minister responsible skirted and dodged 
questions, but finally admitted that there are 11 different entities 
that they’ve talked to about the sale of SGI. Mr. Speaker, 11 
different options for a sell-off. And yet of course they’ve been 
denying it all along, and we hear this nonsense here today again 
from the Premier. It simply can’t be swept under the rug. 
They’re clearly looking to sell off SGI. The minister even 
boasted last night and tried to pitch this deal as some sort of 
good deal. 
 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear what they’re doing here. If the 
Sask Party is trying to sell off SGI, a valuable Crown 
corporation that Saskatchewan people want to keep, how can 
the Premier defend this against his statement that they had no 
plan? Why won’t he be straight with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend omits the fact 
that the legislation they opposed, Bill 40, actually defines 
privatization. There will be no sell-off of a Crown. In fact under 
the legislation, a sell-off is impossible. 
 
What is possible, Mr. Speaker, what is possible though are 
partnerships that might strengthen the Crown corporations 
while the people of the province keep control — 50 per cent 
plus. So of course the Minister of SGI has been having 
meetings about that, about opportunities to strengthen SGI 
without losing control. And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if he’s 
contacted his predecessor, the NDP leader from 2000, who as 
Premier said the following. The article in the Leader-Post says 
this: 

 
But he [Romanow] said the government would consider a 
swap of shares with a partner under the right 
circumstances. 

 
“Supposing they had some great Internet scheme or idea 
which would be both a good thing for the people of 
Saskatchewan and profitable for SaskTel. 
 
“And in the arrangement of the partnership, some 
swapping or exchanging of shares was part and parcel of 
the payment process, [Romanow said] I’d look at it then.” 

 
Do you know what, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t for Bill 40, today 
Premier Romanow would not be able to look at such a deal. Bill 
40 will allow for this kind of a deal to be considered, as Premier 
Romanow said might be a good idea if it strengthens the 
Crowns, if it protects head offices in the province. Well they 
hate the answer to this question. And if, Mr. Speaker, it 
maintains 50 per cent plus majority controlling interest in the 
hands of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, absolutely, ministers are going to be canvassing 
opportunities to achieve those things for our Crowns. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier that’s 
betrayed Saskatchewan people, that’s broken his word, and as 
he sells off our Crown corporations, he’s selling out 
Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan New Democrats will fight 
him every step of the way. 
 
He’s chopped up and they’re selling off STC. They’ve had 11 
meetings to sell off SGI. They’re even pitching it as a good 
idea. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re having meetings to sell off 
SaskTel. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s not true. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Oh I hear the Premier jeering over there. 

So stop me if you’ve heard this one: a chief of staff, a minister, 
and a major telecom lobbyist meet in a minister’s office. This is 
no joke, Mr. Speaker. But once again it’ll be the friends and 
well-connected of the Sask Party who are laughing their way all 
the way to the bank while Saskatchewan people are forced to 
pick up the tab, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On Monday the Premier defended the SaskTel minister right 
before the minister contradicted the Premier’s version of the 
story. So will the Premier finally come clean? And if the Sask 
Party Premier wants to keep ramming forward his damaging 
sell-off scheme of SGI, SaskTel, and our Crowns, will he at 
least have the decency and backbone to take it for a vote to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 clearly 
defines what privatization is and what the government is 
prevented from doing. It says that 50 per cent plus one, the 
controlling interests of the Crown corporations, must stay in 
perpetuity with the people of the province and with the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan. I agree with 
Premier Romanow from 2000 when he said it might be 
pragmatic to look at partnerships though, within that confine, 
within that restraint. That might strengthen the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, well the members are saying, take it to the people. I know 
I campaigned in the election in 1999. I remember then Premier 
Romanow saying the Crowns were not for sale and yet just a 
year later he was able to rationalize that this kind of a 
partnership was pragmatic and something to be considered, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would expect, I would expect that members 
opposite, even as angry as they might be, would agree that what 
was fair for the NDP in 2000 is more than fair for the 
Saskatchewan Party this year. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I know it’s spring, I know it’s 
spring but if the Premier could spare us the hibernation routine, 
Mr. Speaker, or the Rip Van Winkle routine. I’m familiar with 
the Premier that stood in 2007, 2011, and 2016 and said that 
he’d respect the Crown corporation protection Act, Mr. 
Speaker. And that Premier’s seated right over there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I wonder if the Premier could do us all a favour and point to 
where, in the previous three elections, where he takes the 
mandate from to sell off up to 49 per cent of SaskTel, SGI, or 
pick your Crown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
stood in this House and I’ve stood in committee, Mr. Speaker, 
and answered this question. Legislation was tabled by the New 
Democrats when they were in government which was deficient. 
They did not, they did not define the word “privatization,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

What this Act does quite simply, Mr. Speaker, is to resolve a 
deficiency, and the legislation was tabled to define the word 
“privatization,” Mr. Speaker. It was a definition, it was a 
definition which was taken, took guidance from the World 
Bank, Mr. Speaker, in preparing that definition. That’s all this 
legislation does. 
 
As members opposite know, Mr. Speaker, legislation without 
definition is worthless. This bill, Bill 40, brings clarity and 
definition to that legislation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, again I’m familiar with the 
record of a Premier that stood in this Assembly in 2004 and 
voted for the Crown protection Act, and then defended it in 
2007, 2011, and 2016, Mr. Speaker. And didn’t say, you know 
. . . laughed off any concerns that would be raised about, you 
know, if they try to return to their Tory ways and try and 
privatize these assets against the will of the Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. The overwhelming number of 
Saskatchewan people support keeping SaskTel in public hands. 
They don’t support this backdoor way to privatize 49 per cent 
of this valuable corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we asked the minister responsible for it, Mr. Speaker, he 
says that he had . . . You know, when we asked him if they had 
had meetings about this or discussions, he’s got to come 
forward and correct the record. Well in one of those meetings, 
Mr. Speaker, where he just, he’d run into somebody and then, 
you know, apprised them with the fact that Bill 40 was coming 
down the line and that that was the new policy, Mr. Speaker, 
that meeting took place in his office with his chief of staff, Mr. 
Speaker. It wasn’t like they ran into each other at the lunch line. 
 
So can the Minister for SaskTel tell us here in the House, which 
was the large Canadian telecom outfit that he’d met with? And 
what did he have to say about the opportunities that would be 
available under Bill 40? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve said in the House, I’ve taken the opportunity to 
correct what I had said in committee, Mr. Speaker. I did it . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the bill was 
actually passed on the Wednesday, I believe. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that when I make a mistake, I need to own up to it. I 
did so. I conferred with officials the following day. I sent a 
letter to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sometimes make mistakes. In fact just on April 
27th, the interim Leader of the Opposition said, “Yes, I have no 
problem apologizing, withdrawing and apologizing for those 
words,” Mr. Speaker. Well he had enough of an apology that 
somebody had to ask him to offer the apology, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I will not, I will not call into the question the 
character of the interim Leader of the Opposition. I hope he 
would do the same for me, Mr. Speaker, and members of this 
House. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking for opportunities to strengthen the 
Crown corporations, something which apparently Roy 
Romanow would agree with. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, while the minister is admitting 
mistakes, I wonder if he might admit if there are any others. 
 
Last week, just after he says he learned that he reported 
something in a committee that wasn’t true, I asked the minister 
if there’d been any talk of opening up SaskEnergy to private 
investment. He didn’t take that chance to correct the record on 
SaskTel that night when he was able to do so, and he said, no, 
regarding SaskEnergy. That’s the same answer he initially gave 
on SaskTel. It’s the same answer we heard from the Minister of 
Justice on SGI. 
 
Given the shifting sands on those two Crowns, I’d like to give 
the minister a chance to clear things up. Regarding SaskEnergy, 
do you have any news to report on meetings about a 
wind-down, a partnership, an investment opportunity, asset 
recycling, or any other code word for privatization, any other 
code word for a sell-off? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to SaskEnergy, the only thing that I have 
asked of the senior management: one, as we do with all the 
Crowns, they have a business to run — to make sure they run 
that business to the best of their ability, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have also asked whether or not that an opportunity 
for a partnership that was explored in the early 2000s by the 
members opposite if, Mr. Speaker, that would still be something 
relevant to look at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of partnering with potential private 
companies, Mr. Speaker, obviously SaskEnergy and TransGas 
do a lot of business in moving gas into the provinces. If there’s 
an opportunity to even store more gas for Alberta-based 
companies, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that the company is 
exploring and needs to explore, Mr. Speaker. But I don’t think 
that that’s out of the normal course of business. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Lobbyist Registry 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this doublespeak, this 
government’s doublespeak on privatization is just not 
believable. The big phone companies are measuring the drapes 
at SaskTel and they’re already talking to 11 companies about 
carving up SGI and serving it to their corporate buddies. 
 
And who’s been lobbying the government on these sell-offs? 
Fat cat conservative lobbyists, the same ones who’ve bankrolled 
the Sask Party’s elections. Since 2007, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
one conservative insider’s lobbying firms have given the Sask 
Party more than $20,000, and now he represents Rogers. A 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

long-time Sask Party insider is getting the inside track for 
Telus. 
 
It’s so obvious that this government has totally forgotten who 
they’re working for. They’re taking tens of thousands of dollars 
from big-time corporate lobbyists who are getting paid to 
ensure a sell-off of our Crowns. Mr. Speaker, why won’t they 
join us in getting big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
reason that the member has that information is that we have a 
lobbyist registration in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — a 
lobbyist legislation, Mr. Speaker, which was developed with the 
help of both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the lobbyist registration allows people in this 
province to understand, to look to see who’s lobbying their 
elected officials, Mr. Speaker. Before this lobby registry was 
launched last year, Mr. Speaker, there was no way of having 
that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now members of the public, Mr. Speaker, in a very 
transparent way have an opportunity to know who’s lobbying 
their elected officials, Mr. Speaker, have an opportunity to 
know what they’re lobbying their elected officials are, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is precisely the reason why we have this 
legislation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you 
know the Minister of Justice would know full well that my 
colleagues submitted a minority report on the lobbyist registry, 
so they should come clean on that. They should come clean on 
that. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the lobby and election laws aren’t 
being broken. It’s the laws themselves that are broken, and the 
lobbyist registry just doesn’t go far enough. You don’t have to 
register if the Sask Party calls you, and you don’t have to 
register if you’re talking to the government about how a law 
affects you or your business. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what would 
you lobby the government for, if not for something that would 
affect your interests? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even for those who do register, it’s more 
about what they may lobby about, not what is actually 
happening and when. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when will the 
government do the right thing, fix the lobbyist registry, and join 
us in getting big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that question to 
be just remarkable, Mr. Speaker. We co-operated on this 
legislation. Yes, they filed a minority report, Mr. Speaker, but 
there was precisely two things which we disagreed on. The 
basic elements of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, was agreed on 
between both sides of the House, and now the member, now the 
member complains about the very piece of legislation which 

they worked on to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all political parties are required to register and 
report their donations and expenses. That’s transparent, Mr. 
Speaker. The lobbying legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member asked the question. We 
may want to give the minister an opportunity to answer. I 
recognize the minister. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the lobbying legislation 
augments the transparency that the Saskatchewan people have 
with respect to who is lobbying their elected officials. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the member speaks out of both sides of his mouth. 
They’re out looking for corporate donations, Mr. Speaker, for 
their political events; $356,000 in donations to various NDP 
campaigns from the unions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is very, very clear. People are 
allowed now to see who’s lobbying their elected officials, Mr. 
Speaker. They can see who’s donating to those parties, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s transparency. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also gave a $60 million 
tax giveaway to their corporate friends, and all across the 
province parents, teachers, and community members have told 
me that they are concerned about the government’s $60 million 
cut to our kids’ classrooms. People are also concerned about the 
Sask Party’s plan to silence local voices from education with 
Bill 63. And it is no secret that the minister wanted to scrap 
locally elected school boards altogether. 
 
But the Saskatchewan people spoke out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And when he realized he couldn’t get away with it, he decided 
to take away their decision-making powers, their voice, the 
voices of locally elected school board trustees instead. This is 
another Sask Party power grab. And the Saskatchewan people 
have been very clear. They do not want this bill. So will the 
minister finally listen and scrap Bill 63? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier and 
Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, they want to talk about 
Bill 63. Bill 63 is going to prevent the very problem that we’re 
having right now as a result of the Theodore lawsuit. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the NDP that need to explain their position on that 
ruling. Do they support school choice for parents and students 
or not? 
 
Our government’s position is clear. We’ll use the 
notwithstanding clause to protect non-Catholic students’ right to 
attend a Catholic school. The NDP position? Who knows? The 
Leader of the Opposition would only say that he supports 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

consideration of using the notwithstanding. What does that 
mean, Mr. Speaker? Supports consideration, like he wants to 
think as if that’s a new and novel thing. 
 
It’s a simple question, Mr. Speaker: do they support 
non-Catholic students being able to attend Catholic schools, yes 
or no? Do they support the ruling that would have the effect of 
taking 10,000 students out of their school? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not there. They are. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know it’s a foreign 
concept for the members opposite to do any planning before 
they take action, but I suggest that they start doing so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister knows that Saskatchewan 
people do not want this bill. And of course I support publicly 
funded education and I support . . . That support includes both 
the Catholic and the public systems. 
 
What I do not support is that minister taking $60 million out of 
our kids’ classrooms while giving his corporate friends $60 
million in tax breaks. And what I don’t support is that 
minister’s plan to silence local voices in education and give full 
control to himself and to cabinet. 
 
How can he possibly think that he is better at making decisions 
than locally elected trustees? Why won’t he listen to 
Saskatchewan people and scrap Bill 63? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
interim leader for getting his critic on the same page as he is, at 
least a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another important question that needs to be 
answered. Last week the critic said she doesn’t support 
government funding for faith-based schools like Luther 
College, Regina Christian, or Huda School. That’s the first time 
we heard that from the NDP. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member asked the question. She 
may want to give the minister . . . Order. I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
accused us of diverting funds to something other than a publicly 
funded system so we could move things into a faith-based 
system. Mr. Speaker, our government provides funding for 
3,600 students and 26 faith-based students in the province. 
Where are the NDP on that one? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to stand with all of the students in this 
province. We’re going to make sure that they’re well funded 
and the schools are well run and we’re not taking any lessons 
from the people over there. 
 

[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the members to come to 
order. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 
Standing Committee on House Services. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 
report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
sixth report. I move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I think question period is over. 
We’re moving on. It has been moved by the Deputy Chair: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the 
Deputy Chair: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 51, The 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act, 2016 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole and that Bill 
No. 52, The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act 
be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
Repeal Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
52 be now read a third time and passed under its title. . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, Bill 51, The Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Recorded division. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — On division. It’s carried on division. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 70 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak to Bill No. 70, 
the amendment to The Provincial Sales Tax Act. 

Mr. Speaker, I will start to speak to this by reading from an 
article that was published in the Leader-Post on the 22nd of 
April of this year. We had an economist by the name of Nick 
Falvo. Nick is an economist from Carleton University, research 
associate there. He has a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in public 
policy and is based in Calgary. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin has the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So this 
article from Dr. Falvo talked about this budget. And the final 
conclusion was . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve asked the members to come to 
order. The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has the floor. 
I’m having a difficult time hearing him. He’s very close to the 
dais. I’d ask members on both sides of the House to come to 
order. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, appreciate it. Mr. 
Speaker, this article was titled “Saskatchewan’s budget is Robin 
Hood in reverse.” And I’ll skip ahead to the end in terms of the 
actual conclusion because I think it’s a very good statement 
about what budgeting should be about: “Good budgeting invests 
in people while strengthening the economy.” And Dr. Falvo 
concluded that “This budget did neither.” 
 
To exactly what is he referring? I think there are multiple 
different ways in which this budget confirms that set of 
statements, but he describes a few things that are particularly 
pertinent to the bill before us today, Bill No. 70. 
 
Dr. Falvo talks about the way in which this budget increased the 
provincial sales tax from 5 to 6 per cent and stated that “. . . this 
will hurt lower-income households more than higher-income 
households.” 
 
It also expanded the PST [provincial sales tax], as you well 
know, to cover children’s clothing and many other things that 
weren’t previously covered: 
 

The province’s low-income tax credit . . . [is to] receive a 
$34-million enhancement, ostensibly [Dr. Falvo describes] 
to cushion the blow for low-income households — but this 
[he states] pales in comparison with the estimated $872 
million in revenue that the PST changes will bring in. 

 
Yes, that’s nearly a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 

According [the article goes on] to the recent analysis 
[published in Maclean’s] by Trevor Tombe and Blake 
Shaffer [two economists], all of these tax changes will hit 
lower-income households harder than higher-income 
households. Factoring in the cuts to income tax, the 
increase to PST, and the Low Income Tax Credit, earners 
in the bottom 10 per cent will see a two-per-cent increase 
in taxes as a percentage of household income. That steadily 
declines as incomes rise . . . [with] those in the top 10 per 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2017 

cent will see no increase at all to the taxes they pay. 
 
That’s right. The taxes were changed in such a way that those 
who are at the lowest end of the economic scale pay the most of 
their household income, and those at the highest, see no change 
at all. Mr. Speaker, that’s getting it backwards. That isn’t the 
right way to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the expansion into clothes for 
children, that’s clearly something that’s going to hit younger 
families more. It’s going to hit lower income families more. 
When we look at the addition on to restaurant and other 
pre-prepared meals, when families are struggling with food 
security, sometimes they don’t have an option. Sometimes they 
don’t have a place to cook. Sometimes they don’t have the 
option to actually avoid some pre-prepared meals, but now 
that’s going to be more costly, so a greater contribution to food 
insecurity. When you look at students, students in university 
who are accessing meals, for example on campus, already life is 
difficult for them, less affordable for them. This hits them once 
more. 
 
At the same time as we’re seeing no increase in supports for 
people in low income, we’re only seeing this budget talk about 
an increase in overall spending on social assistance, but no 
actual increase in the amounts that individuals or families will 
get. Basically a prediction that there are just going to be more 
people in poverty, more people requiring social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing in this budget makes it easier for families 
to get by, gets them more money in their pockets. But it does 
make life more expensive: this growth to the PST, the 
expansion into other areas, and the elimination of STC, which 
makes transportation much less affordable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with these introduced changes to clothes 
and restaurants and other basic necessities, we also see the PST 
being added to insurance premiums, added to insurance 
premiums in such a way that for many families, including farm 
families who spend on crop insurance, there’s going to be a 
very significant increase in their costs and overall a decrease in 
the impetus to seek out insurance, to plan ahead, which I think 
in some ways is emblematic of this budget overall. It’s a failure 
to think ahead, and by putting the PST on insurance, makes it 
more difficult for families to plan ahead as well. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Perhaps, you know, one of the other major areas where we see 
the PST expanded to, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t know if it’s been 
fully understood quite the impact that will have, is in the area of 
construction with now PST being applied to new builds and 
renovations. Now we’ve heard that that’s only a portion 
because PST was already on materials. However, materials only 
make up 30, at most 40 per cent of a new build. So you’ve got 
an increase of 1 per cent on that and then an increase of 6 per 
cent on every other part of that new build or renovation. 
 
So you’re basically seeing a 3 to 5 per cent increase in costs for 
every construction project. So that means projects won’t be 
completed. There will be projects that just won’t be affordable 
anymore. The margins are tight on that sort of construction 
activity. Removing 3 to 5 per cent of the profit because of PST, 

that’s going to make it more difficult for projects to be built. It’s 
going to be more difficult for people to get into that first home 
or to renovate their home. It’s also going to mean that capital 
expansion for schools, universities, for health regions, all kinds 
of government expenditures are going to become more 
expensive. It means we’re going to do fewer capital 
investments, or we’re going to do less of the deferred 
maintenance that needs to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that introduction of the PST on construction is a 
significant barrier to further activity in a sector that is well 
identified by economists as key. When you’re in a recession, 
you want more construction activity happening, not less. 
 
And that underlies some of the significant problems that exist 
with this budget where we have decisions being made. 
Disinvestment in health and education, the imposition of taxes 
that are actually in the way of growth — all of these are factors 
that mean that this budget will actually be less successful in 
influencing the kind of economic recovery that we truly need. 
When we’re in a difficult time, you don’t introduce an austerity 
budget that actually makes it more difficult for your economy to 
grow. But that’s exactly what we’ve done. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
seen in this budget — and this PST is a very significant 
example thereof — decisions that will make it harder for 
Saskatchewan people and harder for our economy to recover. 
 
When you look at that shift, when you look at that shift from 
people who are paying more in their household income, as you 
increase the PST while you decrease income tax, you see a shift 
with people in the bottom 10 per cent of the income bracket, 
increasing their taxes as a percentage of household income by 2 
per cent. Those who are in the middle, in the 50 per cent, they 
will see an increase of 1 per cent. And those at the very top, the 
top 10 per cent of earners in this province see absolutely no 
change in their taxes. The PST and the income tax evens it out 
as the percentage of household income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s backwards. That’s rewarding the wealthy 
and well connected and making life more difficult for people 
who are already struggling. Add on to that a corporate tax cut 
while you’re cutting education, while you’re cutting health, 
while you’re cutting so many other key elements of providing 
services for our society and reviving our economy. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very clear that this is the wrong direction. 
 
It is backwards motion, and I certainly will be joining my 
colleagues in not supporting Bill No. 70. And I’ll adjourn 
debate for today on that bill, and we’ll have more discussion in 
committee. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 70, The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
order to facilitate committee work this afternoon, I move that 



May 3, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:50.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2377 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2377, 2378 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2377 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2377 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2378 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2378 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2378 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2378 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2378 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2379 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2380 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2380 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2380 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2381 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2381 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2381 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards Ceremony 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2381 
 English as an Additional Language Conference 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2382 
 Walk for Multiple Sclerosis 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2382 
 New Elders’ Complex in Pinehouse Lake 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2382 
 Saskatchewan Resident Aims for Spot in Astronaut Corps 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2383 
 Local Syrian Team Plays in Soccer Tournament 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2383 
 New Potash Mine Opens 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2383 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2383 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2384 
 Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2384 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2384 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2385 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2385 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2386 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2386 
 Lobbyist Registry 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2386 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2387 
 Role of School Boards and Intent of Bill 63 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2387 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2387 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2388 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2388 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 51 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Repeal Act 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2389 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017  
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2389 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


