






















































Hansard: November 06, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2789 
 November 6, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker is not 
present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I request 
leave of the members of the House for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over 
the years our government has tried to recognize appropriately 
those who have served our province and our country, who have 
been willing to sacrifice themselves in that service and serve in 
the Canadian Armed Forces. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s true of 
previous governments as well. I remember, in opposition, 
working with the member for Saskatoon Centre at the time who 
implemented some protection for reservists, some employment 
protection for reservists. 
 
Since then, Mr. Speaker, we’ve designated the Highway of 
Heroes and we’ve had the stickers on government vehicles. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s another initiative of the government, 
and I want to acknowledge the member for Cannington who 
suggested this to us early on in our time in government called 
the Scholarship of Honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a moment we’re going to hear from the 
government’s military liaison, the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, in a member’s statement about the Scholarship of 
Honour. But as members of the Assembly will know, the 
scholarship was created to recognize and assist members of the 
Canadian Armed Forces returning from military operations, as 
well as their spouses and children, should anything have 
befallen those in service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my great honour to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly today, 
two recipients of the scholarships. They’re with us in your 
gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker: Leading Seaman Nicole Baldwin, 
who is joined today by her parents, Sandra and Tony Baldwin, 
and her grandmother, Sharon Baldwin; and Captain Ian 
Bonnell, who is accompanied by his wife, Lindsay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Nicole served in Canada’s navy for six years and 
is now completing her master’s degree in toxicology at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Ian was a pilot, who served on two 
overseas deployment, in Afghanistan and the Philippines, where 

he took part in the humanitarian relief in the aftermath of 
typhoon Haiyan. Ian is completing his M.B.A. [Master of 
Business Administration] through Royal Roads University. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize those who received the 
scholarship but were unable to join us today. And they are: 
Lejla Imamovic, Brooklyn Reynolds, Curtis Boyes, Jonathon 
Bodnaryk, Victoria Bourque, Emma Dufour, Mark Giroux, 
Chad Hanson, Arthur MacKay, Michael Maharajh, Chloe 
McKenzie, Celeste Pawelec, Brian Perigo, Brian Robar, Jana 
Simms, Jeremy Storring, Krista Storring, Joshua Watt, Sheldon 
White, and Rohan Wilson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 22 recipients of the 2017 Scholarship of 
Honour. They have served our province. They have served the 
Dominion of Canada with courage and distinction, Mr. Speaker. 
And on behalf of a grateful province, we want to acknowledge 
them and wish them well in their studies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to welcome 
our guests who are servicemen and women to the galleries, 
recipients of the Scholarship of Honour. Leading Seaman 
Baldwin and Captain Bonnell, I welcome you to your 
Legislative Assembly today. As someone who’s worn the relish 
and sweated out in combat boots at 40 degree weather, I think 
I’m an appropriate person to welcome you on behalf of the 
official opposition. I would ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these folks to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome, Mr. Speaker, 
two individuals seated on the floor of your chambers here, Mr. 
Speaker, two long-time friends of mine, Tim and Irene Johnson. 
Tim and I go a long ways back. We worked many years 
together at the Bank of Montreal. We travelled the province 
together, used to audit cars, count cars, and do all that kind of 
nice stuff. And many years in the winter, we’d be slogging 
through deep snow and doing whatever we had to do. And that 
was back, of course, obviously, Mr. Speaker, before Tim ended 
up being in a wheelchair from an injury when he was a 
youngster. 
 
And his lovely wife, Irene, she’s one of those Revenue Canada 
people that may have phoned you on occasion. And I’m clean. 
Trust me, I haven’t done nothing wrong; it’s all on the up and 
up. So, Mr. Speaker, but Irene tells me she’s going to retire in 
April. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome me in joining Tim and 
Irene to their Legislative Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and today 
seated in your gallery, we have someone that has been here 
numerous times, and that’s Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

vice-president for Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
for prairie and Agri-business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the summer the CFIB [Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business] received over 15,000 petitions from 
across the country from small businesses that oppose the federal 
tax proposals. And our government also listened to small 
business concerns, and that’s why we will be introducing a bill 
today that increases the provincial small-business income 
threshold. 
 
So I want everyone to welcome Marilyn Braun-Pollon to her 
Assembly as well as thank her for the advocacy work she does 
for all of the great small businesses we have within our 
province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And on behalf of the official opposition, to you and through 
you, we would also like to welcome Marilyn Braun-Pollon to 
her Assembly here today. Marilyn is a true champion of 
independent businesses here in Saskatchewan, and of course 
across Canada, in the roles that she plays. And whenever we 
have the opportunity to discuss it, she is a passionate advocate 
for small businesses in Saskatchewan. And for that, we thank 
her for her work. So on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like 
to ask all members to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, I too have two guests 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are two constituents, two 
sisters — Robyn and Tina Knowles. Members, you may 
recognize Tina, sitting on the right. The young ladies are sitting 
. . . Tina just gave us a wave. She was a Page in our last session. 
And she is here with her sister, Robyn, who is a student at the 
University of Regina, taking some classes in human justice, and 
she’s on assignment from the university observing the 
proceedings. I met with them earlier today, and Robyn had a lot 
of questions about how this place works and some other 
questions about my involvement. And I would ask all members 
to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to present a petition to provide funding for 
improved testing, diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment as it 
pertains to Lyme disease, vector-borne, and other zoonotic 
diseases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that there’s been a dramatic increase in 
the number of ticks found in Saskatchewan over the past few 
years. They point out that the increase of ticks puts 
Saskatchewan residents at risk for Lyme disease and other 
tick-borne diseases. They point out that measures must be put 
into place to protect Saskatchewan citizens from Lyme disease 
and other tick-borne diseases. And they go on to say and point 
out that citizens who do contract Lyme disease and other 
tick-borne diseases need to have the proper treatment available 

in a timely manner and with the newest treatment available. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to provide transparency with the 
surveillance of Lyme and other tick-borne diseases and 
provide funding for improved Lyme disease diagnosis and 
treatment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures from all across 
Saskatchewan, close to a thousand signatures. I’d just like to 
give a shout-out to Candace Uhlik who did a lot of work in 
getting these signatures, Mr. Speaker, from places like 
Arborfield, Alida, Swift Current, Regina, Christopher Lake, 
Nipawin, Carrot River, White City, Paddockwood, Prince 
Albert, Gronlid, Saskatoon, Birch Hills, St. Louis, Hagen, 
Estevan, Oxbow, Zenon Park, Frobisher, Hafford, Mayfair, 
Rosetown, Martensville, Shellbrook, Spiritwood, Smeaton, 
Weirdale, Vanscoy, Foxford, Candle Lake, Cabri, and Hudson 
Bay, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to provide a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. I’ll bring attention to the following facts: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North, and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that the local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the communities of Saskatoon and Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Meadow 
Lake and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. These citizens from Regina wish to bring to your 
attention that the Sask Party is making students and their 
families pay for Sask Party financial mismanagement; that 
Saskatchewan students already pay the second-highest tuition 
fees in Canada; that this budget cuts 36.8 million from 
post-secondary education; that this budget cuts 6.4 million from 
technical institutions; that funding the Saskatchewan Student 
Aid Fund and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million; and 
that the Sask Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in Saskatchewan. Those who 
signed the petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
to the fact that across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child 
care centres are taxed inconsistently and that many of our 
licensed child care centres pay commercial property tax — this 
is something that is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC 
[British Columbia], or New Brunswick; that child care is 
essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle to balance 
their budget. This impacts both the number of child care spaces 
as well as the quality of care. Quality child care has an 
enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. And child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and 
it’s appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as 
schools. I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 

exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who signed the petition today reside in 
North Battleford, Lloydminster, and Nipawin. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition on behalf of the 
residents of Balgonie. And the undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 
following: that the permanent closure of Main Street access to 
Highway No. 1 in the town of Balgonie is creating a lot of 
concern. And the people that want to send the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker, reads as follows: 
 

Take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this page and 
many other pages that we have presented and will continue to 
present on behalf of the town of Balgonie are from Regina; 
they’re from Balgonie themselves; they’re from McLean, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’m so very proud to present 
this petition on behalf of the people of Balgonie, and I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Veterans’ Week 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 5th to 11th 
marks Veterans’ Week in Canada. Every person in this room 
has a story of a loved one, family, or friend who has served our 
country in times of need. As a retired Canadian Forces captain 
in the Cadet Instructors Cadre, I am fortunate to have spent a 
great deal of time participating in ceremonies and learning 
about the sacrifices that so many in uniform have made. 
 
I was privileged to learn so much about our country’s military 
history through formal lectures and having the opportunity to 
hear stories from veterans themselves. I encourage all 
Saskatchewan residents to take time this week to reflect on the 
legacy of Saskatchewan’s veterans. For everything they risked 
and everything they’ve put forward in the name of life, 
freedom, and prosperity we collectively enjoy today, we give 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

veterans our thanks and remind them that they will always be 
remembered. 
 
This week hundreds of ceremonies and events taking place 
across Canada are in honour of those who have made the 
ultimate sacrifice, defending Canada’s interests at home and 
abroad. 
 
While these celebrations are a vital component in recognizing 
the service of veterans, it is my hope that our veterans and their 
service remain at the forefront of our hearts and minds 
throughout the year. I call on all members to join me in 
honouring the achievements and sacrifices of all who have 
served our country as well as those brave women and men who 
continue to serve in uniform today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 

Canadian Down Syndrome Week 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to recognize 
Canadian Down Syndrome Week. As a proud father of a 
daughter who has Down syndrome, I can personally relate to 
the importance of raising the awareness of Down syndrome. 
Canadian Down Syndrome Week was created by the Canadian 
Down Syndrome Society to show the world that Canada is a 
place where all people are valued. This year’s theme is, once 
again, See the Ability. It encourages the inclusion and 
celebration of people with Down syndrome while dispelling 
myths and stereotypes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Down Syndrome 
Society began in 2002 as a group of parents who wanted to 
support other parents whose children had Down syndrome. 
Today the Saskatchewan Down Syndrome Society works to 
enhance the quality of life of individuals with Down syndrome 
and their families through advocacy, awareness, and education. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to join the Saskatchewan 
Down Syndrome Society and the rest of Canada in empowering 
individuals with Down syndrome and their families. 
 
One of the priority areas of this government’s disability strategy 
was to raise awareness and understanding of the rights of 
people with disabilities. I hope that all Saskatchewan citizens 
will see the ability in each other as we work towards becoming 
a more inclusive and supportive province. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Lions Club Celebrates 70th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
Saturday, September 30th, a special celebration took place in 
Prince Albert as the Prince Albert Lions Club celebrated their 
70th year of service in the community. The club was originally 
chartered in September 1947 at the Prince Albert municipal 
airport’s Airliner Club. Dr. Chipperfield was the first president, 
and at the time the club had 39 chartered members. 
 

The Lions’ first goal was to support the blind and visually 
impaired, a goal still pursued today through used eyeglasses 
collection drives and ongoing support of the Lions eye bank. 
 
Over the years the Prince Albert Lions Club has expanded its 
service to include high school scholarships and Operation Red 
Nose. Operation Red Nose is a ride program over the Christmas 
season that aims to reduce impaired driving by helping people 
and their vehicles get home safely. We know Saskatchewan has 
nation-leading impaired driving rates, and we recognize how 
valuable these efforts are for our community. 
 
I would like to thank the Lions Club for their sponsorship of 
events including Prince Albert’s annual crafts and antiques sale, 
the Prince Albert Exhibition parade, Easter Bunny sales, and 
youth volunteer awards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the Prince Albert’s Lion Club on their 70th 
anniversary, and in recognizing the club’s many contributions 
to the city of Prince Albert. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 

Member Elected Chair of Commonwealth Women 
Parliamentarians for the Canada Region 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
today to rise and acknowledge the member from Regina 
Rochdale for being appointed the Chair of the Commonwealth 
Women Parliamentarians, or CWP, for the Canada region. 
 
Created in 2005, CWP Canada region is composed of women 
parliamentarians of the provincial and territorial Canadian 
legislatures and the federal parliament. There’s an international 
body for CWP, as well as nine regional groups spread across 
the world. The organization’s mandate is to encourage more 
women to seek public office. They look to achieve this through 
education, connection, empowerment, and engagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rochdale has been 
involved in the CWP Canada for a number of years. She 
previously served as the Deputy Chair from 2014 to 2017, and 
she will now serve as the Chair for a three-year term. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, having strong women representation in 
politics is vital to our success, not only as a party and 
government but as a society as a whole. Despite the progress 
that has been made, there’s still much more to do. It is the 
responsibility of everyone in this Assembly to follow this 
member’s lead and encourage young women throughout this 
province and country to pursue careers as elected officials. 
 
On behalf of this entire Assembly, I’d like to congratulate the 
member from Regina Rochdale on her new position. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
 
 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital Radiothon 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last week 
was the 15th annual Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital radiothon 
presented by CIBC Wood Gundy, which was broadcasted live 
from the Hill Tower II in Regina. The funds that were raised 
this year will go towards current urgent pediatric medical 
equipment for the new Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year’s event raised over $450,000. 
Generous donors arrived to the radiothon from all over the 
province, providing funds, sharing their stories, and showing 
their support for families in their communities who will greatly 
benefit from this hospital being opened. 
 
In addition to raising funds towards the hospital, donations from 
this year’s event will also go towards helping purchase two 
important pieces of equipment for the provincial pediatric 
transport team which makes over 550 trips a year. The 
equipment needed includes a transport ventilator and isolette 
which helps the most vulnerable babies, keeping them breathing 
and warm. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are just two years away from seeing 
the efforts of events such as this bring the children’s hospital to 
reality, opening its doors and expert services to many families 
in need. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
thanking Harvard Broadcasting and CIBC Wood Gundy for 
their commitment to the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital as 
well as the many sponsors who helped make this all possible. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan has a strong history of men and women serving 
in Canada’s Armed Forces, and today I stand in this House to 
acknowledge and thank some of them through the Scholarship 
of Honour. This scholarship was created in 2009 to recognize 
sacrifices made by members of the Canadian Armed Forces. To 
date, 183 scholarships have been awarded. It gives eligible 
returning members, as well as the spouse and children of 
injured or fallen members, a $5,000 scholarship towards their 
post-secondary studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we celebrate 22 of these heroes, two of them who 
join us in the House today. 
 
I would like read into the record a note from one recipient, 
Mark Giroux, who was unable to attend today’s event. He 
writes that the Scholarship of Honour “. . . has enabled me to 
learn the skills that will greatly assist me with my transition to 
the civilian workforce when I am released from the military.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the scholarship is a small token of our gratitude 
for the servicemen and women who gave our country so much 
more. I would ask all members to please join me in thanking the 

two members who have joined us in the House today, as well as 
extend our deepest gratitude to all scholarship recipients for 
their service and commitment to our country and wish them the 
best in their academic studies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

International Trade Centre Opens at Evraz Place 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today’s a 
pretty big day in Regina. The International Trade Centre, being 
built right here at Evraz Place, was officially opened this 
morning. They are now preparing to host their first major event, 
Canadian Western Agribition, from November 20th to 25th. 
The 150,000-square foot facility will be filled with more than 
1,200 international guests from 75 different countries. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this facility was partially funded by the 
Growing Forward 2 agreement, a five-year, $3 billion 
agreement by the federal, provincial, and territorial 
governments to expand and strengthen Canada’s agriculture 
industry. As Canada is the fifth-largest agriculture exporter in 
the world, it is important to continue to make strong 
investments in facilities such as this to help maintain growth in 
our agriculture sector. The facility also received funding from 
the city of Regina, the Regina Hotel Association, and Canadian 
Western Agribition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture’s a driver of our provincial 
economy, and our government is committed to making sure our 
industry can continue to be competitive in the world markets. 
This facility will boost international events that display the 
quality and capability of Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector and 
attract new events and visitors to our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of this Assembly join me 
in recognizing the completion of this incredible facility and 
thank all those parties involved. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This Premier 
doesn’t like it when we ask questions about the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] but, according to the people who are 
running to replace him, it’s the topic that even Sask Party 
supporters are asking about all across the province. 
 
The Premier’s tired lines about the auditor’s report and her 
finding “no wrongdoing” just don’t cut it anymore, and the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] were interested 
enough in possible wrongdoing to go ahead with an 
investigation. The Premier seems to think that we shouldn’t ask 
any questions about it until the investigation is over, but I think 
the Premier should set a higher bar for himself. After a decade 
as Premier, he should know that he needs to be held 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, there are two very different versions of how 
involved he was with the GTH. One is from him: he was 
involved from the start. The other is from his office: he had no 
involvement in any of the negotiations. Mr. Speaker, can the 
Premier please tell us which version he told the RCMP? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The new 
Leader of the Opposition has run out of questions because it’s 
the same one she’s asked nearly every day since the session 
began . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well now they’re saying, 
well you should answer it. I did answer it. I said the correct 
answer is both, Mr. Speaker; both things are true. And what I 
told the RCMP when they interviewed me was the truth. We 
answered the questions truthfully, Mr. Speaker. I expect all 
those who were being interviewed did the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she sort of, just sort of in her preamble though, 
minimizes the work of the Provincial Auditor, and I don’t 
accept that. Well they’re laughing about it. You know, when 
they had their issues — for example, things like SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], things 
like Murdoch Carriere — there was never any independent 
officer of the Legislative Assembly that looked at those matters. 
They never had the courage to refer those very serious issues to 
an independent officer of the legislature . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well we did on the Global Transportation Hub 
issue for good reason, because there were questions that needed 
to be answered. 
 
So they can . . . They’re actually minimizing a process they 
asked for. That’s the interesting part. They demanded the 
Provincial Auditor look at it. The Provincial Auditor did. It was 
exhaustive, Mr. Speaker, and her public comments, 
notwithstanding the recommendation she made about mistakes 
made on this side, her public commentary was that she didn’t 
see red flags around conflict of interest or fraud, Mr. Speaker. 
And now we await this other review. 
 
I will not rule out an additional review potentially, Mr. Speaker. 
But the fact of the matter is she’s asked this question in the past. 
I just answered it as I’ve answered it before. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s original statement 
was, “I was there through this whole process. I know what was 
intended and what wasn’t.” Mr. Speaker, the “whole process” 
obviously includes the negotiations as well. But the problem is 
that there always seems to be two versions to every story that 
comes out of the Premier’s office. 
 
Let’s take another example: his government emails. We know 
the Premier promised he would stop using the partisan email 
with the server housed at the Sask Party office for government 
business, but we also know he kept using it anyway. In 
September, for instance, he used it to make sure a GTH story 
was being controlled. Mr. Speaker, his office said he didn’t use 

his government email because “the Premier’s government email 
wasn’t working for the better part of two weeks in September, 
and this was one of the days.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, seriously, two weeks? The Premier of this 
province was without email for two weeks? What steps has the 
Premier taken to make sure that such a problem doesn’t happen 
again? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much for that. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to thank the member again for her questions about which 
email account I am using. Mr. Speaker, I know members on 
both sides of the House have used non-government email 
accounts. Perhaps it’s been a product of when you have an 
existing thread with someone, you’re corresponding, sometimes 
the default email account comes up and you send it before you 
realize you should’ve switched to some non-private account. I 
think that’s happened to members opposite because we’ve 
received the emails, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s reasonable, 
so long as all of the emails that we send to anybody on 
government business are available for the Provincial Archives 
— that’s an important test — or are subject to FOI [freedom of 
information]. Mr. Speaker, they are asking those questions 
because we ensured that any emails I may have sent, 
inadvertently or otherwise, on a non-government email account 
were made available in an FOI. That’s how they know about 
this issue, is because we made sure that regardless of how . . . 
what account was used, the freedom of information request 
would apply to those emails. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other reason you might want to have private 
email accounts not used, or non-government accounts used, is 
for the purposes of the historical archives of the province. Here 
again I would invite the new Leader of the Opposition to 
explain to the people of the province why eight of her 
colleagues, eight former NDP [New Democratic Party] 
ministers, have the taxpayers’ files in their basement — have 
yet to, in 10 years, turn over those documents to the Provincial 
Archivist. That’s what the regulations of the province require of 
them. So while she’s pointing her finger at others, she might 
want to inquire with her colleagues, former NDP ministers, who 
have taxpayers’ residence documents in their basements, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the official story was 
that the Premier’s email wasn’t working for “the better part of 
two weeks.” Now can you imagine how busy the IT 
[information technology] folks must’ve been trying to fix this 
problem? Well we asked the Ministry of Central Services, 
through an access to information request, for all correspondence 
related to technical difficulties with the Premier’s government 
email account, and any accounts in the offices of the Premier, 
for the month of September. Mr. Speaker, in response we were 
told, “The records that you wish to access do not exist.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they sent us a thorough list of all of the technical 
difficulties experienced by Government of Saskatchewan email 
users during that month, but nothing for the Premier. Mr. 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

Speaker, if it was broken for two weeks, why did the Premier 
not take any of the usual steps to fix this government email? 
And given his apparent lack of regard for following the proper 
process to get his government email fixed, what assurances do 
Saskatchewan people have that he will take the appropriate 
steps to turn over to the Privacy Commissioner the contents of 
the Sask Party email server that he has been using for 
government business? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have five 
excellent women and men who are travelling the province of 
Saskatchewan. They are meeting in town halls. They’re meeting 
individually. There’s been forums. They’ve met with thousands 
of people together, and they’ve been reporting back to the 
caucus the issues they’ve been hearing from Saskatchewan 
people. And I’m surprised that this is not anywhere near the top 
of the list of those. This whole issue of private and public . . . 
Especially when, I would share with the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, the commitment that these emails, the ones that 
should be accessible by FOI regardless of what account they’ve 
been sent on, will be made available to freedom of information 
requests — as we know has been the case already, because they 
discovered this issue because we gave them an email that I sent 
from a non-government account. 
 
Moreover, moreover, all of the emails have . . . all of the emails 
are . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well the member for Nutana 
. . . Oh, she likes to talk from her seat, especially when she 
doesn’t like the answer. Especially when she realizes her leader 
of . . . the leader of her party is asking questions that don’t 
resonate anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan. But I will 
just say this. Let me just say this, Mr. Speaker. Any emails from 
a non-government account I’ve used will be collected, are being 
collected, so they can be turned over to Provincial Archives on 
the soon and coming day when the member will be free of 
having to ask me questions every day in this House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while she’s asking questions of me, she 
should ask John Nilson, former Justice minister; Andrew 
Thomson, former Finance minister; Joan Beatty, former 
minister of Northern Affairs; Graham Addley, minister of 
seniors; Eldon Lautermilch, minister of SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Corporation], why 
they never turned over their files to the Provincial Archives. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Employment and Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Answers like 
that are an insult to Saskatchewan people who are working hard 
every day and who are playing by the rules, Mr. Speaker. 
Meanwhile it looks like the Sask Party are playing by an 
entirely different set of rules. Nowhere is this more clear than 
the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the GTH does ever become fiscally viable, it 
could create jobs. Brightenview alone could create up to 600 
new jobs. But because the Sask Party twisted the SINP 
[Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] regulations and 

created a loophole for businesses at the GTH, not one of those 
jobs will have to go to someone from Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, even though it’s located in Regina, any foreign 
business that sets up shop at the GTH doesn’t get treated like a 
business in the city. Mr. Speaker, why did the Sask Party bend 
the rules to help new foreign investors instead of the tens of 
thousands of Saskatchewan people who are looking for work? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment and the Minister Responsible for the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite in her preamble said that that the 
global transportation at some point may create jobs. In fact it is 
creating jobs. There’s over 800 people that are employed at the 
Global Transportation Hub. There’s over 1,800 construction 
jobs that have been created and in fact there is construction 
going on today. I would invite the member opposite, join me on 
a tour. We’ll go to the Loblaw facility that I toured just a couple 
of weeks ago, and we’ll see, at any given time, there’s over 200 
people employed at the Loblaw centre as a part of 800 people 
that are employed. 
 
With respect to Brightenview, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite will know that the legislation that was put before this 
House, the legislation that was put before this House was 
introduced in the fall of 2012, which did create a municipal-like 
structure as an authority which all inland ports . . . if you’re 
going to operate an inland port, do inland trade, and especially 
in a province that’s over 95 per cent of what we produce is 
exported, is traded . . . It was introduced in the fall of 2012. It 
was passed in the spring of 2013. Brightenview never contacted 
the government, the Global Transportation Hub, until late 
summer of 2013, well before the bill . . . well after the bill ever 
was introduced. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s so hard to get a 
straight answer out of anyone over there, but let’s try another 
topic. Boundary dam and the carbon capture . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It would be helpful if we could hear 
the question and also the answer, and I’d ask for the members’ 
co-operation. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Boundary 
dam and carbon capture utilization and storage. The Premier 
loves to brag about it, and the former minister was in Estevan 
last month saying there was “great potential for further 
expansion.” But, Mr. Speaker, on Friday SaskPower’s president 
and CEO [chief executive officer], Mike Marsh, said the 
opposite — that expansion would cost too much and that he was 
recommending against any plans cabinet might have to expand 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] in the foreseeable future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, which one is it? Will the Sask Party take the 
advice of the experts, including SaskPower’s president and 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

CEO, or will they ignore that advice and keep spending 
hundreds of millions of dollars on Boundary dam? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment and the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think in the preamble the member indicated the 
government has bragged about this project. I think that was the 
word she used — bragged. Mr. Speaker, with respect to carbon 
capture and sequestration, a number of people have in fact 
touted or bragged about the benefits of this, including Lorne 
Calvert, June 14th of 2007. Mr. Speaker, he said, “We have 
pioneered, we have pioneered in this province some of the 
technology around carbon [capture] . . . sequestration, capture 
and sequestration.” I guess he had to repeat himself on that for 
some reason, but that’s April 29th, 2009. 
 
Here is their plan on June 14th, 2007, a five-component plan 
or . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The members co-operated and we 
heard the question. I’d asked the opposition members to 
co-operate so we can hear the answer. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
their five-point plan in June 14, 2007, there are five emissions 
reductions wedges, and I quote — wedges — “Carbon dioxide 
capture and storage measures in . . . [the] oil and gas industry 
and in the province’s electrical sector.” Mr. Speaker, Ralph 
Goodale has also, just in this year, in addition talked about 
significant reductions in the total of greenhouse gases, which I 
believe the member opposite also indicated just in the last 
couple of days. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have Regina Rosemont as 
well. I have quotes from him. I have Harry Van Mulligen. I 
have quotes from him as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all that to say is that SaskPower is going to 
continue to do their due diligence as we move forward on 
making decisions on Boundary dam 4 and 5, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s going to be a part of that deliberation in terms of what 
the energy mix going forward into the future for Saskatchewan 
will look like. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, denial is more than a 
river in Egypt. The Sask Party leadership candidate that the 
Premier basically endorsed here in the Assembly last week, that 
Sask Party leadership candidate said, “Carbon isn’t a villain,” 
and, “We have invested in the right science and technology.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s check the actual facts. Since 2014, 
SaskPower has had to pay over $20 million in penalties alone 
because they couldn’t deliver as promised to Cenovus. And 
don’t forget in 2015, the plant had to be shut down so many 
times it “prevented the plant from achieving an acceptable level 
of reliability and performance.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year despite all of the facts piling up 

against it, the Premier, when he travelled to China, bragged 
about Boundary dam 3. The fact is, the business case for natural 
gas is a better alternative. It was strong in 2012 and it’s 
overwhelming now. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to that minister: 
how many more hundreds of millions of dollars will he make 
Saskatchewan people pay for a Sask Party CCS experiment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment and the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, here’s also another . . . 
somebody that bragged about this technology: 

 
I think we can notice the discussion that goes on globally 
here now around carbon capture and sequestration. We can 
be proud of the investment that Saskatchewan New 
Democrats and that the innovation of Saskatchewan people 
had in making this possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the member from Rosemont just a couple of 
years ago, who is running to be the leader of the New 
Democrats — and I assume the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, heaven forbid. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course the Premier’s going to talk about carbon 
capture and sequestration technology when he goes to places 
like China, because we know around the world there’s over 
2,000 coal-fired power plants that are currently either in 
development or in planning stages. 
 
Who else has talked about this? Well I can say that, Mr. 
Speaker, there were delegates in Regina just a couple of weeks 
ago that looked at carbon capture and sequestration at a 
symposium that we hosted. Over 12 countries from around the 
world, including, Mr. Speaker, including prominent researchers 
from places like the University of Texas, officials from China, 
from other countries that said that we need to continue to look 
at this technology that we’re demonstrating here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will look to see whether or not it makes sense 
in the short term as we increase the power mix in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, that will be a part of the 
deliberations and the due diligence that this government does. 
But no final decision has been made. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish this 
minister showed as much concern for Saskatchewan ratepayers 
as he did for the international guests that come to this House. 
 
If the minister, if he doesn’t like what I have to say, again what 
about SaskPower’s CEO? SaskPower’s CEO says that power 
generation costs twice as much from CCS technology as it 
would from natural gas. And this makes sense, Mr. Speaker. 
We know that amine costs have been increasing year over year. 
We know the business case for the project was flawed from the 
beginning and has been derailed by the lack of CO2 sales and 
exorbitant penalties. And we know the plant was offline for 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

three whole months this summer, Mr. Speaker. Through higher 
taxes and higher power rates, the Sask Party have forced 
Saskatchewan people to dump millions into this project with no 
end in sight. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: will he commit today 
to not expanding the wasteful CCS project to Boundary dam 4 
and 5? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I won’t commit 
today, because the due diligence hasn’t been done. I don’t 
know. Maybe that’s the way that the NDP make decisions, and 
how they made decisions when they were government, Mr. 
Speaker. But we’ll do our due diligence, Mr. Speaker, in 
making that decision. 
 
I can report, Mr. Speaker, that last month 85 000 tonnes was 
captured, the highest performing month since the process came 
online in October 2014. And I could also, should remind the 
members opposite that at the time, over the number of years 
that Boundary dam 3 was being looked at and the due diligence 
was being done at that time — including when the members 
opposite were the government, where they were happy to 
promote some fancy carbon capture clean coal buttons and 
that’s about as far as they got — but they would know that the 
price of natural gas ranged from anywhere from $4 a gigajoule 
all the way up in the mid part of the last decade as high as $17 
per gigajoule. So the rate of natural gas, the price of natural gas, 
fluctuated significantly over the years that the project was being 
done in terms of the due diligence of that project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite acknowledged that this 
technology actually is capturing carbon emissions rather than 
emitting them to the atmosphere — I think that’s the point in all 
of this, Mr. Speaker — and certainly is doing a far better job in 
terms of technology than a carbon tax. And I think the members 
opposite need to decide whether or not they support, on this 
issue, the Prime Minister of this country or the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 

 
Employment of Women in Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, BD3 is another example of the 
Sask Party’s wasteful mismanagement. And instead of waving 
it off as nothing, they need to realize there are real 
consequences being paid by real people that go beyond higher 
power bills. While the Sask Party is busy trying to fill their 
growing deficits and massive debts, they’re abandoning 
Saskatchewan people who are looking for work. As I’ve told 
the minister before, this year, 28 per cent more Saskatchewan 
women had to apply for EI [employment insurance]. Friday, 
October’s job numbers came out and showed even fewer 
women working in our province, and a growing number have 
given up looking for work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, concretely, what is the minister doing to help 
women facing the brunt of the Sask Party’s cuts? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Innovation and the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first thing is 
we want to make sure everyone knows we empathize deeply 
with anyone who’s been affected by the recent job losses. Our 
economy has been hit by the resource downturn. It’s been a 
very . . . has had some effects on our economy. But if the 
member was to look at September’s job numbers, she would’ve 
seen that there is 1,300 more women working in our province 
than there was the year before, as we know that we need to look 
at long-term trends when we look at job numbers. In fact, over 
60,000 more people are working in Saskatchewan now than 
they were in the last years of the NDP. 
 
We are doing this. We know there’s more work to do, but we’ll 
stand by our records of job creation, compared to the NDP 
when they were dead last in job creation in this country. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister doesn’t seem to 
understand is that the participation rate for women in the 
workforce is also dropping, which shows that some people have 
even given up looking because they’ve given up hope. 
 
If this government was serious about helping women in the 
economy and in society, they would stop cutting from health 
care and education — areas of work in which women tend to be 
over-represented — and they would enlist in the expertise that 
you might expect from a status of women’s office. Mr. Speaker, 
in Alberta they have over 25 staff working in that office. In 
Manitoba it’s four. In Saskatchewan, the Sask Party have one. 
One person for a province of over a million people. And the 
position was only filled after they left it vacant for a year. 
 
Can the minister explain how the Sask Party can justify so little 
representation, especially why women are being hit so hard by 
the Sask Party’s heartless cuts and unfair tax hikes? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a new executive director. Her name is Jessica Broda. She 
has a lot of great ideas about how we best promote the interests 
of women in this province and within the economy. Still, the 
member opposite has to admit that the status of women has 
become more of a philosophy or of a movement than the focus 
of just one office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The status of women is all around us. There are six women 
among the members opposite, 10 on this side, and I know we 
feel up to the job, Mr. Speaker. So did Sarah Ramsland, 
Saskatchewan’s first female MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] who was elected in 1918 in the Pelly District, Mr. 
Speaker, only two years after women secured the vote. How far 
we’ve come. 
 
I agree with the former NDP MLA Deb Higgins who said in 
2003 that she felt it was appropriate that women’s issues be 
looked at across government, that every department has a 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

responsibility to look at initiatives and programs in terms of 
how they affect women and equity issues across the province. 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, every ministry is the ministry of 
the status of women. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The wildfires 
near Burstall, Leader, and Tompkins had tragic human cost. 
They also scorched tens of thousands of acres of land and 
claimed the lives of thousands, or of hundreds rather, of cattle. 
Producers say the fire will have an impact on production for 
years to come. On Throne Speech day, the Agriculture minister 
said, “We’re hoping to do more, one way or another.” We also 
hope that as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But like the producers 
who are suffering, we’d like to know what the plan is sooner 
than later. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government set up a $300 million 
contingency fund for circumstances like these. To the minister: 
will this government use their contingency fund to help these 
producers? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. First of all, I extend my condolences 
to the family and friends of James Hargrave who lost his life 
fighting those fires. James was a husband, father, and a cattle 
producer who will be deeply missed and fondly remembered. 
 
Contact has been made with impacted municipalities, and we’ve 
been helping producers through those municipalities to dispose 
of carcasses that were burnt in the fire and in a safe and 
effective manner, Mr. Speaker. We have veterinarians on the 
scene and have had for some time to assist with animals that 
suffered injury from the fires and smoke, but did not die from it, 
immediately at least. And the programs that are available 
generally do not cover insurable assets, and most of the losses 
in these fires, unfortunately, were insurable assets. But we, you 
know, we’re still evaluating what can be done and, you know, 
and looking for ways to help without . . . outside of those 
programs that just don’t fit this situation, I’m sorry to say. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84, 
the income tax (business taxation) amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now introduced and read for a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 85, 
The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and 
Resources has moved that Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 86, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has 
moved that Bill No. 86, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read for a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 

Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 605, 
An Act to Provide Support to Survivors of Domestic Violence be 
now introduced a read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 
moved that Bill No. 605, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 606, 
An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996 to provide fairness and 
accountability in election fundraising be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved that Bill No. 606, The Election (Fairness and 
Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1 through 15. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled 
answers to questions 1 to 15. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 
order the answers to questions 16 through 18. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Questions 16 to 18 are ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker. Today 
I rise to speak about The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. Our 
provincial parks continue to have strong visitation, boasting 
almost 4 million visits both the last two years. It’s important we 
continue to improve park opportunities to ensure every one of 
our parks’ visitors enjoys their time in our great parks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government is committed to improving and expanding the 
provincial parks system in Saskatchewan. My ministry has been 
working towards the commitment by endeavouring to establish 
two new provincial parks. Great Blue Heron Provincial Park, 
the first new park in 20 years, was proclaimed in 2013. The Act 
I’m speaking on today focuses on the introduction of a second 
new provincial park and also includes a number of other minor 
changes. 
 
First I’ll discuss the new park designation in the Porcupine Hills 
area. Over the last six years my ministry has held open houses, 
trade show events, knocked on doors, sent letters, and used 
online surveys as well as the SaskParks website to consult with 
as many people as possible in the area. My ministry used a 
unique nine-step process to consult with First Nations and Métis 
communities as well as cottagers, campers, and surrounding 
communities in order to identify and resolve potential concerns. 
 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

The name of the new park is identified in this bill as Porcupine 
Hills Area Provincial Park. However this name chosen from the 
geographical area is only temporary. My ministry’s intention is 
that the park name will be amended prior to proclamation after 
local jurisdictions and Aboriginal communities are given a 
chance to suggest what the park should be named. 
 
The Porcupine Hills area is located about four hours’ driving 
distance from both Regina and Saskatoon. It’s along the 
Manitoba border just south of the town of Hudson Bay. The 
proposed park will consist of two blocks, Mr. Speaker: the 
Woody River block and the McBride Lake block, each with its 
own unique and picturesque landscapes. The Woody River 
block is covered with dense evergreen forests and lakes, several 
campgrounds, a cottage subdivision, and a year-round lodge. It 
incorporates the existing Woody River rec site, recreation site 
plus additional Crown land.  
 
The McBride Lake block is a mixture of open grasslands and 
mixed aspen, birch, and white spruce forest cover. The block 
has a number of smaller lakes, two campgrounds, and three 
cottage subdivisions. It incorporates four recreation sites: 
McBride Lake, Pepaw Lake, Parr Hill Lake, and Saginas Lake, 
as well as surrounding Crown land. 
 
The Porcupine Hills, and especially the McBride Lake section, 
have a rich cultural history for Aboriginal people. In particular, 
the Pepaw plains area of the proposed park contains burial and 
ceremonial sites and has been an important medicinal herb 
gathering area for a number of nearby First Nation 
communities. There are no electrified campsites or paved roads 
within the park, Mr. Speaker. From the feedback we received, 
that’s the way people like it, and that’s just how we plan to keep 
it. Camping, fishing, and hunting have become prevalent in the 
area, especially in the McBride Lake section which becomes 
busy in fall with sport hunters looking for bear, whitetail deer, 
elk, and moose. Hunting will continue as it does today once the 
park is designated. In the winter months, snowmobiling is quite 
popular, with several groomed trails available. 
 
As part of the 1998 Pasquia/Porcupine integrated forest land use 
plan led by the Ministry of the Environment, these two blocks 
of land were removed from the forest management agreement 
for the purpose of exploring park dedication. Since that time, 
the government has worked with public and Aboriginal 
communities in the region. This work will continue and will 
specifically ensure that First Nations and Métis communities 
find ways to keep their traditions and culture alive in the park 
and are looking at those partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Porcupine Hills area is a place of natural 
beauty and cultural diversity and a popular area for recreational 
use on a year-round basis. Dedication as a provincial park will 
help to raise awareness of the area’s significance for the benefit 
and enjoyment of our residents and visitors for generations to 
come. This will also result in an additional 25 800 hectares of 
Crown land being protected as parkland. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll provide a few more details on the 
secondary amendments in the Act, the first one being adding a 
statute of limitations. A new section is being proposed to extend 
the limitations period for prosecutions within The Parks Act. 
Currently there is no specific limitation period within the Act or 

regulations. As such, limitations default to The Summary 
Offences Procedure Act, which specifies six months. That’s too 
short a period to investigate issues or to make a determination 
on how to proceed. In comparison, other similar Acts with 
limitation periods include The Saskatchewan Employment Act, 
The Wildfire Habitat Protection Act, and The Wildlife Act, 
which have two- and three-year periods. The proposed 
amendment would allow for prosecutions to commence up to 
two years from the time the ministry becomes aware of a 
contravention. 
 
Number two, park boundary descriptions. We have several park 
boundary descriptions which are being brought forward for 
minor amendments. Christopher Lake protected area, Candle 
Lake Provincial Park, Danielson Provincial Park, and 
Greenwater Lake Provincial Park have some minor exclusions 
being proposed. These relate to some future planning, roadway 
widening work, canal expansion, and description corrections. A 
few items of boundary clarification are also included whereby 
the park description requires improved wording to more clearly 
describe the boundary. 
 
Many of our parklands are defined by descriptions using 
original township maps and water bodies, and that does not 
always coincide with the Information Services Corporation’s 
current mapping. It would be extremely costly and time 
consuming to formally survey all our parklands, so instead 
we’re making amendments to address known inconsistencies. 
The park boundaries being clarified include Douglas, Great 
Blue Heron, Lac La Ronge, and Meadow Lake. 
 
And the third part is forestry terminology amendment. An 
administrative amendment is needed to provide a new definition 
of timber to replace the term “Crown timber” removed from 
The Forest Resources Management Act. The forestry 
amendment also provides clarification that timber harvesting 
within parks can be authorized under both The Forest 
Resources Management Act and The Parks Act, depending on 
the type of project. Initial directives on those distinctions are 
provided at a policy level. Under the Canada-US [United 
States] Softwood Lumber Agreement, we have consulted with 
the softwood lumber group to ensure changes do not affect the 
agreement as it is renegotiated. 
 
And four, clarify authority to evict for alcohol-related offences. 
Each year our ministry establishes an annual alcohol ban over 
the May long weekend in all our provincial campgrounds. With 
the advice from our counsel in Justice, we are proposing a 
minor adjustment to close the gap to support an enforcement 
officer’s ability to carry out the annual alcohol ban. We would 
be adding clarification that an enforcement officer may evict for 
contravention of the annual alcohol ban as is currently 
supported by The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. Keep in 
mind that eviction is often the last resort. Our enforcement 
officers apply warnings and tickets before they would go so far 
as to evict. 
 
And the fifth part is housekeeping. There are a number of 
housekeeping amendments being made to improve the 
language, clarity, and gender references throughout the Act. 
 
To conclude, I am pleased to move second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m once again very pleased to take my spot in my place today 
to give the initial comments as it pertains to Bill No. 76. And 
before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the 
member that has become the Minister Responsible for Parks. I 
realize that’s his first portfolio and that it is a very interesting 
portfolio, as on one occasion I sat as the Minister for Parks. 
And it is certainly a learning experience, and there’s a lot of 
valuable people out there that can give some really solid advice 
on many fronts as to how we not only protect our parks but 
expand them as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s really, really 
important I think is that we have to understand that when you 
create a park it should be an opportunity for celebration. But it’s 
incumbent upon the government to make sure that they bring in 
as many groups as they possibly can to try and garner as much 
public support for the establishment of such a park. And yes, 
RMs [rural municipality] should be involved. Community 
councils should be involved. Interest groups should be 
involved. These are the type of people that will give you some 
highly valuable advice. They’ll give you local insight, and 
they’ll certainly give you some perspectives that you wouldn’t 
get as a member of a government, and certainly being far 
removed from the community in question that’s looking at 
hosting such a park. 
 
It’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is to reach out and seek that 
advice. And on many occasions, as the minister will be 
subjected to over time, you will get advice from many quarters. 
It’s important to hear their advice and, as we all know, on 
occasions government sometimes will or may not use that 
advice, but the important thing is to listen in and hear what the 
various groups have to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are housekeeping amendments in this 
particular bill. But I want to focus on two parts of the bill, if I 
may, to give the minister our perspective as the official 
opposition, and the people that are engaged in this process to 
have them understand that we too want to give the bill as much 
thorough reading as we can to understand what the bill is trying 
to do, and to also get perspectives from some of the people that 
might be engaged in the creation of this new park. I understand 
that there’s Woody River is one of the areas that we’re trying to 
incorporate as part of this new park, as well as McBride Lake 
lot being the second piece that would complete the designation 
of this park. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to focus on the two parts I think that 
are problematic in this particular bill, and that things must be 
taken into account for some of the things that people are 
concerned about. The first I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is 
that as we create these new parks, what you want to do is you 
want to respect as many of the stakeholders as you possible can, 
and as I mentioned, RM councils and the business community, 
the community in question, the outfitters. It’s actually a pretty 
difficult job at times to manage all the expectations of people in 
any given area, never mind the province-wide system of trying 

to maintain and enhance parks because both of those jobs create 
a great amount of foresight, a lot of effort, and of course a lot of 
work and thought. 
 
Now one of the things I think is important is — that I’ve always 
maintained as the official opposition member today and in my 
past and certainly as a government — that you must have full 
engagement of all the parties involved. Now I know that the 
minister is aware of a few of the concerns from the Aboriginal 
group, the indigenous group, and it’s important to point out that 
a lot of the Aboriginal people in any area need to have full 
engagement. They need to be fully involved. 
 
I might add as well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of those people in that 
particular area are great Roughrider fans. They pay their taxes. 
They contribute to the well-being of Saskatchewan, so they’re 
just as equal and just as important as everyone else, and they’ve 
always maintained that, and they’ll continue to do so. And what 
they will also maintain, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they’re 
going to bring forward some of these concerns and some of the 
issues that really concern them when we look at setting up a 
park. 
 
Now one of the things that the indigenous people would be 
concerned about off the hop, Mr. Speaker . . . Not having 
discussions with them but I’ve been privy to some of these 
exercises in the past, and certainly the experience that I’ve had 
dealing with some of the groups that are impacted by things of 
this nature is that a lot of the Aboriginal people, they really, 
really begin to worry about access to the land. 
 
[14:45] 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, everything from the sale of the 
prairie grasslands, Mr. Speaker, that has an effect on access for 
many of the Aboriginal people. When you start seeing the 
provincial government sell off even some of the Crown land to 
the highest bidder, it really begins to add concern to the 
Aboriginal groups and to the people of the region as to why 
their concerns were not heard. 
 
And from what I understand, Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal 
people themselves who had centuries of experience on that land 
passed down through generations, they talk about some very, 
very specific issues, Mr. Speaker. And some of the specific 
issues I’m making reference to is the fact that they’ve had a 
traditional way of going to this land and hunting. Now, does the 
designation impede them from doing so? I would think it does, 
because some of the things that also made reference to the bill 
is on prosecutions. And we all know that when you mention in 
the same bill the notion of denying access to people who 
traditionally had access on that land — whether they’re 
Aboriginal or not, Mr. Speaker — that when you mention 
prosecutions in the same breath, it begins to raise some levels of 
concern amongst those impacted groups. And the Aboriginal 
people are a big part of those groups that I mentioned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, throughout history and throughout time, 
there’s many, many cultures that come to Saskatchewan, and 
the Aboriginal people have been great people to negotiate with 
and deal with when it comes to recognizing all people. And 
they’ve also been great to deal with when you look at some of 
the issues that we share, the vision that we share, and 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

particularly on parks. So it’s important to note that the 
Aboriginal community, the indigenous community has been 
very co-operative, have been very respectful, have been 
engaged, and had been very thoughtful in some of their 
discussions with the government. 
 
So when it comes to this park, my point being when it comes to 
the indigenous population, that you must afford them the level 
of respect which I assume we do on all discussions and 
negotiations that pertain to this park. And some of those issues 
that they have brought forward, I think, need to be recognized 
in this Assembly and certainly need to be incorporated in how 
the minister wishes to approach the creation of this park 
because these issues are of vital importance to them, to their 
heritage, to their history, and of course to their culture. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the First Nations and some of the 
Aboriginal groups in the area have, as I have said, they’ve 
collected medicinal herbs in that particular area. They’ve 
hunted and fished and trapped in those areas over time. It may 
not be specifically in that area but a lot of times they have 
occupied that land and done many life-sustaining harvesting, 
whether it’s of berries or animals or so forth, or herbs. These 
are some of the things that they’ve done for centuries, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now when you create a park, does that create a no-trespassing 
attitude to the Aboriginal or the indigenous community of that 
region? Many people believe it does. Does it really weaken the 
significance of our treaties? Many people strongly believe that 
it does. How about the notion of burial grounds, Mr. Speaker? 
These are some of the things that are really important to the 
indigenous community, as they are to all communities, is that 
we must be very, very cognizant of burial grounds and respect 
where our ancestors lay. It’s important to all cultures and to all 
races, and it’s just as equally important to the Aboriginal 
community. So is there burial grounds within the area that is 
being described by the minister as creating a new park? 
 
The other matter that’s important, Mr. Speaker, within the 
indigenous community is the whole notion around duty to 
consult. A lot of people are really worried over time and the 
Aboriginal community themselves, in particular the First 
Nations, they really protect their treaty rights. And people ought 
to know that in this day and age a signed agreement, whether it 
be 100 years or 150 years ago or five years ago, the ability to 
recognize and protect and defend their treaty that they signed in 
co-operation with the Government of Canada, with the 
Government of Saskatchewan — that needs to be respected. 
And the history of our treaty and the signing of the treaties are 
really important for us to understand. So many of the First 
Nations will protect their treaty rights as hard and as strong as 
they possibly can, and they’ll continue to do so. 
 
So when the courts come along and the courts recognize that 
this treaty is a live, breathing agreement between the First 
Nations and the Government of Saskatchewan or the 
Government of Canada, referred to as the Crown. This is a live, 
this is a breathing, this is a very connected partnership 
document that the First Nations will continue holding clear and 
dear to their heart and to their chest, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 
obviously something that they will need in this modern age to 
protect their interests and their people and their future. And 

that’s why when courts come along and they tell governments, 
it’s important for you; you have a duty to consult the Aboriginal 
people — the First Nations people in this case — when it comes 
to doing any kind of development, whether it be park 
development or whether it be economic development. And the 
list goes on as to what one can construe as being development. 
 
So it’s important to point out to the minister that duty to consult 
does apply in this instance when you are actually taking land 
away from traditional means in which the First Nations or the 
Aboriginal people, the Métis people, have accessed that area for 
years, if not generations, that you have a duty to consult. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s an important distinction that many 
people make when we talk about the notion of duty to consult. 
There’s also an attachment called duty to accommodate. Now 
there’s all kinds of interpretations as to how the Supreme Court 
of Canada would look at that duty to accommodate as to 
whether that really means duty to agree. 
 
So there are many interpretations legally, but my advice to the 
minister on this particular bill is that I don’t think we need to 
argue the process of how we interpret the duty to consult nor 
the duty to accommodate. I think what should happen, clearly, 
is that we should (a) have respect for the treaties that we signed; 
(b) that we must engage the Aboriginal community fully at the 
start with very, very comprehensive discussions; and we also to 
have to respect like we do with all the other participants in this 
process, whether it be a reeve and council or whether it be a 
special interest group or whether it be a business interest, that 
we have to respect them to bring the Aboriginal community to 
the table and say, look, what could we do? What could we do? 
 
And they have some excellent ideas, Mr. Speaker. There are 
some serious reservations on the First Nations’ part, from what 
I understand, on a number of fronts. And I mentioned things, 
for example denying them access to a newly proclaimed 
provincial park. Is that really an affront to the right to consult 
and the right to accommodate? They also look, as I mentioned 
earlier, at the practice of gathering herbs and berries and so on 
and so forth. And as well, Mr. Speaker, does that weaken their 
treaty in some way, shape, or form? 
 
These are all real serious worries that the First Nations and 
indigenous people of the province have when they negotiate 
with the province. So I’d point out there is a lot of issues that 
are left outstanding that need to be addressed. 
 
I don’t think that you will find many Aboriginal people that 
would argue with the protection of land. There would not be 
very many First Nations people that would argue that trying to 
create a space where nature and human beings could coexist and 
a place where we can really protect our culture and our need to 
appreciate the land in many ways, shapes, and forms, I don’t 
think you’d find that argument from any First Nations person, 
Mr. Speaker. So there’s a great amount of co-operation that 
they would afford the process. There’s also a great amount of 
understanding of other people’s desires and needs on the land. 
 
And as you know, Saskatchewan has been known to continue 
building forward a relationship between the First Nations and 
non-First Nations people on many fronts. And when it comes to 
parks, Mr. Speaker, we must be very careful. We must take the 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

time to understand exactly what the First Nations’ issues are. 
Not to take away from the other concerns as I mentioned earlier, 
but to really take the time and listen, listen very carefully to 
their points, that should there be an effort to protect the burial 
grounds. Should there be an agreement to allow access to the 
park for some of the First Nations activities that they’ve done 
for centuries, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And should we be very, very careful to not mention the word 
“prosecutions” at the same page that we’re mentioning a 
creation of a new park, at the same page we’re talking about 
Aboriginal rights and of course the protection of treaty? Those 
three sections lined up side by side, Mr. Speaker, it shows that 
there could be an adversarial position on this particular bill. 
And it needn’t be that way, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps through 
thoughtful discussion, good dialogue, and a respect for all 
peoples’ desires and needs and wants attached to this particular 
piece of land, that those must be incorporated in the creation of 
a park. 
 
And if you can imagine for a moment that we address the First 
Nations’ concern and everybody’s in agreement that this park 
would serve in many ways, shapes, or forms the interests of all 
Saskatchewan people, then we can see the logic behind creating 
this park was thoughtful. Then we can say that the intent here 
was pure, and then we can say, Mr. Speaker, that the parties 
bought into the agreement and therefore we’d move the bill 
along as per the speedy implementation of this new park which 
would benefit many, many people. 
 
So we do have a lot of discussions on this particular bill. We 
want to see what the First Nations’ perspective is. We would 
like the minister to share as well what some of the other 
advocates are saying about this particular . . . in the 
establishment of a provincial park. 
 
But my closing point on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is that 
you must incorporate the First Nations’ and the treaty people’s 
concerns as it pertains to this particular park. If you’re going to 
have their buy-in then you must respect their wishes. You must 
also respect the court’s wishes under duty to accommodate and 
duty to consult, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And as I had mentioned before, the First Nations have been a 
part of this particular province for centuries, Mr. Speaker. They 
have been great co-hosts of this great province. They have been 
co-operative on many, many fronts, and that’s why today I 
think at the very least, at the very least, with the court cases, the 
discussions, the points they’ve raised, and all the arguments 
made on many fronts, that this government ought to respect the 
duty to consult, the duty to accommodate, and also the desires 
of the Aboriginal people of those areas when they try and 
designate this park as a provincial park, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With their blessing and their input and their guidance, this park 
could be a model park for the rest of the country to follow but, 
Mr. Speaker, unless and until we do that then we’re going to 
take the time as the official opposition to really go through this 
bill and contact as many of the proponents of this bill and those 
that have concerns, whether they’re First Nations or not, as to 
what problems may occur as a result of this particular bill and 
the establishment of this particular park. 
 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues will have a lot 
more to say, but it’s obviously an important lesson for the 
minister to learn that First Nations must also have buy-in here, 
and if you don’t have their buy-in then we’ve got some major 
problems. So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 
Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill serves to amend both The Liquor Board 
Superannuation Act and The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act. 
 
The first amendment proposed in this bill, Mr. Speaker, is to 
amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act to designate the 
minister responsible for the Act as the sole member of the 
Liquor Board Superannuation Commission, or the commission. 
The commission is responsible for the administration of the 
Liquor Board superannuation plan, or the plan, while the 
day-to-day administration of the plan is delegated to the Public 
Employees Benefit Agency, PEBA, Ministry of Finance. 
 
The Liquor Board and public service superannuation plans have 
been closed to new members since 1977. As of March 2017, the 
Liquor Board superannuation plan has two active members, 
both of whom have exceeded 35 years of service and are 
eligible to retire. In 2012 a third party was engaged to review 
the governance of both the Liquor Board and the public service 
superannuation plans, given the decline in their active 
membership and the associated work for administering the 
pension plans. The primary function of the plan at this time is to 
pay pensions. The key recommendation of the review, which 
was accepted by the former minister responsible for The Liquor 
Board Superannuation Act, was to designate the minister as the 
sole member of the Liquor Board Superannuation Commission 
once the plan approached zero active members. The minister 
will be supported in this role by PEBA, who will continue to 
provide administrative services to the pension plan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second proposed amendment in this Act serves 
to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
to allow the restricted retirement option, commonly referred to 
as RRO, to continue until otherwise ended by a legislative 
amendment. The RRO provides a means for executive 
government and the Crown Investments Corporation to offer 
early retirement to eligible employees in corporate downsizing 
or restructuring. Proceeding with the amendment does not 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

commit the Government of Saskatchewan to a future course of 
action. The RRO provision has been extended annually by an 
order in council since December 31st, 1995. The amendment 
eliminates the need for an annual order in council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 
Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
I’m pleased to stand in my place to present our initial thoughts 
around Bill 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 
Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
obviously a lot of questions we have on this particular bill, but I 
wanted to point out as a result of the initial look at this bill, it 
really . . . The bill shuts down the appointed commission to 
manage the superannuation plan for the Liquor Board 
employees. And the plan has been closed to new members since 
October 1st, 1977 from what I understand, and because there 
are only three active members in this plan as of December 31st, 
the government is shutting down the order in council appointing 
members of the board and replacing them with the 
decision-making ability of the minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that we ought to 
know as a result of this particular bill is what’s the opinion of 
the . . . There’s three members left in this particular 
superannuation bill that we, or superannuation plan rather, that 
we ought to be able to seek their input and seek their valued 
opinion on this particular bill and see if they have any concerns 
as it relates to their particular bill. 
 
And the reason why, Mr. Speaker, is that you look at the 
relationship with the Saskatchewan Party as it comes to 
pensions and their attack on working men and women, that any 
particular plan to replace them, to replace the board that’s 
protecting some of these interests with them being in total 
charge, even for three members, Mr. Speaker, it really begs the 
question is that we need to find out what details that these three 
members, or how these three members would be impacted and 
what detail that the government is planning on implementing to 
manage the superannuation plan of these three members. 
 
So there’s not a lot of trust that we have in the Saskatchewan 
Party when it comes to protecting workers’ interests, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen evidence of that as they go back to every 
working . . . all the working men and women of our province, 
and ask them to pay 3.5 per cent of their salary to cover some of 
their deficit costs, Mr. Speaker. And here we go again: a bill 
asking for them to have greater power over, yes, three 
employees or three active members. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
want to find out what kind of money is involved, what the 
opinion of the three active members are, and what’s the intent 
of the government. What kind of decision-making ability is the 
minister heaping upon herself to deal with this particular 
aspect? 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s really a tough day 

for a lot of people that used to work for the Liquor Board. This 
is obviously a superannuation plan that affected the former 
workers and, Mr. Speaker, I think you’re going to find more 
and more of the challenges of dealing with former workers of 
the liquor stores of the province of Saskatchewan as the Sask 
Party begin to sell them off, store by store, location by location. 
And every time they sell a store, Mr. Speaker, they are taking 
money away from the people of Saskatchewan that would profit 
otherwise under the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority], and those profits now are going out of province and 
certainly heading to points unknown. 
 
In the meantime, when we need more money for 
Saskatchewan’s need, we won’t be getting it from the Crown 
corporations like the liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have to 
go back, as the Saskatchewan Party did. We’ll have to go back 
and have to see if we can find other ways and means in which 
they can generate revenue. And, Mr. Speaker, about the only 
place that the Saskatchewan Party has been able to find ways to 
generate revenues has been through a billion-dollar tax hike this 
year alone — $1 billion in new taxes as a result of the 
Saskatchewan Party, courtesy of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, and they keep doing it. They also created a $300 
million contingency fund or backup fund, and all I see that fund 
being used for is to backpedal on the current leadership debates 
or the current leadership candidates. They keep backpedalling 
on some of their promises as it pertains to what they would fund 
and what they would not fund. 
 
So as I look at the manner in which they handle our finances, 
Mr. Speaker, it is a sham. So even though there are only three 
employees being impacted by this superannuation plan, we 
want to make sure we scrutinize this bill and we find out 
exactly what is going on with this bill or any other employees 
or any other plans as the Sask Party begin their process of 
having a wall-to-wall sale of our Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that impacts all taxpayers in the future because revenues from 
the Crowns will now have to be, as the Sask Party has shown us 
this past year, the revenues of those Crowns will now have to be 
replaced with more taxes from the people of Saskatchewan. 
And the Saskatchewan Party has shown us that example in 
spades this past budget year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again as we look at this particular bill, we 
have no trust whatsoever when it comes to operating the 
finances of our province with the Saskatchewan Party. We 
particularly are very, very defensive when it comes to 
protecting working men and women of this province, and 
protecting our Crowns. These are some of the things that are 
paramount to what we stand in the Assembly for today, and 
that’s one of the important things that people of Saskatchewan 
ought to know. 
 
And we all know that having a robust labour force, a dedicated 
civil service like we have, having investment opportunity for 
businesses big and small, and then corporate Canada come to 
our province to help create those mortgage-paying jobs — those 
are all real things in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But when you have a party that puts a billion-dollar tax hike in 
one year on working men and women, and buying children’s 
clothing and paying everything from insurance to your power 
bill to heating costs, Mr. Speaker, you can see how they have 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

failed miserably at protecting the people of Saskatchewan’s 
interests. And that’s one of the reasons why we are especially 
careful as they come along and tell us that they’re going to be 
conferring decision-making ability to themselves on any matters 
pertaining to a superannuation plan. We become concerned. We 
become very skeptical. And of course we become very 
defensive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, as we noted throughout the 
leadership race of the Saskatchewan Party leadership 
candidates, they have changed every second day as to what they 
would fund and not fund. They have had no discipline 
whatsoever on moving forward on their budget bill of this past 
spring, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing the cracks and the confusion 
and the lack of a team over there, Mr. Speaker. It is very 
obvious from our perspective. 
 
So I think when you look at the confidence of managing any 
money for any amount of employees, we are concerned and 
we’re very skeptical of that. And that’s why we will take the 
time to understand the bill. We will take the time to try and 
speak to people that may be impacted by this. Oh and there may 
be only three, but there’s other superannuation plans that could 
be at risk here as well. We want to be able to anticipate that. 
 
And that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to pay very close 
attention when ministers confer certain special powers upon 
themselves. Because based on their history, Mr. Speaker, they 
have not served Saskatchewan well. And this is the reason why 
we shall and will continue monitoring these bills to make sure 
that there isn’t some plan that they have up their sleeve to try 
and hurt and continue their war against working men and 
women of this province. 
 
So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 77. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77, the miscellaneous 
statutes superannuation amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, the 
municipal employees’ pension plan, commonly referred to as 
MEPP, is a defined benefit pension plan administered by the 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission for the employees 
of schools, rural municipalities, cities, towns, colleges, villages, 
and libraries and a variety of other municipal-level employers. 
 
As of March 31st, there were close to 25,000 plan members in 
MEPP and 737 employers participating in the pension plan. Mr. 
Speaker, the Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission wants 
to continue the financial sustainability of MEPP. Having been 

in consultation with its actuary and plan stakeholders, the 
commission is seeking approval of this Legislative Assembly to 
amend the plan to remove those provisions that impact the 
financial stability of the pension plan. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, proposes to eliminate the portability of 
the pension benefit for members eligible for pension upon 
termination of employment. Moving lump sums of money out 
of the plan at retirement is a financial drain on the pension plan 
and is in contradiction to the steady stream of payments the plan 
is funded to provide to members in retirement. This amendment 
causes the option of a temporary pension to transferring 
members to become redundant. Consistent with the elimination 
of the portability of pension, Mr. Speaker, members who have 
pre-1994 contributions in the plan will not be allowed to 
remove a portion of those pre-1994 contributions on 
termination or retirement as a partial settlement of the 
member’s benefit. This in turn will maintain the value of the 
pension benefit for members. 
 
Currently on retirement or termination, members who have 
contributed more than 50 per cent of the contributions required 
to fund their pension benefit may use the excess funds to 
increase the value of their monthly pension benefit. With the 
passing of this bill, Mr. Speaker, members will be required to 
move their excess contributions out of the pension plan within 
two years of their termination date or immediately upon their 
retirement. This will eliminate any unforeseen liability resulting 
from the increased pension. 
 
Amendments of a more administrative nature are also required. 
This bill, Mr. Speaker, proposes to change the composition of 
the Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission. The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act requires a review of the composition of 
the commission every five years. A review was conducted in 
2015 and a report was submitted to the then minister of Finance 
in 2016. The minister accepted and agreed to follow through on 
the recommendations contained in the report. As such, it is 
recommended that the election of a chairperson and the 
vice-chairperson for the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission shall be for a term of two years instead of one 
year. 
 
It is also recommended that the composition of the commission 
increase by two members. One member is to be appointed by 
employers who employ firefighters and police officers, and the 
other is to be appointed by Saskatchewan locals of the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees that represent MEPP members. 
 
These amendments to the composition of the commission serve 
to ensure more equitable representation for all stakeholders and 
will enhance the continuity of the commission’s operations 
from one year to the next. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this bill 
contains amendments to enhance the administration of the plan. 
One amendment is intended to clarify the definition of full-time 
hours for all members of the plan. Besides facilitating 
consistent interpretation of full-time hours, salary, and service 
for members, the amendment will also serve to simplify 
reporting to the plan for the employers. 
 
A second amendment will require all employers to remit 
contributions to MEPP within 15 days after the end of a pay 
period. This will provide a more equitable basis for the timely 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

remittance of contributions by all employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 
want to preface my comments with the earlier statement I made 
about the previous bill, that obviously there is a great amount of 
defensiveness, not only from the opposition, but from any 
working men and women across the province when it comes to 
the Saskatchewan Party proposing changes to any of their 
pension plans, Mr. Speaker, or to how they’re going structure a 
board and so on and so forth. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to be very, very careful. And this is a 
lesson that we obviously have been taught over time by many of 
the people that work together, that strive together, and that 
bargain together and that of course is our the unions of the 
province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve often 
maintained on this side of the Assembly, I’ve said it on many 
occasions, that if in Saskatchewan the great opportunity is to 
balance the interests of our province, is that we obviously look 
at the notion of creating a sustainable economy which a big part 
of that is to have the large corporations and the small, 
medium-sized businesses come to our province and help create 
mortgage-paying jobs and of course to begin the process of 
strengthening our communities for years and our province for 
years to come. 
 
So that part of the preface of my comments is the fact that we 
understand that investment into our province is critical and key 
if we’re going to continue seeing those jobs come forward. But 
as we invite corporations into our province, we fully expect 
them to profit from their investment here, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
how the free economy works.  
 
And one of the things that we think is also important to 
recognize is that the labour force that helps drive that 
investment for profit should also be able to sustain real good, 
mortgage-paying jobs through discussion and bargaining and 
certainly protecting their interests. And a big part of that is to 
have the unions talk about not only their salary, Mr. Speaker, 
but as the case makes reference to Bill 78, their pension plans 
for a safe and comfortable retirement once they finish working 
and giving their lives to whether it be a Crown corporation or a 
private corporation or a medium- and then small-sized business, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s really a balance. We’ve said all along that having the 
corporations come to the province and help develop the 
resources should obviously profit, Mr. Speaker, and that the 
people that work and help drive that profit and help drive the 
resource economy overall, they should be able to negotiate a 
fair salary. And part of the negotiations for employment include 
the notion of a pension of which not only that they make 

payment on, but the employer makes payment on as well. 
 
The system would work fine, Mr. Speaker, if we continue down 
this road and we obviously look at that balance because, as we 
said, it’s important to find those balances within the economic 
construct of our province. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we find from time to time we 
have a right wing government as is evidenced today with the 
Saskatchewan Party, where they try and weaken the ability for 
people to organize, to negotiate better health benefits, better 
salaries, and of course a pension plan. Those are very basic 
things that every working man and woman in this province 
would like. And we find that somehow that a right wing 
government come along and that their job is to try and break the 
union, try and have zero contribution to the future of workers, 
Mr. Speaker, and that they actually, the Saskatchewan Party 
detest  the working men and women of this province when it 
comes to things like pensions.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to have a highways worker get up at 
5 o’clock in the morning to clear a road for many people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, well that person, whether it be a 
male or female, takes pride in his or her work. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they do that as a service to Saskatchewan, and that’s 
the dedication that we speak of on this side and why it’s 
important to continue recognizing the value of the employees. 
And certainly some of the issues that they negotiate — whether 
it be better dental health benefits, whether it be better salary, in 
this case, pension —we have to respect their position and their 
ability to collective bargain on some of these fronts. 
 
So that’s important, Mr. Speaker, as we hear the words of The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Saskatchewan Party, any member of the Saskatchewan 
Party, you know, we begin again the process of being very, very 
careful with what these folks are trying to do.  
 
It’s important to note that if you look at the history of the 
Saskatchewan Party, as I mentioned earlier, everything from the 
billion dollar tax increase, to try and claw back three and a half 
per cent from every working man and woman in this province 
to cover for the scandal, mismanagement, and waste, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s typical of the Saskatchewan Party. And that’s 
one of the reasons why we simply don’t trust them when it 
comes to protecting working men and women’s interests in our 
province. And we actually, we’ll take the time to talk to CUPE 
[Canadian Union of Public Employees]. We will take the time 
to talk to the employees of some of these municipalities that are 
looking at this particular Act and see what effect or what impact 
it may have on them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that these are issues that 
are serious to many working men and women of our province. 
They are impacted by decisions that we’re making in this 
Assembly. They are impacted by some of the callous cuts by 
the Saskatchewan Party on many of their services. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why we don’t trust the 
Saskatchewan Party to not only balance the interests of 
investment into our province, but to protect the labour force that 
the corporations and the companies rely on on a continual basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand this bill a lot better. We 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

need full engagement of some of the people that may be 
impacted by this. We understand that some of the updates are 
around language, but the key issue that we’re going to take a lot 
of time to understand, Mr. Speaker, is really what they’re trying 
to do with this bill. And from our perspective, we will not trust 
unless we find the intended purpose of this particular bill. And 
it’s only through consulting some of the impacted workers and 
some of the organizations mentioned in this bill to see how we 
can do all we can to serve and protect the working men and 
women of this province as best we can from the opposition 
perspective. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, 
the public employees pension plan, also known as PEPP, is a 
defined contribution pension plan administered by the Public 
Employees Pension Board. The plan, established in 1977, 
provides a means of saving for retirement and a means of 
receiving retirement income for its membership: the employees 
of executive government, government agencies, Crown 
corporations, and other employers. As of March 31st, there 
were close to 65,000 members of PEPP and 146 employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world is always changing and the provisions 
of PEPP need to change to keep up. The six amendments 
proposed in this bill will, if enacted, enhance the provisions of 
PEPP. They will improve the rights of PEPP members and their 
spouses and improve the service provided to PEPP members. 
 
The first proposed amendment would provide immediate 
vesting and locking in of required member and employer 
contributions. Vesting entitles the member to the contributions 
made by the employer on the member’s behalf. A member who 
terminates prior to vesting forfeits the employer contributions, 
which PEPP then uses to defray administration costs. Currently 
members must wait one year to become vested. Locking in 
means that the member’s account balance must be used to 
provide a retirement income. Currently, locking in happens at 
one year of membership. The proposed amendment will mean 
that vesting and locking in occur when the member enrols in 
PEPP. 
 
Two related amendments would also provide the spouses of 
PEPP members with additional rights. In the case of a 
member’s death, the amendment would clarify that the spouse 

of a deceased member may keep any amount left to him or her 
in PEPP. With respect to that amount, the spouse would have 
the same rights as any other non-working member of PEPP. In 
the case of a breakdown in a spousal relationship, the 
amendment would permit the spouse or ex-spouse of a member 
to keep in PEPP any amount resulting from a division of the 
member’s account balance. With respect to that amount, the 
spouse or ex-spouse would have the same rights as any other 
non-working member to PEPP. 
 
A proposed amendment would remove a 15-day waiting period 
for the unlocking of voluntary contributions on termination of 
employment. 
 
With respect to the authority of the Public Employees Pension 
Board, which is the trustee of PEPP and the body responsible 
for administering The Public Employees Pension Plan Act, the 
amendments would clarify that the board may make policy to 
administer PEPP with respect to out-of-province members and 
their monies, which is subject to the laws of other provinces. 
 
The amendments I have discussed thus far are being proposed 
on the recommendation of the Public Employees Pension 
Board. One final amendment is a purely administrative nature. 
It is to update the Act to reflect the new name of the 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union which is 
now known as Unifor. Unifor is one of the organizations that 
appoints a member of the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 79, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Again, Mr. Speaker, thank you so very much 
for giving me the opportunity to give the official opposition’s 
first response to Bill 79, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017. And, Mr. Speaker, as we look through 
the bill we notice that there are a few housekeeping items that 
the minister alluded to in her closing statement as it pertains to 
CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada] being now represented by Unifor and the fact that we 
have to update some of the membership content, you know, of 
the commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 79 deals with the public employees pension 
plan and while there are a few parts of the Act that are primarily 
housekeeping amendments, Mr. Speaker, we have to really 
begin to look at some of the issues that the bill also presents, as 
I pointed out and as the minister made reference to, talking 
about some of the change that’ll allow the board to include 
members who might live outside of Saskatchewan after their 
employment. How does that affect the overall process of the 
PEPP project? As well, Mr. Speaker, there’s also changes to 
include allowing spouses to stay opted in should their partner 
leave, etc. So these are some of the amendments that the Bill 79 
made . . . that the bill spoke about and according to the minister 
these were things that were asked of the government by the 
public employees pension plan management team. And, Mr. 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

Speaker, this is something that is quite an important bill to pay 
attention to as we want to know what the effects are and what 
the impacts are. 
 
Obviously when you talk about to allow the board to include 
members who might live outside of Saskatchewan after their 
employment, I’m not sure how it pertains to protecting 
Saskatchewan’s interest versus protecting the employees’ 
interest. How does that affect some of the changes within the 
bill itself? We need to understand that more thoroughly. And 
obviously we need certain advice from certain groups, and I 
would daresay, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps it gives us the 
opportunity to go sit down with the PEPP management board to 
ask them the impacts and the reasoning and the logic behind 
why they requested the Government of Saskatchewan to make 
some of these changes. 
 
So while the bill, parts of it, is primarily housekeeping, there 
are two things or three things that we have to pay very close 
attention to and obviously we need to research what they mean. 
And that is of course including making sure that the CEP 
members that are not represented by Unifor, that that would be 
addressed. And as I mentioned, people living outside of 
Saskatchewan after their employment is over with 
Saskatchewan, that the changes could include them. What does 
that mean for the PEPP plan and for the employee? And of 
course how long the spouse is to stay opted should their partner 
leave. 
 
So those are some of the issues that we’re going to research, 
Mr. Speaker. This is obviously some changes in how we do 
business, and we just need to understand it better and get advice 
and input from those that certainly manage and watch the PEPP 
interest as best as they could. And they’ve done a fairly good 
job of that, Mr. Speaker, but we still certainly need to see and 
understand their reasoning and logic behind asking the 
government to put these changes in place. So as a result of that, 
I certainly move that we adjourn debate on Bill 79, The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I once again recognize the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 80, An Act to amend 
The Municipal Financing Corporation Act. Mr. Speaker, the 
proposed recommends two changes to the legislation of the 
Municipal Financing Corporation. These changes are important 
to a growing province with growing municipalities in need of 

key infrastructure to help better serve Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first change repeals MFC’s [Municipal 
Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan] 30-year borrowing 
limit which is a provision that dates back to the 1970s. Capital 
markets have evolved since then to permit borrowing for 
longer, more cost-effective terms. Repealing the 30-year limit 
would put MFC in line with most other Crown corporations 
which are subject to a 40-year limit in The Crown Corporations 
Act. 
 
The second change is to increase MFC’s debt limit from 350 
million to 500 million. MFC’s debt limit was set at 250 million 
in the 1970s, and it was raised to 350 million in 2010 to assist 
local governments in addressing their infrastructure needs. It is 
prudent to increase the limit once again to ensure that this 
demand continues to be met and no one is turned away. MFC’s 
debt is self-sustaining debt like the debt of SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and SaskTel, and it does not affect GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] operating debt. Local governments are fully 
responsible for repaying any amounts that have been loaned to 
them. In a growing province, given demand from local 
governments for infrastructure financing, increasing the debt 
limit should provide the capacity needed to meet the needs of 
the local governments for the foreseeable future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Municipal 
Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the minister . . . or the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
three years too early, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wanted to chat a bit on Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017. And this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister has spoke briefly on it, it allows the 
financing corporation of Saskatchewan, the Municipal 
Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan the ability to borrow 
$500 million which is an increase from $350 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, she made in her closing comments, the growing part 
. . . or Saskatchewan is growing and extra money is needed for 
the Municipal Financing Corporation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that from the municipal 
perspective as we look throughout the history of a lot of the 
municipal governments, municipal governments are not allowed 
to go into debt to the extent where they can’t pay it. They 
obviously have to be able to show that they do have the ability 
to pay. And you’re seeing more and more of the municipalities 
taking more and more of the roles and responsibility of the 
government. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 
cognizant of the fact that as you take on more responsibilities as 
a municipality, you lessen the pressure and strain on the senior 
governments. And one has to begin to assess whether the 
impact is going to be minimized or is going to have a dramatic 
effect later on in your finances. 
 
So as you look at the Municipal Financing Corp. being allowed 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

to lend out $500 million, which is an increase of $150 million, 
one can surmise and can certainly understand that perhaps there 
are some larger projects with higher costs that the increase 
could certainly accommodate, Mr. Speaker, because many 
communities are doing more things on their own. 
 
And the only thing I would say is that we have to, as an 
opposition, we have to really sit down and say, okay, if there’s 
additional dollars that the Municipal Financing Corporation is 
being allotted to, in this case $150 million, we need to 
determine through committee — we’ll have that process of 
course as the time permits — to ask the questions as to what 
projects are we looking at that have substantiated the increase of 
$150 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also got to see what communities are being impacted 
and being affected by this. And more so we’ve got to also 
understand is what financial drain this could also create on 
some of the municipalities that certainly have ambitions. But, 
Mr. Speaker, they, like anybody else including ourselves, need 
advice as to how this affects and impacts their financial future. 
 
And I’ll give you a good example, Mr. Speaker. When we 
talked about housing in northern Saskatchewan we saw . . . And 
I’m not certain if this was part of the loan or the project 
proceeds, whether it was done through a loan or whether it was 
done just through a mortgage financing arrangement. I think it 
was done through a mortgage finance arrangement, Mr. 
Speaker. But what happened was the provincial government 
came into Ile-a-la-Crosse, they came in with their federal 
representative and they announced a million-dollar housing 
plan, housing project. 
 
And the problem was, Mr. Speaker, was that just over 45 per 
cent were costs being covered by the provincial government and 
the federal government. And in the past, Mr. Speaker, 100 per 
cent of providing housing to the people of Saskatchewan in the 
past was covered by senior governments, whether it’d be the 
provincial government or the federal government. 
 
Now when the municipality was asked at the time to cover over 
half of the cost of building these new homes, Mr. Speaker, it 
was an enormous strain on the town’s finances. As a small 
northern community, if you are required to cover $550,000 of 
housing costs that you weren’t anticipating, then obviously 
you’ve got to be very, very careful. 
 
And what happened was as the ministers — at the time it was a 
Conservative government in Ottawa and of course the Sask 
Party government here in Regina — they took part in the shovel 
ceremony where they were breaking ground for five new 
houses, and what they were actually doing was digging a 
deficit, a big hole for the future of the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. But because some of these communities are so 
desperate for housing, Mr. Speaker, the municipality through 
their development corporation took the lead, took the lead to try 
and get the money so they can build more homes for their 
people. 
 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is you live in certain 
socio-economic conditions. You’re not actually lending or 
building these houses for people that have 100 or $150,000 a 
year income, Mr. Speaker. A lot of times these are the working 

poor; they’re the low-wage earner. And there are some families 
that are on assistance that were living in deplorable conditions 
in terms of overcrowded houses or poor housing overall. 
 
So what happens in that case, Mr. Speaker, the mayor and the 
council in their wisdom decided to go to a mortgage to build 
more units so you could have more people that have decent 
homes in their community, and they’re willing to go in debt. 
Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that desperation 
allowed them to go into debt because the senior governments 
come along and said, we’re not going to continue building 
houses for you folks. We’re getting out of that particular part of 
it. So as you lessen the responsibility on the senior government, 
you increase the local government’s financial future for many, 
many years to come. 
 
So at the time, I was critical of the fact that senior governments 
were walking away from 100 per cent financing of homes 
where they had to now turn to municipal corporations to borrow 
the money to build homes for those that desperately needed 
homes, and they took care of the high-risk tenants and the 
high-risk clients in terms of paying their rent, and of course 
paying down this mortgage that the town of Ile-a-la-Crosse was 
responsible for. And, Mr. Speaker, it was quite shameful from 
my perspective in the sense that senior governments heaped that 
particular debt onto these communities. Because of the 
desperate need for houses, most communities decided to go into 
debt, and as a result of that, that’s going to affect them for years 
and years to come. They simply had no choice, Mr. Speaker, 
because the senior governments were walking away from that 
responsibility. 
 
And that’s why when you talk about Municipal Financing 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker . . . And it may be not housing that 
the fund is available for, and we’ll find out the details as we go 
through committee. But the fact is that if that’s an example of 
how the government wants to lessen their responsibility to local 
citizens and heap more of this responsibility onto community 
corporations, then that’s my whole point, Mr. Speaker, is we 
have to make sure that we don’t see the government doing this 
more and more and more and more. And again municipalities 
across the province have seen this downloading, and they’ll 
continue seeing that unless and until the government gets the 
message loud and clear that you can’t use backdoor financing 
such as the Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan 
to lessen your responsibility and increase debt to the municipal 
governments across the province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, in some northern 
communities, some communities can actually afford to borrow 
money. It’s a strain on them. It is difficult for them to do a lot of 
things after they commit their financing to housing. But there 
are some communities that can’t afford to do a cost-sharing 
process with the federal and the provincial government. So 
what happens to them, Mr. Speaker? They don’t get any 
housing allocation. 
 
So it’s really a detriment, I think, overall to the municipalities in 
the North. Once the federal government and the provincial 
government exit their role and their historical role of providing 
housing at 100 per cent of their costs, Mr. Speaker, through 
taxation, then the onus goes onto the municipal corporation to 
borrow the money to match some of the grants from the federal, 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

provincial government. 
 
So while they go in a hole to house their people, the 
communities that cannot go into debt, they’ll go deeper in the 
hole of debt, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they’ll never get 
another housing allocation in the future simply because they 
can’t afford it, and their people will continue living in 
deplorable housing and in overcrowded housing as well. 
 
So it’s really a thing that we have to pay attention to, Mr. 
Speaker. It is obviously something that we want to take the time 
to understand. And through committee, people will have the 
opportunity to, on our side of the Assembly, ask the minister 
very specific questions about the Municipal Financing 
Corporation and the parameters in which they operate. And at 
that time, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have more to say on this particular 
bill. So on that notion, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 80, The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017. The Act, administered by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, outlines traffic laws and rules of the 
road. There are numerous changes being proposed to the Act. 
Most are of a housekeeping nature or are being undertaken to 
formally reflect in legislation what is already happening in 
business practice. I will highlight a few of the more significant 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that impaired driving is a problem in 
Saskatchewan, and we know that awareness efforts undertaken 
by SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and increased 
enforcement are helping to bring about a change in 
Saskatchewan people’s attitudes towards this problem. People 
are realizing that driving while impaired is never acceptable, 
that it’s important to plan a safe ride ahead of time. It’s also 
important to step up and prevent friends and family from 
driving impaired, to be a good wingman, and to look out for 
them. Otherwise the results can be devastating — hundreds 
injured, dozens killed, and countless shattered lives left behind. 
 
I have attended two roadside memorial events over the past year 
to commemorate deaths of innocent victims killed by impaired 
drivers, and I’d love for there to be no reason for anyone to 
attend this type of event again, Mr. Speaker. The impacts of 
impaired driving are just devastating. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our government has made significant law changes 
to toughen the consequences for impaired driving with harsher 
licence suspensions and fines and longer vehicle seizures. Mr. 
Speaker, we are now going to step further to make the 
consequences more severe for drivers who are impaired and 
who make the terrible decision to transport children. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Experienced drivers with blood alcohol content between .04 and 
.08 or who fail a field sobriety test will face a seven-day 
administrative driving suspension if they are transporting any 
child under the age of 16. That means instead of a three-day 
suspension on a first offence, it’s a seven-day suspension. 
Instead of a 21-day suspension on a second offence, it’s 30 
days. And for a third offence, it increases from 90 to 120. 
 
We are also increasing the length of time a vehicle will be 
seized in these situations, Mr. Speaker. Both new and 
experienced drivers will have their vehicles seized for seven 
days on a first offence, up from three days. It increases from 7 
to 30 days on a second offence, and on a third offence, it 
increases to 60 days, up from 7 days for new drivers or 14 days 
for experienced drivers. There are significant changes, 
demonstrating our government takes seriously the safety and 
welfare of our most precious cargo — our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Traffic Safety Act also sets out the 
administrative penalties for drivers charged with impaired 
driving-related offences under the Criminal Code. Currently if a 
driver is charged with exceeding the legal limit for alcohol or 
refusing to comply with the demand by law enforcement, they 
are subject to an indefinite administrative suspension of their 
driver’s licence pending the court’s outcome of the criminal 
charge. As well their vehicle is seized. The proposed 
amendment will allow law enforcement to issue an indefinite 
administrative suspension when a driver is charged with 
impaired driving under the Criminal Code. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, The Traffic Safety Act sets out the length 
of time SGI can look back on a driver’s record to see prior 
related offences to determine the length of a driver’s suspension 
and vehicle seizure. The more prior offences a driver has, the 
longer the period of suspension and/or vehicle seizure. 
Currently SGI can look back five years for previous offences. 
The proposed amendment will extend this look-back period on 
these type of offences to 10 years to determine driving 
suspension, vehicle seizures, educational programming, and 
ignition interlock consequences. This ultimately improves 
traffic safety, Mr. Speaker, by ensuring those risky drivers feel 
the consequences of their poor decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more change I’d like to highlight is the 
proposal to eliminate operating authority certificates currently 
issued by the Highway Traffic Board. Operating authority 
certificates are required for transporting passengers for hire, for 
example, by limos and chartered buses. Taxis don’t require 
operating authority certificates because they are regulated by a 
municipality. Operating authority certificates were intended to 
outline specific requirements of the certificate holder regarding 
routes, insurance, rates, background checks, and more. Over 
time the Highway Traffic Board has been issuing them in a 
much more general way, and they have almost evolved into a 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

rubber stamp. Thus it makes sense to deregulate this process. 
SGI will strengthen other regulations as required to ensure there 
is sufficient oversight regarding safety requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we may have had an unreasonably hot and dry 
summer in Saskatchewan, but winter will be here before we 
know it. In fact it’s already here, Mr. Speaker. There will be 
plenty of ice and snow and that means snow removal equipment 
will be out on the highways to keep our roads safe. 
 
The last change I will mention, Mr. Speaker, updates the rules 
for slowing to 60 kilometres per hour around highway 
equipment, snowplows, so they are consistent with the rules for 
passing emergency vehicles and tow trucks. There has been 
confusion around this issue depending on the warning lights 
being engaged or not. So whether the snow removal vehicle is 
in motion or not, this change clarifies that drivers are required 
to reduce their speed to 60 kilometres per hour when passing 
highway equipment that is stopped on the highway and with its 
warning lights in operation, when travelling on the same side of 
the roadway as the highway equipment. 
 
As I mentioned at the outset, Mr. Speaker, there are numerous 
other incidental changes being made to the Act. These include 
changes to gross vehicle weight for towed conveyances, 
clarifications around permits issued in other jurisdictions, 
updating the definition of the word “trailer,” amending the 
definition of “farm implement,” and other small changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The minister has moved 
Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to give some comments on Bill No. 81, The Traffic 
Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. But prior to my 
brief comments on this particular bill, I want to pay tribute to 
my colleagues, the member from Cumberland and the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale, in the sense that they’ve 
contributed a lot of time as they travelled throughout the 
province to talk about some of the challenges as it pertains to 
unnecessary deaths in vehicle accidents as a result of impaired 
driving. Mr. Speaker, I think these two champions deserve 
significant praise in the sense of the work and the compassion 
that they showed during their travels through many 
communities, as it relates to traffic safety in the province 
overall, but more particularly their actions as it came to 
impaired driving. 
 
I noted that some of the aspects of the impaired driving bill 
that’s being introduced today were points that were raised by 
my two colleagues, as they certainly heard and saw evidence in 
the stories of how difficult this issue is. There’s no question that 
their work ethic and some of their minority report decisions that 
they obviously put in place . . . Now we’re seeing that the 
government is adopting some of those positions, and I want to 
make sure that we commend my two colleagues that spent a lot 
of time and done a lot of work to make sure that some of the 
opinions as expressed today’s bill are certainly incorporated in 

our strategy overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 81, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, the 
summary of this particular bill for those that need an additional 
summary is that a driver with a blood alcohol content of .04 or 
higher who transport children under the age of 16 will face 
longer licence suspensions and longer vehicle seizures. The 
length of suspension and seizures increase for repeat offenders. 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the provisions is the looking-back 
period extended from five years to 10 years, allowing for 
tougher penalties for repeat offenders. Law enforcement can 
offer an indefinite administration suspension, which means 
making roadside consequences for those charged with impaired 
driving under the Criminal Code consistent with those charged 
with exceeding .08 BAC [blood alcohol concentration] or again, 
refusing to comply with a demand for a test. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also alluded to slowing down to 60 
kilometres an hour when you’re meeting a snowplow when 
they’re stopped on the side of the road, or in passing other 
vehicles providing assistance if the prescribed lights are in 
operation. Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of effort over time to teach 
drivers about school bus safety. Obviously when you have the 
flashing lights from a school bus and the stop arm is clearly 
extended on a school bus, there was times where people didn’t 
really understand that they had to stop, I think it’s 15 metres 
behind the bus, either way. And I think over time, Mr. Speaker, 
people have finally got the message through, and now you’re 
seeing that people are consistently stopping when it comes to a 
school bus with their lights flashing and their stop arm 
extended. And that took a lot of public education. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think slowing down to 60 kilometres an hour when 
snowplows are stopped at the side of the road, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously we have to be very careful when it comes to the 
safety of the highways worker and of course, as was evidenced 
this past spring, Mr. Speaker, with the tow truck operators as 
well. 
 
These are people that we certainly respond, or we need on our 
highway system. Whether it’s a highways worker clearing off 
the snow or whether it’s a tow truck operator that is helping a 
driver in distress or whether it’s a first responder responding to 
a car accident, Mr. Speaker, we all have to be very, very careful 
and all of us can learn how to slow down in some of those 
zones. And over time, I think if we were to continue with the 
public education, and certainly expressing this through strong 
public advertising, that the people will certainly understand 
what is being done with this particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again I want to commend my colleagues for 
their fine work. And they’ll obviously have a lot more to say 
about this particular bill because they went to a lot of the 
hearings and they certainly were privy to a lot of the 
discussions. And I was really impressed when they did a 
minority report that countered some of the measures that were 
not being undertaken by the then minister of Highways. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s also some questions as we look 
through the bill under the operation authority certificates. This 
means that those operating a vehicle on the highway for the 
purpose of transporting passengers no longer need an operating 
authority certificate. Well we have a lot of questions on that. 
We’re going to be asking the minister a lot of questions, as it 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

removes transparency and accountability. We’ve got to get 
those questions on the record, and as I mentioned, there are 
people within our caucus that will be doing so. 
 
So I’m giving the minister a heads-up on that front. There will 
be questions asked of you. There is some deep concern in that 
regard, and obviously as an opposition caucus, we need to 
ensure that people are safe when they’re travelling as 
passengers on highways across Saskatchewan. That is 
paramount in our mind. So as we look at this particular aspect 
of this as it pertains to the operation authority certificates, we 
do have some serious questions and some very pointed 
questions to ask you. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the time permits and the time comes, I’ll 
be referring to my caucus colleagues who have some great 
information on this front, and they’ll give their insight as to 
what is necessary and how this bill can or cannot help in the 
quest to make Saskatchewan a safer place to travel. So on that 
note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 81, The Traffic 
Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
debate on this bill. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the Minister 
of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of Bill 82, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, the bill 
proposes necessary updates to The SaskEnergy Act to balance 
the corporation’s needs with the changing needs of customers. 
These updates will allow the corporation to better serve private 
sector business opportunities to support growth and 
competitiveness. 
 
The major focus of the proposed amendments is on sections 23 
and 60, the exclusive rights for distribution and transportation 
of natural gas. The natural gas marketplace has seen major 
changes since The SaskEnergy Act was passed in 1992. The 
proposed changes to these sections will modernize the Act by 
recognizing today’s industry needs and support new business 
ventures in the province that were not as common when the Act 
was first developed. 
 
These amendments will allow SaskEnergy to provide 
efficiencies and enhance safety to the corporation and its 
customers by allowing flexibility to determine the end point of 
the gas distribution system; increase compressed natural gas 
and liquified natural gas opportunities in the province by 
allowing for third party trucking to qualified companies; and 
support the development of enhanced oil recovery and natural 
gas markets in the province by allowing operators the right to 
move high-pressure natural gas across land parcel boundaries; 
and move the exclusive business rights definition from the Act 
into The SaskEnergy Regulations, allowing the corporation to 

make necessary updates to accommodate changes in technology 
and marketplace conditions. 
 
SaskEnergy is also proposing amendments to sections 16, 34, 
35, and 45, considered housekeeping matters, ensuring the Act 
is current with recent case law and corporate policies; section 
12, to prevent SaskEnergy’s insurance premiums from rapidly 
increasing due to nuisance claims, making it consistent with 
SaskPower’s legislation; and sections 54 and 64, which will 
enable the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations 
respecting the exclusive business rights definition to better 
enable SaskEnergy to make updates as needed. 
 
These amendments are intended to address modern industry 
needs and align with corporate priorities. SaskEnergy’s core 
operations of natural gas distribution and transmission services 
remain in place. This will continue to allow the corporation to 
operate safely and efficiently in the best interest of all 
customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill 82, 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The minister has moved 
that Bill No. 82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be read 
a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
One of the things I think is really important as the opposition is 
that it’s really incumbent upon us to look at all, every aspect of 
every bill as to what the changes may or may not bring to not 
only the province of Saskatchewan overall but in particular our 
Crowns. 
 
We have very, very . . . We have a very guarded position when 
it comes to our Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s SaskEnergy — certainly not what it was 
at one time, but still a very important part of our distribution 
system of natural gas throughout the province — and whether 
it’s SLGA, whether it’s the land titles office, that any time we 
have the Sask Party dealing with a Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition is very, very aware. They’re very 
guarded against the Saskatchewan Party position on the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen an incredible attempt to flip-flop and then flip-flop 
again on the whole notion on Bill 40, so when any minister 
from that side of the aisle stands up and starts talking about the 
best interests of the Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
the people of Saskatchewan will forgive us for taking their 
position and their issues on anything, including this particular 
bill, with a grain of salt when it comes to protecting the interests 
of our Crown corporations. We simply do not trust them. We do 
not believe them and we never will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s actually an amazing flip-flop. I’ve been in this 
Assembly for a while and to see every single one of their 
members get up and the member from Carrot River expanding 
on the value of this incredible Bill 40, of how it was visionary 
and cutting-edge and how important it was, and how excited he 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

was that we’re going to put this bill forward, Mr. Speaker. And 
here all this time, Mr. Speaker, he was simply reading off 
prepared notes. And he had no commitment, no plan except to 
read off the prepared notes, Mr. Speaker. And then a year later, 
not barely a year later, they changed their mind. They said, 
okay, we’re not going to do that now. So I’m sitting there 
saying, well okay, why don’t you get up and make 40 speeches 
of that like you did last time? I want to see why you changed 
your mind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line, the reason why they 
changed their mind and went — what is it? — 360 degrees 
opposite of what they were a year ago is because they don’t 
know what they’re doing. They simply don’t have a clue as to 
how to govern. They can’t manage our finances, and we 
certainly can’t trust them to look after our Crowns. 
 
So when any bill that pertains to the Crown corporations of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as this particular bill does, Bill 82 
. . . It talks about things such as the closure of customer services 
to pedestrian traffic, Mr. Speaker. How does that affect this 
Crown overall? What kind of dollar value are we talking about 
as it pertains to the Crowns? And this particular Crown, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskEnergy, what kind of dollars did they save as a 
result of that? 
 
So what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, this bill, Bill 82, actually is 
part of the critical evidence that we’re building against the 
Saskatchewan Party in the sense that they’re weakening the 
Crowns. Because those right wingers over there don’t believe 
that the Government of Saskatchewan, nor the people of 
Saskatchewan, deserve to own their own insurance Crown, that 
they don’t believe that we should own our own power 
corporation, Mr. Speaker. So what happens is they arbitrarily 
and certainly quietly, they begin the process of dismantling the 
Crowns and weakening the Crowns. And obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, through Bill 40, they’re trying to sell 49 per cent of the 
Crowns. 
 
And you know what happened there, Mr. Speaker? No 
corporation in their right mind would entertain an option of 
sinking millions of dollars into buying an asset like SaskPower 
if they only own 49 per cent and they didn’t have any say in the 
management of the Crowns. So here you have the confused 
Sask Party in the middle of this Crown debate, whether to sell 
or not. Forty of them got up and sang the praises of selling, and 
then they said, oh we’re only selling 49 per cent; oh it’s only a 
definition. Then a year later they all change their minds. So 
really they didn’t have a clue what they were talking about and 
they still don’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s why when it comes to the Crown corporation, no one 
trusts the right wing Saskatchewan Party. They tried to sell the 
Crowns. They couldn’t figure out how to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
They got laughed at by the corporate people that were 
interested. They weren’t going to buy 49 per cent of an asset; 
they wanted the whole thing. 
 
And the same token, the people of Saskatchewan didn’t want to 
sell their Crowns. And these guys across the way, they thought 
they had it all figured out and they all stood up and sang the 
praises of Bill 40. And a year later, Mr. Speaker, a year later 
they’re all eating crow. They’re all eating crow, and that’s why 

you should never elect a conservative right wing government 
because they don’t have a clue how to govern the province of 
Saskatchewan, and they don’t have a clue how to handle and 
protect our Crowns, and they don’t have a clue how to manage 
our finances. 
 
And here we are, here we are a scant nine years later. Our debt 
is $23 billion, thanks to you guys. And we have no more liquor 
stores to generate profit for health care and education. And we 
have no land titles branch, because they made $14 million and 
then you tried to sell the rest of the stuff. Some of you guys just 
don’t have it figured out, do you? 
 
So the bottom line is Saskatchewan people do not want you to 
sell the Crowns. Get it through your heads. They don’t want 
you to sell the Crowns. Forty-nine per cent and which 
corporation . . . I don’t know what economic school that you 
folks went to, but which corporation would come buy half a 
company, sink millions of dollars into buying half a company 
and say, okay, now you control it. No corporation in their right 
mind’s going to give you guys . . . buy 49 per cent of any 
Crown corporation. But you try to skirt up the middle. You try 
to . . . you know why you try to skirt . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I think the member knows that 
the remarks should be put through the Chair. I recognize the 
member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. But my 
point being is this confused, right wing, extreme right wing, 
conservative Sask Party . . . I don’t know what to make 
reference to them anymore, Mr. Speaker. They confuse the heck 
out of me. 
 
And where they confuse me, Mr. Speaker, is after they try to 
sell half our Crowns — no corporation wanted half of 
something — then they turn around and they ate crow on that 
Bill 40. And then to make matters worse, Mr. Speaker, they 
come along and they put a billion-dollar tax hike on the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m trying to figure out, are these guys conservatives? Are 
they Saskatchewan Party? And the best tell, Mr. Speaker, is 
how they deal with the Crowns. That’s the best tell. And I can 
tell you today that that’s a massively confused right wing party 
across the way, Mr. Speaker. Some of them are conservatives. 
Some of them, I don’t know what background they come from. 
 
And when it comes to economics and the Crown corporations, 
Mr. Speaker, let me give them an update. Crown corporations 
make money. They make money. They make profit for us, Mr. 
Speaker. They make profit for us. And that profit comes from 
the Crowns and goes to the government, the General Revenue 
Fund. So we get money from the Crowns, you guys. We get 
money from the Crowns. That money goes into health care, 
goes into education, goes into agricultural programs, goes into 
municipal financing, and goes into people’s pockets by things 
like salary, Mr. Speaker, for people that work for the 
government. 
 
And then when we have that money coming in, we don’t have 
to go to a billion-dollar tax hike to cover your mismanagement. 
The Crowns, the Crowns could have helped cover your 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

mismanagement. But you guys wanted to sell it. You guys 
wanted to sell these Crowns. And once you sell them, once you 
sell them, they’re gone. Like why can’t you right wingers figure 
that out? If you guys are supposed to be these great business 
minds, I just can’t figure you out. It must be totally beyond me 
because I’m sitting here, I’m sitting here thinking, okay, how 
does this right wing voodoo economics work? How do these 
guys think? 
 
So let’s see. The Saskatchewan Party done a billion-dollar tax 
hike. A billion dollars — there was not one tax you guys didn’t 
like — a billion dollars, and then you put us in debt for years to 
come. You went from $10.2 billion when we left government to 
23 billion by 2021. So let’s see, a billion-dollar tax hike, a 
record debt, $23 billion thanks to you guys. We haven’t even 
incorporated what the P3 costs are. 
 
You’re trying to sell the Crowns but nobody wants to buy half a 
Crown, so they told you no. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are saying, well you sell our Crowns, what are we going to have 
left? And then you say, oh we’ll make money from that. But we 
have to cover your debt plus your P3 debt that you got planned 
later on for us. Well if we end up selling off the Crowns, they’re 
gone forever and so is the cash. I don’t know why the member 
from Melfort can’t figure that out. If you’re such right wing 
economic giants . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well help me 
understand this. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Once again I’d like to remind the 
member to put his comments to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m just 
trying to . . . I’m not an economist by any stretch of the 
imagination. I’m a hockey player dabbling in politics. But I’ll 
say this. I’ll say this, that I think I understand the economy and 
the effects of Crown a heck of a lot better than 99.9 per cent of 
the Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s 
important to tell people when it comes to any bill, Bill 82, any 
bill pertaining to the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, I 
can’t help but feeling defensive about our Crown corporations 
and the hair on the back of my neck stands up. 
 
Because who’s proposing some of these changes, Mr. Speaker? 
It is the Sask Party, and I say to them today that it’s very 
simple. That if you sell off the Crowns, they’re gone forever. 
They’re gone forever like some of your leaders will be gone 
here in a few short months, Mr. Speaker. Time for them to head 
out of Dodge. Time for them to head out of Dodge, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re heading out. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan want to keep our Crowns. I 
can’t understand why they can’t get that, Mr. Speaker. Those 
Crown corporations belong to us. We employ people. We create 
profits for the General Revenue Fund. But you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? They are so blinded by their philosophical belief that 
they don’t believe in the Crowns that they’d actually have 
Saskatchewan come into financial ruin to prove their point, to 
prove their point. And by then, Mr. Speaker, they’re all going to 
be heading out of Dodge. They’re all going to be heading out of 
Dodge like the former member from Kindersley, like the 
current Premier. And there’ll be a few others leaving, Mr. 

Speaker. A few others have left. There’ll be a few others 
leaving. Mark my words. 
 
Why? Because they have destroyed the future of this province. 
They have destroyed the future of this province. And they 
laugh, Mr. Speaker. They laugh because they’ll go home to the 
comforts of their home, and we’ll be left with record debt, and 
not to mention the P3 debt that’s going to be coming due to us. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they will have left behind Crown 
corporations that are saddled with debt, Mr. Speaker, but more 
so always under a threat of sale. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why I tell the people of Saskatchewan, I think we’ve 
had enough of the Sask Party. It’s time to get rid of them 
because people don’t trust them anymore, Mr. Speaker. They 
have mismanaged our finances. They have actually increased 
our taxes exponentially. Half of them are going to have their 
foot out the door, ready to head out of Dodge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s time, I think it’s time that Saskatchewan sends 
them a message. And the message that they send them is that 
from the NDP perspective, Mr. Speaker, from the NDP 
perspective, we are going to help build a brave new economy, 
on side and in partners with the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. We need corporate Canada to come and invest in our 
province of Saskatchewan, but we also need good 
mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
We have to balance our economy when it comes to the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, and we also have to make sure that 
rural Saskatchewan is strengthened for years to come through 
things like good, solid water management strategies, Mr. 
Speaker, and making them part of a brave new economy that 
really talks about green energy, whether it’s a carbon sink bank, 
Mr. Speaker, or generating power through a variety of sources, 
whether it’s cogeneration opportunities or things like electricity 
generation of all kinds and all sorts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the NDP do have a plan. We do have a vision, Mr. Speaker, 
and that vision isn’t selling the farm and having dollars shipped 
out of our province each and every single day that the Sask 
Party is in power, Mr. Speaker. And as I’ve said it a thousand 
times in this Assembly, we’ve seen this act before. And I would 
encourage the people of Saskatchewan to get rid of this 
government. They are bad for us, Mr. Speaker. They have hurt 
so many people and they have to . . . Through their 
mismanagement, to their scandals, and to their waste, it is 
actually despicable what they’re doing to the province of 
Saskatchewan — despicable. And there’s 50, 49, 48 — is it 47 
now? — we’re counting down here. It started off at 50. Now 
it’s 49. Now it’s 48, then it’s going to be 47. And pretty soon, 
Mr. Speaker, they’ll go back to where they were in 1991: down 
to five, down to five, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’ll point out this: when it comes to the Crown corporations, 
we do not trust the Sask Party with our future. And the number 
one tell, the number one tell, Mr. Speaker, as to how confused 
they are, every single one of them made speeches, speeches, 
speeches about Bill 40. The member from . . . Is that Yorkton? 
Where is that guy from? I don’t know where he’s from. I can 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

see he’s in the back there somewhere. But he was making 
speeches. He was making speeches, right wing speeches about 
Bill 40. And today now he’s eating crow. He’s eating crow 
because you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? He was told 
what to say. He was told what to say. Here is your speaking 
notes. You will do and say as you’re told because that’s the 
right wing mantra. You just keep saying the same thing over 
and over again till you believe it and maybe people in 
Saskatchewan will believe it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw this act before. And I tell the people 
of Saskatchewan, when it comes to the Crowns, when it comes 
to debt, when it comes to the economy, when it comes to raising 
taxation, the Saskatchewan Party has failed miserably. Not only 
the current state of Saskatchewan, but for the future, for years 
and years to come we will begin to suffer from their 
mismanagement, corruption, and waste, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s a shame. Because what’s up next is the Crowns. What’s 
up next is going to be private health care. What’s up next — 
insurance on life, or life insurance premiums. It’s starting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We talked about the carbon sequestration of SaskPower today, 
of how they mismanaged that file, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Minister Responsible for the Environment or the carbon 
sequestration project said, give me another question. And the 
question I asked him: who’s paying those bills? Who’s paying 
those bills? It’s not him. It’s not the Sask Party. It’s you and I, 
Mr. Speaker; we’re paying that through our power bills. When I 
go to northern Saskatchewan and I see the 3 or $400 power bills 
that people are paying, Mr. Speaker, every single month while 
we’ve got a carbon capture tax compliments of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, that’s who’s paying it. And we’ll be 
paying that for years and years to come. 
 
And the sad thing is it’s not going to SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
Do you know where it’s going? It’s going to Cenovus — 
Cenovus — because those guys couldn’t manage to keep up 
their carbon supply to an oil company, so they had penalties. So 
I don’t know what the price was this year. The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana identified the cost today, and we’re giving 
those guys millions of dollars each year because of the 
mismanagement of the Sask Party. 
 
So you tell me if we should trust any word from the minister 
that proposed changes on Bill 82. The answer I tell the people 
of Saskatchewan: no way. No way do you trust them with the 
future of the Crowns, because one day they’re totally bent on 
selling them, then they got a memo from the people of 
Saskatchewan. All of a sudden, they saw the light, but the 
Premier saw the light on his way out.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the remains and the tatters of the 
Saskatchewan Party called the Sask Party caucus across the 
way, Mr. Speaker, now is the time to get rid of them before they 
sell anything more. Enough of the wall-to-wall sale of our 
Crowns. Let’s protect them and let’s enhance them. Let’s build 
them up. Let’s modernize them. Let’s make them even greater 
and grander. And let’s make them a good, true partner in the 
economic building of Saskatchewan for years and years to 
come. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s more to say on this particular bill. So 

thereby, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 82, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 82, The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to speak and deliver second reading of Bill 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017. These amendments provide legal clarity and enhance 
government’s ability to ensure that our environmental resources 
are sustainably managed and our environment remains 
protected. The amended legislation is consistent with other 
provincial resource management legislation, and is also in line 
with Saskatchewan’s results-based approach to environmental 
regulation. The amendments will expand the definition of 
“person” to allow the ministry to issue permits to certain 
associations or organizations that carry out activities regulated 
by the Act or associated regulations. 
 
In addition, members of the Saskatchewan Environmental Code 
advisory committee change frequently due to changes within 
organizations and associations. The amendments will transfer 
powers from the Lieutenant Governor in Council to the 
minister, allowing for more timely appointments of new and 
replacement members of the committee. 
 
To provide you with a better understanding of the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory committee and its 
work, this group replaced the code development committee in 
2016 after the first set of code chapters were implemented in 
2015. It has met six times since then. 
 
The code, the first of its kind in Canada, introduced a new 
results-based approach to environmental protection and 
resource management that emphasizes outcomes not processes. 
The code reduces government red tape by replacing some 
permits with notifications and allows timely authorization of 
various activities such as water and sewage main construction, 
hydrostatic testing, and spill reporting. 
 
The code is already improving processes and removing red 
tape; for example, turnaround times to approve acceptable 
solutions for water and sewage mains have been reduced from 
several weeks to one day. The ministry, upon the 
recommendation of the code advisory committee, is moving 
forward with new code chapters and committees to develop 
technical content for the next chapters. These amendments will 
strengthen this group’s ability to carry out this important work 
for the province. 
 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

Today’s amendments also strengthen the province’s ability to 
enforce legislation around out-of-province beverage containers 
that are inappropriately brought into Saskatchewan to take 
advantage of our recycling program. The government’s former 
litter control Act, where the province’s beverage container 
recycling program was housed, was repealed when The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2010 was 
proclaimed. At that time it was believed the new Act provided 
adequate authority to charge any individuals and/or 
organizations purposely redeeming out-of-province beverage 
containers at Sarcan depots. 
 
After operating under the Act since June of 2015 and having 
experienced several enforcement challenges in this area, the 
Ministry of Justice has advised that an additional enforcement 
provision in the Act be created similar to the former litter 
control Act provisions. The new provision will identify the 
delivery of out-of-province containers to Sarcan and the 
submission of false information to depot operators as offences 
pursuant to EMPA [The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act] 2010. The amendments will provide new 
enforcement tools for cross-border beverage containers that are 
returned for refunds where there is no Saskatchewan-paid 
deposit. 
 
Thanks to Sarcan and the people of Saskatchewan, we have one 
of the most successful beverage container recycling programs in 
Canada, with more than 80 per cent of containers consistently 
returned for recycling. Sarcan is an important organization in 
our province. By recycling beverage containers, paint products, 
electronics, Sarcan protects our environment, provides 
employment opportunities, and supports economic 
development. These amendments aim to keep this beverage 
recycling program strong, successful, and sustainable into the 
future. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the amendments provide the minister 
the ability to appoint a program operator for waste stewardship 
programs where public interest is threatened by the imminent 
discontinuation of a stewardship program. This has been raised 
with the ministry in the past. 
 
The amendments will also clarify language in several sections 
of the Act, including the following: in regards to precautionary 
drinking water advisories, the Act includes a reference to the 
environment with respect to causing an adverse effect but does 
not reference human health. Drinking water is tied directly to 
potential harm to human health. For clarity, amendments will 
include reference to harm to human health and the environment, 
and this is consistent with wording from the 2002 Act. 
 
With respect to the abandonment of waste, the amendment 
changes the wording from an allowance to a prohibition to 
ensure issuing charges for disposal of waste is clear and 
consistent with other prohibition wording in the Act. The 
current wording makes it difficult for officers to lay charges. 
This section has been reworded to a prohibition that states no 
person shall discard waste other than to an approved location. 
No change to the intent of the section has been made. 
 
The amendments will also clarify language for audits, 
inspections, and investigations to ensure environment officers 
have the appropriate powers to carry out their duties. Inspection 

powers were lacking in EMPA 2010 and are now similar to the 
powers provided for conducting audits. The amendments make 
it clear what authorities an environment officer has when 
conducting an inspection or audit, such as requiring the use of 
machinery and taking samples and copies of records. With 
respect to the investigation and enforcement powers, clarity has 
been brought to when a court judge may issue a warrant and 
when environment officers may seize items. 
 
The amendments also provide the authority for the court to 
dispose of items forfeited to the Crown. The amendments are 
consistent with other enforcement powers provided in other 
Acts, such as The Saskatchewan Employment Act and The 
Wildlife Act, 1998. 
 
A further amendment will include provision for a person to 
request that information of a commercial, financial, scientific, 
or technical nature that may reveal proprietary business, 
competitive, or trade-secret information to be kept confidential 
beyond the original five-year time period. Every five years a 
person may reapply to have that information kept confidential. 
This will be done through the original application process. 
 
Further, the code only applies to waterworks and sewage works 
mains. Therefore permits are required for collection and 
distribution systems. The list of activities for which permits are 
required for waterworks and sewage works will be updated for 
clarity to better align with existing legislation. 
 
Other housekeeping amendments will ensure the Act is 
responsive to current legislative needs. This includes expanding 
the definition of “person” to capture associations, partnerships, 
and other organizations not otherwise captured and ensuring 
environmental protection orders can be issued for all adverse 
effects caused by any chemical, physical, or biological 
alteration. 
 
Saskatchewan is an incredibly beautiful place to live. We have 
outstanding prairie landscapes, pristine lakes, fresh air and 
breathtaking sunsets. We want to keep our environment and our 
communities as clean and healthy as possible. That objective is 
not only our privilege but it’s our responsibility. The 
amendments in Bill 83 represent a significant step forward for 
sustainable environmental management in Saskatchewan and 
demonstrate our commitment to protect the environment and to 
fully implement a results-based approach to environmental 
regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan continues to grow as a province 
our government will continually adapt and implement 
leading-edge environmental management practices to address 
the challenges of growth and protect our enviable environment. 
Our government will continue to work with stakeholders to 
identify additional opportunities to refine the province’s 
environmental legislative framework including the Act, 
regulations, and the Saskatchewan Environmental Code. And, 
Mr. Speaker, with that I now move second reading of Bill 83, 
The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment 
Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 
moved that Bill 83, The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is the 



November 6, 2017  Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
I’m proud to stand and give a first observation, if you will, of 
the bill that’s being proposed, Bill 83 — the first blush — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017. And, Mr. Speaker, the first thing we notice on this 
particular bill . . . And I’ll certainly do the connection with all 
the other network of people that are impacted by any bill that 
the Sask Party brings forward. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But as typical, Mr. Speaker, Bill 83 starts off with a very simple 
phrase and it says a bunch of nice fancy words, but the net 
effect is that this bill will allow the minister to appoint new 
members to the Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory 
committee instead of having them appointed by order in 
council. So really it provides the power to the minister, and 
from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, that radically decreases 
accountability. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in our mind as I listened 
to the minister’s comments on the environmental issue and 
some of the points that he brought forward . . . He talks about 
the new authority to the minister to operate a product 
stewardship program. He talks about inspection powers for 
environmental officers to conduct inspection and audit, and he 
kind of goes on and on about some of the things that they wish 
to do as it pertains to water regulation. And certainly the 
environmental integrity of the province of Saskatchewan was 
something that he wanted to maintain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what he has to do, Mr. Speaker, is he has to chat, move 
over to talk to the Minister from Agriculture because any time 
the Minister of the Environment has some initiative being 
planned, the Minister of Agriculture comes along and says, no, 
we’re not going to do it that way; we’re going to do it this way. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that time and time again where 
the minister comes up and he espouses great work and great 
plans that he wants to do, and then along he comes later on and 
says, well I can’t get that done because I’ve been overruled by 
the Minister of Agriculture. We’ve seen it time and time again, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I have to explain to the Minister of the Environment, when 
you’re in cabinet the Minister of the Environment is usually the 
person that really works a bit in isolation, because obviously 
when you look at assessing any project, Mr. Speaker, that you 
can’t have the Minister of the Economy overrule you on an 
environmental matter. The whole notion around Minister of the 
Environment is you must have environmental preference in 
your thinking and you’re kind of in a cocoon when it comes to 
influence or bartering or getting direction from a minister that 
could be contrary to protecting the environment like you’re 
compelled to do so as the minister. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen time and time again the flip-flop 
of this minister and many other ministers when the Minister of 
Agriculture comes along and the Minister of the Economy 
comes along and tells the Minister of the Environment, you will 
not do that. And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of 

the Environment slinks away and doesn’t do his job. 
 
And that’s exactly what I fear is going to be happening here 
despite all the words behind this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. He 
will be overruled by the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister 
of the Economy, and there goes your independent 
integrity-based system of environmental protection for 
Saskatchewan if you have the minister that won’t stand up for 
his own words in this particular Assembly. 
 
So that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that as the 
opposition, we kind of explain to him, this is what you should 
do when you’re in government. You should actually stand 
separate, and all your decisions should be scientific based. It 
should be environmentally conscious and it should be 
independent. And you should not be influenced either way. 
 
In fact I would dare say that the Minister of the Environment, 
when it comes to fulfilling his obligation in cabinet, has more of 
a status and has more cachet, if you will, when it comes to the 
integrity of the environmental protection, even against advice 
from the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of the 
Economy or the Minister of Finance. And they have to 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. And what happens now is nothing 
more than a shell of environmental protection. We’ve seen that 
time and time again from this government. 
 
And we were hoping that the new minister, perhaps he would 
actually do his job as the Minister of the Environment and 
protect the environment, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we thought 
he would do. But what we’re seeing, that he’s giving himself 
more power and, Mr. Speaker, he’s having the decision-making 
ability, as opposed to having cabinet appoint some of these 
folks that could come from a wide background, Mr. Speaker. 
And whenever, whenever the Minister of Agriculture or the 
Economy comes knocking on his door, right away, Mr. 
Speaker, environmental integrity is out the window and the 
agenda of those senior ministers take over. And this is the 
worry I have when it comes to environmental integrity, 
environmental protection, and certainly any bill that’s being 
proposed by the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the solution is simple. The 
solution is very simple. And I want to give the minister the 
ABCs of being an environment minister. First of all, you don’t 
have to compromise the economy to balance environmental 
interests. There is such a word as balancing the needs, Mr. 
Speaker. And there is a way you can engage corporate Canada 
and corporate Saskatchewan to assist in protecting the 
environment as best as they can because it makes good sense 
and good PR [public relations] to have these companies, 
whether they’re oil companies or potash companies, to be part 
of the solution. You can actually engage them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, in fact, Mr. Speaker, there are many oil companies in 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, they’re actually investing into the 
next wave of green energy options. Yes, it’s true. Oil and gas 
companies are actually investing into the green economy. So 
they’re thinking 20, 30 years down the road, and that’s actually 
something that we should embrace as a province. We should 
say, yes, the companies that are out there, the companies that 
are out there that are doing good work in Saskatchewan, they 
can become a big part of the solution. So when we say balance 



2818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2017 

the economy with our environmental needs, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
two-way street, that there are ways. 
 
And you think for one minute that the people of Saskatchewan 
are telling the Sask Party go ahead, do what you want to the 
environment, as long as we have a job? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely. People need to work. People need to work. They 
need to have a job. There’s no question about it. Most of the 
people that are working will also say, we need to do something 
for our environment to make sure that we protect the water we 
drink, the air we breathe, and the parks that we create. That’s 
really important, Mr. Speaker. So we can’t operate in silos, and 
we certainly can’t dance to the tune of the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Minister of the Economy when it comes to 
environmental protection. 
 
And I see the Minister of Agriculture has joined the Minister of 
the Environment, and all of a sudden he’s pretty quiet, Mr. 
Speaker. That goes to my point. That goes to my point, is that 
he will dance to his tune. 
 
So I will say on this particular bill, there’s a lot of work ahead 
of that Minister of the Environment to prove to Saskatchewan 
that he is going to do his job, that he is going to protect the 
interests of the environmental issues that threaten our province. 
 
We want to be leaders. We want to be leaders, Mr. Speaker, but 
the problem we have is every time the minister gets up and talks 
about the carbon sequestration project, we think that when we 
go pay our power bill, we shouldn’t make the cheque out to 
SaskPower Corporation. We should make it out to Cenovus 
Energy because you’ve not been taking carbon out of the air 
and selling it to them at the rate that you agreed upon. And that 
goes to my point, is that somewhere along the line, you got 
trumped. And the bottom line is that the balance is simply 
something that we have to work on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll close on this point: you can indeed engage the public sector, 
the corporations that work and live in Saskatchewan. They can 
help you become environmental stewards. They have a lot of 
proactive thinking. By the same token, we have to make a 
conscious effort to be independent in cabinet to protect the 
water we need, to protect the air we breathe, and to protect the 
forest and the lands that we live on. We can indeed achieve that 
balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on this bill, I see it all about giving him more powers, more 
powers to appoint his own board. It goes against transparency 
and accountability. And mark my words, Mr. Speaker, there’ll 
be a time when he’ll be told to not respond when given 
direction by senior ministers in that right wing government, to 
simply forget about the environment and do as he’s told. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when that happens, then you know that there are 
more serious problems than we assumed over here. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn Bill No. 
83, The Environmental Management and Protection 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 83. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved that the 
House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:40.] 
 
 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2789 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2789 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2790 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Veterans’ Week 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 
 Canadian Down Syndrome Week 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2792 
 Prince Albert Lions Club Celebrates 70th Anniversary 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2792 
 Member Elected Chair of Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians for the Canada Region 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2792 
 Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital Radiothon 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 
 Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour Recipients 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2793 
 International Trade Centre Opens at Evraz Place 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2794 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2794 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2794 
 Employment and Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 
 Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2796 
 Employment of Women in Saskatchewan 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2797 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2797 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2797 
 Support for Agricultural Producers Following Fire 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2798 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2798 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2798 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2798 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2798 
 Bill No. 605 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 
 Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2799 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2799 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2801 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2803 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2804 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2805 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2806 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2807 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2807 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2808 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2808 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2810 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2811 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2812 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2812 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2815 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2817 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


