






















































Hansard: April 05, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 70A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2123 
 April 5, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise members that Mr. Speaker is not 
present today to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today 
we’re going to be introducing amendments to The Education 
Act, and we have a number of people in your gallery that are 
here for that. I hope I don’t miss any of the ones that are there. 
We have got some governance panel members, Ray Morrison 
and Duane Favel. I believe Doug Moen may be in the gallery as 
well. We also have . . . Well who says you can’t recycle old 
people? 
 
From the ministry we have Deputy Minister Julie MacRae and 
Assistant Deputy Minister Donna Johnson, and from the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association we have President 
Shawn Davidson as well as Vice-president Aleana Young. I 
understand, Mr. Speaker, as well, that there are a number of 
members from the Saskatoon Catholic board, and the member 
for Churchill-Wildwood will be introducing those momentarily, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask that all members join in in welcoming 
these people to their Assembly today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to join with the minister opposite on behalf of our 
Leader of the Opposition and our Education critic, who I know 
would have loved to have the opportunity to welcome all of you 
to your legislature, all the governance panel members, my past 
former colleagues from Saskatoon at Saskatoon Catholic, and in 
particular Aleana Young who is actually a constituent of mine, 
vice-president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association], and Dr. Shawn Davidson, the president of the 
SSBA. 
 
I wish you, all of you, a productive day of meetings, and thank 
you for all of your work in advocating on behalf of all of the 
students of Saskatchewan and promoting education in our 
province. I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
make an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce Jim and Susan Carriere, two of my constituents seated 
in your gallery. Give a wave. 
 
Jim is retired from SaskTel as a customer service manager, and 
he operates his own home renovation company. In fact he 
remodelled two of my bathrooms recently and did a great job. 
He was elected to the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Board of 
Education in 1997 and served as board Chair from 1998 to 2001 
and again from 2003 until 2007. 
 
Susan, his wife, previously owned a retail business in 
Saskatoon. They have raised four children. Their daughters are 
involved in education. One of their sons works for SaskTel, and 
their other son is involved in the pipefitting trade. They are 
proud grandparents of four beautiful grandchildren. 
 
I would also like to introduce Debbie Berscheid who hails from 
Humboldt — Debbie. Deb has recently retired after working for 
34 years as a special care aid on the dementia unit at St. Mary’s 
Villa in Humboldt. She is married to Roger and they have two 
children. Their son works for Mosaic potash mine in Colonsay, 
and their daughter lives in St. John’s, Newfoundland. Deb was 
first elected to the Humboldt Catholic Board of Education in 
1994. After this board amalgamated with Greater Saskatoon 
Catholic — it had happened in 2005 — she was elected as the 
trustee representative for Humboldt. She currently chairs the 
joint operations committee for Humboldt Collegiate Institute. 
 
I would also like to introduce Diane Boyko. Diane was first 
elected to the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Board of Education in 
2003. We joined the board at the same time. She became the 
board Chair following Jim Carriere and has remained in that 
position to this day. When she is not working diligently on 
school board work, she is coordinating the Sundog Arts and 
Entertainment Faire. Diane has two daughters. One is a lawyer 
who lives in Victoria, and her other daughter is a teacher in 
Mexico. 
 
I spent many years at the board table with Diane, Jim, and Deb, 
and consider all of them my friends. They offered support and 
encouragement during my election campaign. I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
make a couple of introductions today. First and foremost, I am 
so excited to welcome the grade 5 and 6 students from École 
Victoria School, here all the way from Saskatoon Nutana. It’s 
my first school group in six years, Mr. Speaker, so I’m very 
excited about that. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Grayson 
Beaudin, and also a number of chaperones, including Sarah 
Brown, Mindy Bratvold, Tyler Rittinger, Sherri Duggan, 
Chantel Serack, and Mike McKague, who also ran for city 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

council in the last city election. 
 
So I know a number of the kids in this class. I know their 
parents. And they’re all inquisitive and very eager to learn 
about what goes on here today. I had the chance to meet with 
them a few weeks ago, so I’ve warned them about question 
period so they know what it’s like. But I’ll be meeting with 
them afterwards to answer questions they might have. But for 
now I would like everyone to welcome these grade 5 and 6 
students and their chaperones to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take the 
opportunity to introduce a young gentleman to you from my 
riding, Mr. Christian Pollock. Christian is a third-year political 
studies student at the University of Saskatchewan, and currently 
he is working at the Diefenbaker Centre. So he’s travelled with 
tours, including educating people on women’s suffrage and 
commemorating the 100th anniversary of women’s right to vote 
in Saskatchewan. He leads elementary school students — so 
maybe you guys might want to go to Diefenbaker Centre with 
him — encouraging youth to become involved in democracy. 
He’s also responsible for developing material for the 
Diefenbaker Centre and does tours. 
 
And just for all MLAs’ [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
awareness, this Sunday there’s a grand opening of the exhibit 
for the 100th anniversary of the battle of Vimy Ridge. So 
everyone’s welcome there as well. 
 
So there’s lots more to say about Christian, but for now I’d just 
like to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Joining us today are a group of 23 public service 
employees seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are part of the 
parliamentary program for the public service. Participants are 
employees from the following ministries: Advanced Education, 
Agriculture, Economy, Education, Environment, Finance, 
Health, Justice, Social Services, as well as employees from the 
Office of the Provincial Auditor and the Legislative Assembly 
Service. The program includes an in-depth history and tour of 
the Legislative Building; briefings by the chief librarian, 
committees branch, and Executive Council; an opportunity to 
sit in the public galleries and observe question period; and an 
opportunity to meet with members on this side of House. 
 
I have the opportunity to meet with them later; I think the 
Opposition House Leader and maybe yourself, as Deputy 
Speaker, as well. So I’d like to welcome these public servants to 
their Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see a number of 
Saskatoon Willowgrove constituents. Ray Morrison has been 
introduced, and it’s good to see you here, Ray. And Ron 
Boechler, who is a Saskatoon Willowgrove constituent. I think 
it’s Ron’s first time here to the Legislative Building. Ron was 
employed as an emergency medical technician and has been a 
chief of police, and as a volunteer he’s worked with the 
Blackstrap Youth Camp, YMCA [Young Men’s Christian 
Association], Saskatoon Youth Soccer, softball, and is a trustee 
with the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools. Ron, I’d like to 
welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I see Diane Boyko there as well. Diane’s part of the . . . I 
was with her at the Saskatchewan Country Music Awards this 
past Saturday and she’s on the committee for the Canadian 
Country Music Awards. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she is a 
wicked two-stepper. So if she ever gets you on the dance floor, 
look out; you’re in trouble, especially with the dancing abilities 
with somebody like myself. So, I’d like to ask all members to 
welcome these fine individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’d like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 
public servants to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly the 
parliamentary program for the public service is a very valuable 
opportunity for public servants to come see the other side of the 
proceedings, and it gives us an opportunity certainly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly, and to say thank you very much for the service. I 
look forward to meeting with them later on today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to say 
a quick word of hello to an old coach of mine. You know, 
coaches, they play a . . . Well it’s 30 years ago that this 
individual was a coach of mine, and such were the lessons, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s, you know . . . here I am. But I want to say a 
fond word of welcome and hello, and thank you very much for 
all you do, to Mike McKague, who is a tremendous athlete in 
water polo and is a triathlete but also a very active member of 
the community in Saskatoon. But, you know, somebody that 
makes a difference in a bunch of different lives and certainly 
made a difference in mine. So it’s really good to see Mike 
McKague here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d say I don’t know what the 
Deputy Premier was precisely trying to say to Mr. Doug Moen. 
Certainly as a former deputy minister to the Premier, good to 
see you here at your Legislative Assembly, Doug. Perhaps he 
was trying to say happy birthday. But with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, please join me in welcoming these important 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in my place and introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, 15 students, grade 5 students from St. Olivier School 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

in Radville, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they’re here today to 
watch the proceedings, and I’ll have an opportunity to visit with 
them later this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I want to ask all of 
my colleagues, who are already helping out, but to help me in 
welcoming these 15 students, grade 5 students from St. Olivier 
in Radville to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with government and with other members in 
recognizing some of the esteemed and distinguished leaders that 
are here in our Assembly here today. And it’s fair to say that 
education is the foundation of our future here in this province, 
economically, socially, culturally. And the foundation of 
education is in this Assembly here today with the elected 
leadership that’s within the Assembly, the school board 
leadership as full partners and valued partners in education. 
 
So it’s my pleasure to welcome the leadership here on behalf of 
the SSBA of respective boards. And in fact, we have school 
divisions that are represented from the far southwest corner all 
the way up into the far North and all points in between, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So on behalf of a very grateful opposition and a grateful 
province to those that serve our students, I say thank you and 
ask all members to join me in offering a very hearty and warm 
welcome. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, seated in your 
gallery is Jana Len. Jana Len received her Bachelor of 
Commerce degree with a major in marketing from the 
University of Saskatchewan in 2010. 
 
After some time in the advertising industry, she began her 
fundraising career at the Children’s Hospital Foundation of 
Saskatchewan in 2012. In her role as director of donor relations, 
Jana travels extensively throughout the province working with 
individuals, community groups, as well as local and national 
partners to raise funds for maternal and pediatric health care in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Jana currently sits on the board of 
directors for the Saskatoon Society of Fund Raising Executives, 
as well as the board of directors for Enactus at the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan]. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Jana met with the children’s hospital 
stakeholders earlier this morning. She will be meeting with the 
Minister of Health this afternoon, and this evening she will be 
meeting with the Regina chapter of the Knights of Columbus, 
who are partners in fundraising for the new children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon University. So I would ask all members to 
welcome Jana to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
welcome several people here as well today. I want to start 
actually with the Massage Therapist Association of 
Saskatchewan, with whom my colleague from Regina Douglas 
Park and I had an opportunity to meet today, and I know 
members opposite had a chance too to meet with them as well. 
I’d like to welcome Lori Green, who is the executive director. 
We’ve got Garret Woynarski, who is the outgoing president this 
week, and Marles Kerns. 
 
Thank you for all the work that you do in advocating to ensure 
that those who use the services of massage therapists receive 
the best-quality treatment possible. They’re advocating to have 
legislation and regulation for massage therapists. I look forward 
to being a positive ally in making that happen. So thank you for 
your work here today. 
 
And like my colleagues, there are many people in the legislature 
here today I would like to welcome: Mike McKague, who also 
was a coach of mine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And he is the only 
person in this building who bore witness to the fact that I 
completed the marathon, thanks to Mike McKague’s coaching. 
As my colleague said, he was a great coach and got me through 
that, and I think I could use his help as I embark upon running 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to welcome Chantel Serack actually who . . . We have a 
very good mutual friend, my constituency assistant, Vanessa 
Hyggen. And Chantel and I were just at Vanessa’s house a few 
weeks ago for an iron chef competition where the ingredient 
was basil. We all had to figure out how to make do with . . . 
what we could come up with that, and it was a fun evening. And 
Chantel and I actually also belong to an attachment parenting 
online mothers’ group actually, an e-mail list, and have many, 
many shared interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And last but not least I’d like to welcome Diane Boyko who is a 
constituent of mine and a friend, and to everybody else here in 
the legislature today. I’d ask all my colleagues to join with me 
in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to join with the Health critic opposite, Mr. Speaker, and 
welcome the members from the Massage Therapist Association 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they hosted a luncheon today 
for MLAs. I wasn’t able to attend the luncheon but I had an 
opportunity to meet for a while with outgoing president, Garret 
Woynarski. And as the member opposite mentioned, their 
executive director, Lori Green, and Marles Kerns, the incoming 
president, are also here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also told that a number of other members of 
the board are also here and I apologize in advance for the 
pronunciation of some of these names. I’m told Mandy Fahr, 
Camille Lapierre, Gus — I’m sorry Gus — Giannoutsos. I don’t 
know how Hansard’s going to handle that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Also Erin Sobkow and Ken Ansell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again would welcome these members to their 
Assembly. I look forward to meeting with them again in the 
future as they move forward with some projects they’re 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

working on. I understand that they met with some of my 
colleagues this morning. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 
please welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
Duane Favel. I can barely see him behind the clock there, but 
I’ve had the opportunity to meet with Mr. Favel a few times and 
he’s got an extensive background, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s a 
former police officer, a former principal. He’s been involved 
with the local health region. He sits on the local school board, 
but he’s also been the mayor of Ile-a-la- Crosse for many, many 
years. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the member from 
Athabasca, he’s a terrible curler; he can’t fish; and he can’t 
hunt. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, apparently he’s an 
accomplished actor and that helps him when he has to appear to 
be interested when the member from Athabasca’s rambling on 
and on. So I would like everybody here, all the members here, 
welcome Mr. Favel to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in my excitement to introduce this great class from St. 
Olivier School, Radville, I forgot to introduce Lorrie Fiechter, 
their teacher who’s accompanying them today. You’ll notice, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re only accompanied by their teacher. 
There are no chaperones with them. They’re such a 
well-behaved class, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they’re raised in 
Radville. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I do want to add a 
welcome to Lorrie to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I too want to rise in my place and join my colleague from 
Prince Albert Northcote in welcoming my hometown mayor of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Duane Favel. And yes, perhaps his name 
will not be called when they look at the accomplishments in the 
various sports of hockey or baseball or volleyball or track or 
basketball or curling. But, Mr. Speaker, for the record, in the 
area of the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse where he lives — 
there’s about three households — there’s no one could touch 
him in lawn bowling there. So I want to give him credit for 
some of the athletic ability that he has enjoyed, but to also point 
out that he’s been a great colleague, a dear friend, and a very 
powerful leader of our community. And I take this opportunity 
to join all my colleagues in recognizing our mayor, Mr. Duane 
Favel. Welcome. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to join with members on both sides of this 
House to welcome a number of guests in the gallery. And I 
really don’t want to start naming names, in part because it 

would take me a long time, but also because I can’t see 
everyone who’s behind the clock there. 
 
But those leaders in our province in the area of education, I just 
want to thank them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all of their work. I 
know there has been a lot on their plates over the last several 
months, and I just want to say that those of you who’ve put 
your heart and soul and your work and your effort into ensuring 
that we have an education system in this province that serves 
the needs of our children, I really can’t imagine a more valuable 
endeavour and I want to sincerely thank each of you for the 
work that you do. And I would invite all members to join me in 
welcoming you to your Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I too would like to take the 
opportunity to welcome all our guests in all the galleries. 
Certainly pleased to see the galleries so full here this afternoon, 
but I would ask our guests not to participate in the proceedings. 
That includes applause. But certainly welcome to each and 
every one of you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, families throughout the 
province, and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel. And that STC helps 
to drive the economy with parcel services that serve farms and 
other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed by many good people of our province. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition in support of legislation to regulate the 
profession of massage therapy, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and actions to establish a regulatory body to register, 
monitor, and regulate the profession of massage therapy 
for the benefit of patients, massage therapists, and the 
general public. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today, there’s about 250 signatures, 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

but it’s part of another petition that’s been tabled that I believe 
there were about 1,500 signatures. And these petitioners today 
are from all across Saskatchewan. We’ve got, just on the first 
page alone, Saskatoon, Indian Head, Lanigan, Vanscoy, 
Wynyard, Manor, Kyle, Cumberland House, Preeceville, 
Clavet, Biggar, Spiritwood, Ogema, Halbrite, and it goes on and 
on, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly take the following action: to 
cause the Government of Saskatchewan to take the 
necessary steps to stop the federal government from 
imposing a carbon tax on the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Swift Current, 
Aneroid, Morse. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to rise in my place under the call and direction of the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote for anyone, someone to 
help her in her battle for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
Anyone, Mr. Speaker? So on that note, the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and the 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. Therefore the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, 
hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people 
calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan and 
then quickly commence the construction of a second bridge 
for Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do every day, Mr. Speaker, we’re presenting this 
petition signed by many people from all throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. And on this particular page we have 
people that have signed from Moose Jaw, from Regina, and 
from Weyburn. And I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m rising 
today to present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 
per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people who signed this 
petition would like to bring to our attention the following: Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 
per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned almost $300 million in dividends to pay 
for schools, roads, and hospitals. Those dividends should go to 

the people of Saskatchewan, not private investors. And of 
course, our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province. 
 
Under section 49 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations are normally exempt from corporate income tax 
provided not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a 
government or province. So the Sask Party’s proposal would 
allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without being 
considered privatized. So, Mr. Speaker, this short-sighted 
legislation risks sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa 
rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs in our Crown corporations instead 
of selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed these petitions today 
come from Tisdale, Star City, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I’d 
like to present a petition regarding pay equity here in 
Saskatchewan. And the undersigned residents of Saskatchewan 
wish to bring to your attention the following: that the citizens of 
this province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer now: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And the people signing this petition today come from Grandora, 
Saskatoon, and Martensville. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to present a petition to increase the funding to Prince 
Albert mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to 
close its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of 
resource to people in distress. The daytime closure of Prince 
Albert mobile has put stress on the Prince Albert Police Service, 
Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may not be trained 
and/or qualified to provide counselling and intervention 
services to clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petition that I present today are signed 
by residents from Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the restoration of funding for 
libraries in our province. As I’ve noted before, this is but one of 
the measures that those who value and support our libraries are 
putting forth to ensure that their voices are heard. And I think 
that they’re doing a really remarkable job of ensuring that this 
issue is in front of us and that people really understand what 
was cut in the last budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will read some of the preamble to this petition: whereas the 
Saskatchewan government has cut funding for regional libraries 
in half or by 3.5 million and eliminated funding for libraries in 
Regina and Saskatoon, this drastic funding cut will have 
devastating impact on libraries, especially regional libraries and 
those who depend on them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They note that libraries are a vital part of communities across 
Saskatchewan, and this is certainly something that we’re 
hearing from people right across this province. And libraries are 
more than just about borrowing books. Libraries have meeting 
rooms used by community groups. There are educational 
programs and clubs, publicly accessible computer terminals that 
are used by many. They also have programs for seniors, for 
children, employment support and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the list 
goes on. And these cuts will have a disproportionate impact on 
rural communities. Whereas libraries are vital community 
spaces, potential closures or reductions in service will severely 
impact our communities. 
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Therefore in the prayer that follows, we respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
renew its commitment to the invaluable programming, 
educational opportunities, and public spaces that our 
libraries provide across this province and restore the 4.8 
million in funding for public libraries that was cut in the 

2017-2018 budget. 
 

We are receiving petitions from across the province. Those 
signing the petition today reside in Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise presenting a petition calling on the government to restore 
funding to post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. The 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to 
bring to your attention the following: that the Sask Party is 
making students and their families pay for Sask Party financial 
mismanagement. 
 
They point out that Saskatchewan students already pay the 
second-highest tuition fees in Canada. They point out that this 
budget cuts $36.8 million from post-secondary education. They 
point out that this budget cuts $6.4 million from technical 
institutions. They point out that the funding for the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships has been cut 
by $8.2 million, Mr. Speaker, and they point out that the 
Saskatchewan Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan immediately restore funding to 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and stop the 
damaging cuts to our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by citizens 
from Saskatoon and Langham. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition regarding the taxation of non-profit child care 
centres. Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit 
child care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial property taxes, 
which is different from what’s done in Alberta, Manitoba, 
Ontario, BC [British Columbia], and New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child care is essential to the economy, yet most 
centres struggle to balance their budgets. This issue threatens 
both the number of child care spaces and the quality of care. 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools do. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act, and 
that all child care centres be exempted from property tax 
through changes to the appropriate legislation. 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and Weyburn. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Voice of Youth Leadership Summit 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
Thursday, February 16th the member from Saskatoon Centre 
and I both had the pleasure of attending the 10th annual Voice 
of Youth Leadership Summit hosted by the Saskatoon Open 
Door Society. 
 
Each year this summit is planned by and for our province’s 
culturally diverse youth. It provides a sense of leadership and 
creates a welcoming environment where kids from different 
backgrounds can come together and foster better cultural 
understanding. 
 
This year the summit was held at TCU Place and more than 100 
students attended. During the event, students had the 
opportunity to speak with community leaders and stakeholders 
about the issues that are important to them. And, Mr. Speaker, 
in my panel the students were particularly interested in the TRC 
[Truth and Reconciliation Commission], so the reconciliation. 
The topics discussed included education, cultural bullying, and 
youth employment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our kids are the future of this province, 
and the events like this leadership summit really highlight how 
socially engaged they are with the issues that affect 
Saskatchewan. It’s also a great opportunity to bring our youth 
together. With tragic crimes of hate still taking place in our own 
country, it is so important for our young people to experience 
culturally diverse events like this. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me 
in extending thanks to this year’s summit organizers for all their 
hard work, to the Saskatoon Open Door Society for hosting the 
event, and to all of those who participated for working to create 
change in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan, and celebrating the 
cultural diversity of our young people. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Maidstone Boys’ Basketball Team Takes Silver at Hoopla 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and congratulate the 
Maidstone Huskies high school boys’ basketball team on an 
amazing season. You see, this is the first time the Huskies have 
ever made it to the provincial championship. After years of hard 
work, Huskies coach, Ray Bodnarek, had this to say about the 
team: 
 

This really shows what passion for the game, the hard 
work can get you. And when graduating players were here 
in grade 10, their goal was to make it to Hoopla, and they 
achieved it this year. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it looked like everyone in town showed up 
to cheer the Maidstone Huskies as they headed to Hoopla finals 
at the U of R [University of Regina]. For those fans that weren’t 
able to make the trip, they watched the game live-stream in the 
Huskies’ home gym. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the team was set on bringing home a 
medal, and after some great games, lots of hard work, and a 
nail-biter final, they were edged out in the gold medal game. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, although the team was hoping for gold, 
they should be proud of their effort, and I would ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the Maidstone Huskies on 
a great season and a well-deserved silver medal. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Global Asbestos Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
April 1 to 7 is Asbestos Awareness Week. Marked globally by 
the Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization, this week is a 
time to raise awareness about asbestos-related diseases. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, asbestos is the leading cause of workplace 
deaths in Canada, and it’s estimated that 152,000 workers in 
Canada are currently exposed to asbestos. These figures 
however only account for the number of accepted claims and 
don’t include people who can’t prove work-related exposure. 
The number of people who have been affected by asbestos is 
therefore likely much higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, asbestos is a naturally occurring fibrous material 
which was regularly used in buildings from the 1950s until the 
late 1990s. If products containing asbestos are disturbed, the 
tiny fibres are released into the air. All forms of asbestos are 
carcinogenic, and the World Health Organization estimates that 
125 million people in the world are exposed to asbestos in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, much more can be done in our province to 
prevent our workers from being exposed to asbestos in the 
workplace. It starts by taking the recommendations of groups 
like Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization 
seriously by expanding the current asbestos registry to include 
leased government buildings and licensing certification 
programs for abatement workers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call on all members to recognize this 
week as a time to raise awareness about asbestos-related 
diseases and to remember those lost and to remain vigilant in 
the protection of Saskatchewan workers and families. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Distillery Awarded for World’s Best Cask Gin  
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, last week at 
the prestigious World Drinks Awards a local Saskatchewan 
company was awarded the distinction of distilling the world’s 
best cask gin. This occurred at the World Gin Awards in 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

London, England. Black Fox Spirits of Saskatoon, owned by ag 
entrepreneurs John and Barb Cote, were selected top of the 
class from entrants submitting samples from around the world. 
 
Black Fox Spirits opened for business in August of 2015, taking 
over three years to construct, and acquiring technology and 
equipment from around the world. As a result, they now have a 
world-class facility located on Valley Road outside of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the dry gin ingredients are using triticale, 
rhubarb, and flowers that are grown on site or sourced locally, 
and all the indigents for all their products are produced the same 
way. I should also mention that they also have a whisky in the 
works, but it is aging in oak barrels as we speak.  
 
John Cote credits our government with helping to ensure that 
there is a regulatory environment “that fosters and encourages 
the production of quality products.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Cotes have been leaders in Saskatchewan agriculture for years. 
They were Saskatchewan and Canada’s Outstanding Young 
Farmers in 2001 and continue to be innovators.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join in congratulating 
the Cotes and Black Fox Spirits on winning the award for 
world’s best cask gin. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Gala 
 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last Friday I 
had the pleasure of attending A Night with STARS [Shock 
Trauma Air Rescue Society] Gala along with the Minister of 
Highway and Infrastructure, the Minister of Central Services, 
the member from Regina Rochdale, the member from 
Cannington, the member from Moosomin, and the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
This year’s gala was filled with entertainment, inspiring 
testimonials, and was successful in raising over $200,000 to 
keep STARS in Saskatchewan skies. The evening featured a 
performance by one of Saskatchewan’s favourite artists, Brad 
Johner and the Johner Boys. 
 
The highlight of the evening was hearing Kody Scholpp, one of 
STARS’ VIPs, or very important patients, speak about his 
experience with STARS and his incredible fight to stay alive. 
Kody was involved in a car accident in the middle of a blizzard 
and was ejected from his vehicle in the dark. Mr. Speaker, it 
took his friends 20 minutes to find him in the snow, and his 
body began to shut down as hypothermia took control. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, having STARS, with their specialized 
emergency equipment and medical professionals on board, 
successfully saved Kody’s life. Thanks to STARS and the 
generous donors who made this and many more rescues 
possible, Kody’s healthy and alive today and has completely 
recovered. 
 
It was great to attend this event with my colleagues and to be 
involved in giving back to our community, ensuring that access 

to these highly specialized emergency medical transport 
services are ready and available to the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the STARS foundation on a very successful 
event and thank the whole STARS team for the service they 
provide to the citizens of our province, especially the heroes in 
the blue suits. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 

Remembering Oliver Cameron 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to celebrate the life of one of my constituents. Oliver 
Cameron, better known as OC, passed away on March 29th. 
Born on Beardy’s First Nation, OC was known for his 
humorous personality and warm spirit. He dedicated his life to 
education, introducing the first teacher education program on 
the reserve he was from. Focusing on supporting youth 
employment, OC was a fantastic volunteer, selflessly giving his 
time to the nation’s Aboriginal Hockey Championships, North 
American Indigenous Games, and Sask Sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, OC’s passion for youth engagement and 
empowerment carried him through his career with Social 
Services, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, and 
Saskatchewan Indian Community College. He retired as 
director of Labour Force Development with the Saskatoon 
Tribal Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during his retirement, OC was given the honour of 
serving as coordinator and master of ceremonies for the pipe 
ceremonies of the Saskatoon Tribal Council. In his later years, 
OC enjoyed golfing, gardening, and cheering for his beloved 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. OC was remembered by his loved 
ones and community supporters this past Monday. Mr. Speaker, 
I ask all members to join me in commemorating the life of 
Oliver Cameron. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Knowledge Centre Promotes Carbon Capture and Storage 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, our government is 
proud of our carbon capture and sequestration facility at 
Boundary dam. This technology has the potential to literally 
change the world and have a significant impact on reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to share the news that last week 
the International CCS [carbon capture and storage] Knowledge 
Centre and the Global CCS Institute have signed an MOU 
[memorandum of understanding] to accelerate the development 
of CCS technology around the world. The International CCS 
Knowledge Centre at Innovation Place is already one of the 
leading innovators in this technology, and this new partnership 
will expand the reach of this transformative technology. 
 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

The CCS at Boundary dam 3 was the world’s first power 
project to successfully integrate carbon capture, transport, and 
storage, along with the creation of the knowledge centre, a 
partnership between SaskPower and BHP Billiton that helps 
accelerate knowledge of CCS around the world. 
 
While our government has invested in this technology, which 
has the potential to transform the world energy supply, the 
opposition seems to dismiss the hard work of SaskPower and 
their partners to make this project a success. In fact, just today 
the Premier has made it clear in his visit to Washington that 
CCS technology is a great option for the US [United States]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in this House to join me 
in welcoming the new MOU and thanking all of those at the 
CCS Knowledge Centre and its partners for their hard work. 
Thank you. 

 
QUESTION PERIOD 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 
is very quickly losing the trust of Saskatchewan people, and it’s 
not to hard to see why. On top of the broken promises, the 
callous cuts, the desperate sell-offs, and the billion-dollar tax 
hike, they refuse to be straight with Saskatchewan people. They 
refuse to even answer very simple, straightforward questions 
about their GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. Not in 
this House, not in the media, and they won’t even listen to the 
Privacy Commissioner. 
 
The Ministry of Highways received a freedom of information 
request for documents about the sale of land to CP [Canadian 
Pacific], CP Rail at the GTH. The government refused to 
release the records. The Privacy Commissioner was asked to 
intervene and our office asked Highways to see the documents 
too. Twice the Sask Party refused to release the documents. 
Twice the Privacy Commissioner called on the government to 
do so. Twice the Sask Party refused to do so again. To the 
Deputy Premier: why won’t the Sask Party release those 
documents today? What are they hiding? And why won’t they 
be straight with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course on this side of the House, we co-operate 
with the Privacy Commissioner and work with the 
commissioner on moving forward with those documents, as we 
co-operated with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the GTH. We asked the auditor to look into the 
matter, as did the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
And the auditor had full authority to look into all aspects of the 
transaction. She did so. She did a very thorough job of looking 
into the matter by her own testimony to the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
She made 10 recommendations, Mr. Speaker, eight for the 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure, two for the Global 
Transportation Hub. We are implementing or have implemented 
all 10 of those recommendations, Mr. Speaker, and accept those 
recommendations. 
 
The Provincial Auditor also stated at the conclusion, after her 
report was issued publicly that, I quote . . . These are the words 
of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, an exact quote from the 
Provincial Auditor: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. And we didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work, so there were no red flags there.  

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, how pathetic and how 
weak. The question was to the Deputy Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Instead we have the minister get up and puppet 
the same lines that are discredited day after day, that have been 
discredited by the auditor, making a mockery of accountability, 
and just showing how out of touch they are, Mr. Speaker, with 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, they refuse to accept any responsibility on front 
after front for any of their mismanagement, their scandal, or 
their waste; for their cuts that hurt families and target our kids; 
or for their billion-dollar tax grab that takes over $440 out of 
the average family’s pockets this year alone. On top of that, 
they’ve introduced job-killing taxes on our small businesses and 
on those that literally build Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday over and over again, when asked about 
their cuts and their hikes, members opposite came back with the 
weakest of answers, responses like, oh well, two other 
provinces are that bad, too; oh, these other provinces don’t have 
that program; oh, two decades ago this is how it was. What 
happened to keeping Saskatchewan strong? Don’t they realize 
these cuts and these tax hikes are doing nothing to strengthen 
Saskatchewan, but everything to weaken us? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve heard over and over again from the Leader of the 
Opposition that they don’t like the tax package, that we are 
moving from taxing income and productivity in this province to 
consumption taxes. Even coming from a party, Mr. Speaker, 
that has several members in here that were still in the former 
government, and just as recently, those 10 years ago under 
premier Calvert, that raised taxes 21 times in this province, Mr. 
Speaker — raised taxes 21 times in this province. 
 
With the changes we’ve made in this budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
budgets prior to this, we as the government have taken 112,000 
low-income people off the provincial tax rolls altogether in this 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

province, something the NDP never saw fit to do in 16 years in 
office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even with the expansion of our PST [provincial sales tax] base 
and an increase from 5 to 6 per cent . . . not as high as 9 per cent 
when you were in government, to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, 9 per cent PST when you were in government, 9 per 
cent. Even with, Mr. Speaker, even with the changes, in 2007 
under the NDP a person with $40,000 income paid $3,688 in 
combined provincial income tax and PST, Mr. Speaker. This 
year, with the changes to our tax plan, this year with the 
changes to our tax plan, that same individual making $40,000 
income will pay $2,939, Mr. Speaker — down 20 per cent from 
10 years ago. They’re paying 20 per cent less in combined 
provincial income tax and provincial sales tax in this province 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes it is a major shift. I acknowledge that. But we’re going to 
get this budget back to balance in three years time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, quite the response from 
the Finance minister, that not only couldn’t manage, but 
couldn’t keep his word to Saskatchewan people. You know, 
we’ve been hearing from people all across our province, 
Saskatchewan businesses. We’ve been hearing from our mayors 
and our councils and common-sense leaders, and in city after 
city, town after town, mayors and community leaders are telling 
us that they feel blindsided and ambushed by the downloading 
from that government. 
 
The cuts to the grants-in-lieu were done without consultation. 
Not even the decency of a heads-up, Mr. Speaker. Many cities 
and towns of course already completed their budget, but now 
they’re back to the drawing board because of these cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re being forced to put programming on the 
chopping block, infrastructure on the chopping block, and jobs 
on the chopping block. And they’re being forced to jack up 
property taxes in an unfair way, Mr. Speaker. One mayor, one 
mayor told me that it was like, it was like having one foot 
stomped on and the other one having a brick dropped upon it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Community leaders are upset. Their constituents are speaking 
out and so are they. Why won’t the Deputy Premier and the 
Sask Party listen to Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, there is no 
doubt this is a difficult budget and there is no doubt that we’ve 
asked our municipal partners to look for efficiencies to help 
with this budget as well, Mr. Speaker. There has been no sector 
that we have supported more than the municipalities. We have 
increased revenue sharing year over year over year. It is a 
predictable formula, which is something they had asked for 
when the previous members were in government and didn’t 
receive. 

But I would like to know, Mr. Speaker . . . because we all know 
that the resource revenue is down $1.2 billion. That’s not a 
secret, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking at the budget. The members 
opposite have had this budget for some time now. Where would 
they make the cut? Where would they find $36 million? Would 
it be in education? Would it be in health? We have not heard 
one suggestion coming from the members opposite. We’ve 
heard criticism after criticism after criticism, but where would 
they find it? We’ve asked our municipal partners for just 3 per 
cent of what we’re short, after years of giving them increases. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe the minister 
should stop listening to whoever is writing her talking points 
and start listening to the leaders in our cities and our towns. 
These mayors don’t want special . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — We might want to hear the question 
and we also would like to hear the answer, so I would just ask 
all members to respect the member that has the floor. I 
recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — These mayors don’t want special treatment, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They want the province to make good on 
their commitments and they want them to stop downloading 
Sask Party problems on their backs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
cities and towns need predictability and funding to take care of 
the people of this province, and all the minister can come up 
with, with an excuse, is a list of town names that she should be 
treating better. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this was all about fairness, why did the 
Sask Party not run this on their last campaign? Why did they 
not run on it in the by-election last month? And, Mr. Speaker, 
why weren’t they straight with the leadership of our cities and 
our towns before they made this cut? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and just for 
those that are watching, the document that I have is the budget 
document. That was the one that I referred that maybe the 
members opposite should take a look at and read, and see what 
cuts they would like to have in this document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting when she comments on 
downloading because I don’t believe increasing revenue sharing 
each and every year for every budget, which is predictable — 
it’s a predictable formula, Mr. Speaker — is downloading. The 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina alone are seeing two and a half 
times more than they did under the previous government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, record infrastructure spending in this province is 
somewhat but not entirely through shared programs with our 
municipalities. We have invested more money in infrastructure 
than the previous government, record spending in infrastructure. 
But not just shared programs, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 
stand-alone programs in all of our cities, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

see that as downloading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member opposite should take a look at 
her reading notes and maybe modify it. And the member 
opposite is beaking away, saying, talk to your mayors; maybe 
you should talk to your mayors. She knows perfectly well we 
have met with the mayors. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, municipalities are 
getting hit from all directions because of the Sask Party’s 
downloading. Mayors and councillors are speaking out, and not 
just about the cuts. They’re also frustrated by the lack of 
economic investment that they are seeing in their communities. 
Times are tough, but the Sask Party is only making it worse. 
 
Forestry has been an incredibly important industry to Prince 
Albert, and there is talk of reopening the Prince Albert mill. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with power bills continuing to 
skyrocket under the Sask Party, that looks a lot less likely to 
happen. And last year, the Meadow Lake mill warned about job 
losses with the Sask Party’s ever-increasing power rates. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people of Meadow Lake and the people of 
Prince Albert can’t afford to lose any more jobs. Can the 
minister show me what is in this budget that will help get these 
mills and jobs back? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll 
have to forgive me. I don’t have the detailed list for each and 
every city, but I can say how hard done by Saskatoon and 
Regina has been. Along with around . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The opposition member asked a 
question. The opposition members may want to listen to the 
minister’s answer. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but I would 
just like to bring to the member opposite’s attention, just in 
housing alone all across our entire province, we have invested 
now $714 million. In the city of Saskatoon, the children’s 
hospital, 235 million; two bridges, Mr. Speaker, 147 million; in 
capital expenditures at our U of S, 500 million; K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] schools in Saskatoon, 355 million; 
Shaw Centre, 7.3 million; Remai Art Gallery, 4.1 million; 
Gordie Howe Complex, 1.5 million. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In the city of Regina, let’s talk about the Mosaic Stadium, 80 
million; capital at the U of R, 60 million; K to 12 schools, 222 
million; IPSCO Place renovations, Co-operators Centre, Brandt 
Centre, 22.5 million; the Lewvan highway exchange, 18 
million; Regina bypass, $1.8 billion. There’s been $158 billion 
of private and government investment for growth in this 
province, and it’s a record that I don’t think is downloading. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Management of Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s strange, Mr. Speaker; we ask a question 
about the economy and forestry and we get a minister reading 
again from her speaking notes. You know what, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s talk about finance. The Finance minister talks all the time 
about the need to diversify the economy, but besides hiking 
taxes on families by a billion dollars, adding over $440 to the 
average family’s bills, they have no plan for diversifying at all. 
 
They say that they want 50 per cent renewable energy by 2030 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where’s the plan? They say they 
support pulp and paper, but besides the promises they make 
every election, where’s the plan? The budget is supposed to be 
the plan, but besides a list of cuts to the very programs we need 
to build for the future, where is the plan? A 1 per cent cut to the 
corporate tax rate will cost Saskatchewan $60 million a year, 
but attract exactly zero new companies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, does the Finance minister have a plan to 
diversify the economy and just doesn’t want to show it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
objectives of this government, and successfully attained, has 
been the diversification of this economy far beyond how it was 
diversified under their government. 
 
Just today, later today, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving second 
reading of the patent box legislation, the very first patent box 
program, and they’re dismissing it, Mr. Speaker. Dismissing it 
— that’s exactly what the NDP [New Democratic Party] do 
over there. They have no plan. They have no alternatives. They 
have no suggestions. 
 
So we’re introducing the patent box later today, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a manufacturers and processing tax decrease and 
change that’s going to make us the most competitive 
jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the most, most successful 
ways of diversifying an economy historically, and it has been 
shown over history, has been to open new markets, has been to 
open new markets. And how do you open new markets, Mr. 
Speaker? Through trade agreements. Every single trade 
agreement brought to the floor of this Assembly, whether it be 
the New West Partnership, whether it be the Canada free trade 
agreement which we will be signing later this week, which they 
oppose, Mr. Speaker; the Canada free trade agreement, which 
they oppose; the Canada-Europe trade agreement, which they 
oppose; the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which they oppose. As 
far as I know, Mr. Speaker, the free trade agreement with the 
United States, it’s still their position that they oppose the free 
trade agreement with the United States. 
 
This is a party opposed to trade. That’s how you open new 
markets, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana.  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a wee second there, I 
was hopeful that maybe the Economy minister could share the 
plan that the Finance minister isn’t able to share. But no, instead 
we get empty rhetoric and bluster. And with that we see that the 
Sask Party has been using that — empty rhetoric and bluster — 
to justify every bit of their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
And it’s now they’ve dragged this province into the financial 
mess that they now refuse to accept responsibility for. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in October of 2014, oil prices started to 
drop, and the writing was on the wall then, but the Sask Party 
ignored the signs. Why? Well, a more cynical person might say 
that the upcoming election just might have had something to do 
with it. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they put Sask Party politics 
ahead of Saskatchewan people. 
 
In 2016, they knew they needed to change the course, but 
instead of being straight with Saskatchewan people before the 
election they hid the budget and they hid the facts, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
How can the minister stand there now and act like the deficit — 
the $18 billion debt, the cuts, the tax hikes, the sell-offs — how 
can he not accept that all of that does not sit squarely on his 
shoulders? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy.  
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — We’re talking about an economic plan, 
Mr. Speaker. I talked about some of the initiatives that we’re 
taking. 
 
What do we know about their positions? They’re opposed to 
trade agreements. We know that — all trade agreements. They 
haven’t supported one of them, Mr. Speaker. We know they 
support the Leap Manifesto.  
 
Their next leader, their next leader actually has the courage of 
his convictions. He’s actually been probably the only one, the 
member from Meewasin, probably the only one, their next 
leader, to put some economic policy on the table. It’s not 
popular. It’s not going to be good for the economy, but we 
know what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know he supports the carbon tax. He’s been very, very clear 
about that. He supports Justin Trudeau’s carbon tax. We don’t, 
Mr. Speaker. We know he wants to shut down the coal industry, 
Mr. Speaker. On this side of the House, we don’t. But at least 
he has the courage to be honest about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that he’s sympathetic towards the Leap Manifesto — 
that’s been made clear — as is from the member who asked that 
question, Mr. Speaker. We know she supports the Leap 
Manifesto as well. On this side of the House, we don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to pursue economic 
policies that are going to create growth, not the policies on that 
side of the House that will damage and destroy this economy. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries and Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a total lack of responsibility 
and credibility. They’re acting like the cuts that they made on 
their spreadsheets are not the same ones hurting our kids. They 
know better than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so do the 
people of Saskatchewan. They are the ones who slashed 
funding to our public libraries. They’re the ones who forced 
libraries to make deep cuts, and they’re the ones who said that 
everything is on the table. And now that minister wants to 
lecture libraries about the interlibrary loans. Give me a break. 
 
On top of everything else, they’re trying to scrap STC. And 
now maybe the minister missed this while he was slashing 
funding to our families, our seniors, and our kids, but the loan 
system relied on STC. Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the Sask 
Party were gutting and slashing funding, what did they think 
was going to happen? Did they really think that no one would 
notice or that no one cares? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. It’s an interesting question because it 
talks about how we move books around the province. It talks 
about using STC. But over the last number of years, any 
number of routes for STC have been cut. Ask the member 
opposite what’s happening in those ones. Other couriers have 
sprung up in place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we started looking around at options 
to make our libraries more vibrant, make them vital, and make 
them more sustainable, do you know what we found out? 
Canada Post has got a book rate: $1 a book. Ship it right to the 
individual patron. Mr. Speaker, it’s not for us to tell libraries 
how to operate, but it is for us to say to them, you find some 
efficiencies. We’d like to work with you and have some 
officials work with you to find those things. 
 
And it’s not right for the members opposite to say this is 
something that can’t work, won’t work. That’s been the history 
of the members opposite. We’re not like that. We look for 
solutions. We look for economies. We look for sustainability on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I cannot 
wait for the library folks to hear that answer. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these are Sask Party cuts and so are the cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms. The Sask Party has eliminated school boards’ 
ability to raise money, so the minister got the school boards up 
against the wall and now he’s acting like the cuts that are 
happening aren’t his fault. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 
knows better than that and he should admit it. 
 
Regina Public has announced that pre-kindergarten programs 
will be cut for kids with autism, hearing problems, and kids 
who have experienced, and I’m quoting, “profound trauma and 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

neglect.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Sask Party are making our 
most vulnerable kids pay for their mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste. And we keep hearing about core services, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The Premier once said there was especially a 
role for government when it comes to those who are most 
vulnerable. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t think of anyone more 
vulnerable than these kids. What happened, Mr. Speaker? Why 
are the Sask Party targeting our kids? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, since 2008 the government 
has made a significant investment in pre-K [pre-kindergarten]. 
We’ve more than doubled the programs from 155 — this is in 
Regina — 2,480 spaces, to 316, which is 5,056 spaces. Each 
program has 16 spaces. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you as well, 
Regina Public has 41 pre-K programs, total cost of 2.577 
million. Twenty-three of those programs were created since 
2007-2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased Regina Public funding since 
’07-08 by 40 per cent. There’s been an enrolment growth during 
that period of time of 10 per cent. 
 
Regina Public provides some great services for their students. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re phasing out programs that are not funded 
by the provincial government. We intend to have some 
discussion with them. Those are programs that they’ve chosen 
to fund and created on their own. We’re not saying they’re good 
programs or bad programs. What we are saying is we want to 
look at them and see how they dovetail and fit in with the other 
things that we’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, those discussions 
are ongoing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of people that 
I hope are listening to these answers today. That is completely 
unacceptable. And I honestly have to ask: how can the minister 
stand in his place and give those so-called answers? 
 
He sat as the Chair of the public school board, and he knows 
how this works. Thanks to Sask Party cuts, kindergarten kids 
who live up to a full kilometre away from their school will have 
to walk to school. The minister may tell us not to worry though 
because, as it stands today, after decisions in this budget they 
will only have to walk to school every second day because 
kindergarten has been cancelled on every other day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Catholic school board in Regina says that 
they are contemplating 68 cuts that they’ve been forced to 
consider because of this shortfall. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is 
this minister ignoring calls from across the province to reverse 
the cuts to our libraries and to our classrooms, and how can he 
stand there and stand behind these cuts to our kids? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I made reference 
to certain communities in the province that don’t have a school 
anymore. There’s 176 of those schools that don’t exist because 
of the members opposite. I think I got as far yesterday as 

Windthorst, Lintlaw, Endeavour, Pleasantdale, Denzil, 
Sonningdale, Centennial Park in North Battleford, Alida, 
Gainsborough, Willowbrook, St. James, Dore Lake, St. John’s 
School in Estevan, Benson School in Benson, Margaret 
Mcclumb in Semans, Simpson School, Radisson. Mr. Speaker, 
the list goes on and on and on of schools that have been closed, 
people that have moved to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not taking lessons from those people. We’re 
working with our school divisions. We’re working with our 
libraries. We value the citizens of our province and we value the 
children of our province, and the people over there have no, no 
right to make any comments or any . . . [inaudible] . . . 
whatsoever because these are people that have demonstrated 
how utterly incompetent they are. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier and 
Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 63, The Education Amendment Act, be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy 
Premier and Minister of Education that Bill No. 63 be now 
introduced and read for a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 64, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 64, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

[14:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the bill be read again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report Bill 
No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017, a bilingual bill without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 47 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave is not granted. When will this 
bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize the 
Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later this 
day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Later this day. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Committee of the Whole. I now leave 
the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017/Loi de 2017 réduisant les 

traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée législative  
 
Clause 1 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Order. Committee 
of the Whole will come into order. Before us today is Bill No. 
47, An Act to Amend the Legislative Assembly Act, 2007. Clause 
1, short title. 
 
If we vote this off, then there are only questions on the specific 
clauses. So clause 1. I recognize the member . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Does the minister want to give a statement as 
well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, well you can do it in 
your response to his. Okay, I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And this is a 
very important process that we’re taking today because it is an 
important piece of legislation that we have here before us, Bill 
47. It’s one that is unique and different — we’ve not seen this 
kind of legislation in Saskatchewan in my memory — because 
it deals with a kind of an issue that should have been dealt with 
at the Board of Internal Economy. And I just want to introduce 
a few brief comments, and then we can go to clause by clause. 
And we have some amendments for clause by clause. 
 
But as I said, with this bill we can, and we have said in the 
media, we can live with the 3.5 per cent cut. We understand and 
we respect the government’s right as the majority party in the 
House to do that as they manage the affairs of the province, and 
so we respect that. 
 
But we have deep, deep, grave concerns that this is a flagrant 
attack on the caucus grants, both on the government side but 
particularly on the opposition’s side, because it interferes with 
our work to do the job of opposition here in Saskatchewan, 
which is very, very important, particularly in the matters that 
we’re dealing in the House, in question period, and we’ll be 
dealing with in estimates, and a significant budget that’s cutting 
so many needed programs in Saskatchewan and raising taxes 
and cutting programs. And so this is very, very important. 
 
I don’t want to make a long speech, but I do want to cover some 
key points. And I just want to read a brief quote into the record 
from last night, and it’s about The Opposition in a 
Parliamentary System, a quote from Gerald Schmitz, December 
1988. And it talks about the: 
 

. . . principle means that government must rest on the 
consent of the governed — which means, inter alia, that 
the minority accepts the right of the majority to make 
decisions, provided that there is a reciprocal respect for the 
minority’s right to dissent from these decisions and to 
promote alternative policies.  

 
And, Mr. Chair, that’s what we have been raising, our concern 
with the process since March 8th when we boycotted the Board 
of Internal Economy meeting with the rush to get a 3.5 per cent 
cut to the MLAs. We had already met twice before, once in 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

December and once in January, to deal with wage issues, where 
we accepted a freeze that was presented by this government. 
And then we saw a further request. And the typical process for 
the board to work on is for informal conversations to happen 
between both sides of the House, so that when we do meet in 
the committee, there are no surprises and we can all be on board 
and we can try to reach that common ground. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I just want to state the four key points, concerns, 
issues that we want to raise, and make sure that they’re 
highlighted. 
 
First, this bill overreaches and it punishes the opposition, which 
is a key component to the democratic government as we know it 
and we respect it in Saskatchewan. We have never seen such a 
point where this punitive action of imposing a 10 per cent cut 
on caucus grants has ever been done before. We accept the 3.5 
wage cut. We understand that. We understand that. But we 
don’t, we cannot condone and we can’t sit silently by while this 
government, with this kind of majority, imposes a 10 per cent 
cut to silence opposition in Saskatchewan. 
 
Second, Mr. Chair, is this bill underachieves and is a severe 
disappointment because it does not hold cabinet accountable for 
the mess that we are in. They would lead us to believe that this 
is all about natural resources, a collapse in natural resources. 
Now we understand what’s happening in Saskatchewan, but this 
is a cabinet that for the past 10 years have made the decisions 
that they have made, and eight of our best years, eight of our 
best years, failed to provide for those years when most people 
who’ve been in this province understand that the price of 
natural resources would go down. So it underachieves. It does 
not hold the cabinet to account. We’re asking for a 20 per cent 
cut on their bonuses, and that’s what should happen. 
 
Mr. Chair, we heard, in fact we heard today, we heard today 
that we offer no solutions. We offer no solutions. That is 
absolutely not true. That’s absolutely not true. We say, let’s 
take a look at this House because we are over-governed. We 
have five too many MLAs in this House.  
 
Now those folks over there, they cranked it up by three, did not 
campaign on that in 2011. All of a sudden we came back from 
the 2000 election. They said they wanted three more MLAs. We 
are the most over-governed province in Canada. We look to our 
neighbours in Manitoba. They represent 22,000. Here it’s 
16,000. Alberta is 45,000 and BC is 65,000 people. We have to 
do something. This is a sustainable initiative that would help us 
address the issue of making some solutions that they’re trying 
to reach. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I do want to say that, and this is the fourth and 
final point, that it’s a sad situation for the Board of Internal 
Economy that gets to solutions because of mutual respect that 
we have between both sides, and that has gone off the rails 
because this government has acted in haste and has failed to 
consult with the opposition. And we’ve actually had a good 
record of working together. We’ve hired four officers of the 
legislature. We’ve done that well. And we have changed some 
of the standing orders. We’ve worked on that. We’ve changed 
directives. We’ve worked on that. All of that has been 
productive, but we have gone off the rails and we really need to 
work to restore that relationship. So, Mr. Speaker, we see this 

happening in Ottawa right now. In fact the Conservatives, I 
understand, call it political thuggery that’s happening by the 
Liberals. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, those are my opening comments. I will have 
amendments to the clauses as we go through that. And with 
that, I’ll take my chair. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — I recognize the 
Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair, 
and I’d like to thank the member opposite for his submissions. I 
think, you know, members who were either watching or 
attending the discussion at Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice Committee last night would have seen, I think, a 
productive and for the most part thoughtful, coherent discussion 
around the matter. And I thank the member for reiterating some 
of the remarks he made last night, and I’m going to reiterate 
some of the remarks I had made as well in turn. 
 
And I would agree with the member that it’s very unfortunate 
that we are here in the Chamber having a debate at committee 
stage, which is very unusual in this House. This is I think only 
the second occurrence I can think of in the years I’ve been here, 
and I think only the second occurrence, since we changed the 
way legislation flows through the House, that this has occurred 
on. 
 
And this is a matter that is properly and should be before the 
Board of Internal Economy. We wanted to deal with the matter 
at the Board of Internal Economy. It very much would have 
been my preference to have the matter dealt with at the Board of 
Internal Economy, but the opposition didn’t show up at the 
Board of Internal Economy.  
 
[15:00] 
 
And the way the board is structured, the member pointed out 
rightly last night, which is correct, that the board is structured 
on a kind of two, two, and two basis. Two members of 
executive . . . or appointed by Executive Council, two members 
of the government not a member of Executive Council, and two 
members of the opposition. If any two members don’t show up 
at the board, the board can’t conduct its business. And the board 
is a creature of statute, not a parliamentary committee so subject 
to different rules of statute. So it’s a unique entity. 
 
So it’s unfortunate that we’re here. And I think it’s, as a 
precedent, I think it’s unfortunate for the institution that we 
would be here. And I know the member cares, cares a great deal 
about the institution. I do as well, Mr. Speaker, and I know . . . 
Or Mr. Chair. And I know that you very much do as well, and it 
is unfortunate that we’re here. 
 
I’m going to address the substance of the member’s argument 
with respect to the reduction matter, then I want to talk a bit 
about the role of opposition, which . . . I’ve been in opposition; 
I understand the role — not as long as the member opposite has 
been and will be. But that being said, it’s a significant and 
important role. 
 
As for the substance, I think the argument the member’s making 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

is that Executive Council . . . or executive government should 
bear a larger or a large portion of a reduction. And this bill, 
which is a very simple bill — it’s three clauses; we’ll go 
through it soon — reduces the salaries of members of the 
Assembly by 3.5 per cent, and it reduces the political offices of 
both government and opposition, which are taxpayer-funded 
offices, by 10 per cent each. So about $130,000 for the 
government side, and I believe a little over $60,000 for the 
opposition side. 
 
So in terms of reduction though, I want to just point to some 
facts with regard to executive government, and make a 
comparison to the last full year of the NDP government, which 
was ’06-07, compared to the last year of this government, a 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
The number of out-of-province trips in ’06-07, NDP was 131. 
In the last fiscal year the number of out-of-province trips for us 
was 44, down 66 per cent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I 
mean the members are heckling, Mr. Speaker. We gave the 
member opposite the right to put forward his arguments without 
interruption, and I would hope the Opposition House Leader 
would reciprocate as well, as we’re having a substantive debate. 
 
The cost of out-of-province travel in ’06-07 for the members 
opposite was $264,000; for us last year it was $75,000, 72 per 
cent less, reduction. The total for in- and out-of-province travel, 
the aggregate total for the NDP ’06-07 was $975,000; for us, 
$344,000, down 65 per cent. 
 
Executive air usage: their last year in government, ’06-07, 
$509,000; ’16-17 for us, $104,000, down 79.4 per cent. In 
addition to that, we announced that we will be discontinuing 
executive air and selling the aircraft, winding down the airline. 
The trip usage is down very, very significantly. 
 
I also would point to the cost of Executive Council, executive 
government, and ministers’ offices from our government versus 
the last full year of the NDP government. Monthly salaries 
down 30 per cent from the last year of NDP government, 
$365,000 lower per month — per month. Four million dollars 
per year. Very significant, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five less staff 
in Executive Council under this side of the House than under 
that side of the House. Twenty-seven fewer staff in ministers’ 
office on this side of the House versus when members opposite 
were in the House. So very significant reductions, far, far in 
excess. 
 
And I understand the political imperatives for members 
opposite putting forward the arguments that they are. But 
substantively the political costs of government, which is I think 
what they are getting at, and the political costs of Executive 
Council, which I think is what they are getting at, are down 
massively from what they were under the NDP. 
 
And you know, with respect to the argument advanced by the 
member opposite with respect to the role of the opposition, I 
would take the argument seriously and I do take the argument 
seriously. I think the argument is overwrought — that a $64,000 
reduction in a caucus office, political office taxpayer stipend 
would have as detrimental an impact on their ability to oppose. 
 
In past years we know, we know budgets for the party, the 

political offices, have been significantly less. We know that 
there was a 25 per cent reduction to caucus office budgets in the 
early ’90s proposed and instituted by the members opposite. 
But we also know, we also know the history of the development 
of our parliamentary system. Everybody knows of the, you 
know, Magna Carta obviously, which . . . What all of these 
things led to was the Bill of Rights and the Act of Settlement. 
And these are kind of the cornerstones of the British 
constitution which, you know, consisted of parliament . . . You 
know, there were party groupings-ish at that point in 
Westminster, Mr. Speaker, but the biggest party grouping was 
largely parliament versus the Crown and parliament asserting 
its rights and privileges versus the Crown, at which point it was 
very dangerous to do so. 
 
And you know, I pointed out yesterday, we still have vestigial 
sort of traits with respect to that and practices in this Assembly, 
the Speaker being dragged up against his will to the front of the 
room being one of them, when newly elected. That’s because 
Speakers used to actually be, you know, regularly executed by 
the Crown for asserting the rights of parliament versus the 
Crown. And it was a very dangerous thing to be in opposition to 
the Crown, but there were very brave parliamentarians 
throughout the course of the development of the Westminster 
system that asserted that authority of parliament. 
 
And it was largely traded by the Crown when the Crown needed 
money, when the Crown largely needed money to wage wars 
was the main reason. And parliament would assert its authority 
and say, in order for us to grant you certain taxation revenue, 
you’re going to have to give us some additional money. And 
that kind of culminated . . . And there were a number of 
important points along the way in the development of 
parliament, but I think the Bill of Rights in 1689, in the 
immediate aftermath of the Glorious Revolution in 1688, would 
be the kind of seminal constitutional document in the 
Westminster system. 
 
And people hear Bill of Rights and they assume, well that 
means the rights of individuals and subjects, and that’s not 
actually the case. The Bill of Rights is about the rights of 
parliament versus the Crown. And the Bill of Rights entailed 
free elections and required there to be freedom of speech in 
parliament on all these matters. So I don’t take this lightly in 
terms of the argument the member makes of the importance of 
an opposition in a parliamentary system. 
 
I would say, having spent some time in Ottawa, that our 
legislature is a model of how a Westminster parliament should 
work vis-à-vis Ottawa where you have, you know, the motion 6 
that the government introduced last year, which was a genuine 
travesty. And if Harper, the former Prime Minister Harper had 
ever introduced something even approaching that, I could only 
imagine the newspaper headlines and editorials about it. But 
somehow they more or less got away with introducing it. They 
ended up rescinding it. It was a motion of the House, which was 
a good thing. They’ve tried to do the same, a similar thing with 
a report issued which was debated last week in the procedure 
and house affairs committee, filibustered successfully for now 
by the official opposition in Ottawa along with members of the 
member’s party in Ottawa also. 
 
So all this to say that I don’t take the argument he makes lightly 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

with respect to the role of opposition. And my colleagues have 
heard from me as well when we have discussions around these 
things that, you know, one day we’re going to be in opposition 
as well, and the rights and authorities of the institution and the 
opposition within the institution are something we need to keep 
in mind when going through standing order revisions or 
directive changes with things of this nature. So I don’t take it 
lightly. I would contend that the arguments advanced with 
respect to the impacts of a reduction of 10 per cent in the caucus 
office, political office budget are overwrought. And for that 
reason, I won’t be supporting and the government won’t be 
supporting amendments in that regard. And we will be 
supporting the bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Okay, if there are 
no further questions, short title, clause 1, is that approved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
Clause 2 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Clause 2. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have an 
amendment that I would present to the table. Okay, I would . . . 
I’ll read my motion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. Well I 
won’t talk long but I do have . . . This is regarding section 
46.1(c), and this is the removal, striking out the line where the 
funding to each caucus pursuant to clause 54(a) is reduced by 
10 per cent. 
 
We’ve talked about this in the House. We’ve had committee. 
But I do want to move this motion. So I move clause 2 of the 
printed bill to be amended: 
 

Amend Clause 2 of the Printed Bill by striking out 46.1(c) 
as being enacted by Clause 2 of the Printed Bill. 

 
And I’ve signed it today. And I also will present a French 
version as well. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — The member for 
Saskatoon Centre has moved: 
 

That Clause 2 be amended of the Printed Bill by striking 
out 46.1(c), as being enacted by Clause 2 of the Printed 
Bill.  

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Is the amendment 
approved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 

The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — The amendment 
fails. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:12 until 15:16.] 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — All those in favour 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer   
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — All those opposed 
please rise. 
 

[Nays — 43] 
 
Moe Stewart Wyant 
Reiter Morgan Harpauer 
Doherty Duncan Beaudry-Mellor 
Hargrave Heppner Boyd 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ross 
Weekes Brkich Kirsch 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox  
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Order. 
 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding  
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Chair, those in favour of the motion, 
10; those opposed, 43. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — I declare the 
motion lost. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have one more 
amendment for clause 2. This amendment deals with the 
suggestion we had, the belief that we have that the cabinet 
members who have created the situation, the mess that we find 
ourselves in, should have some penalty on their bonus that they 
receive — that in fact they’re asking others throughout the 
province to shoulder a much harder, a much bigger part of the 
solution than they are. We think that they should accept a 20 per 
cent cut in their bonus. And so I’d like to read the amendment: 
 
Clause 2 of the Printed Bill 
 

Amend Clause 2 of the Printed Bill, by adding the 
following after proposed section 46.1: 

 
Maximum payments — Members of Executive 
Council 
46.2(1) Notwithstanding any other Act, law, or 
Order-in-Council, any member who is also a member of 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

executive council is not entitled to and must not receive 
more than $39,175 in annual salary funded from the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
(2) Any amount that exceeds the maximum set out in 
subsection (1) is a debt due to the Crown and may be 
recovered pursuant to The Financial Administration Act, 
1993. 

 
I have dated this today and I have signed, and I have a French 
version. I do so present. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — The member for 
Saskatoon Centre has presented an amendment to clause 2. Will 
you take the amendment as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — The nos have it. I 
recognize the members . . . Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:21 until 15:22.] 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — All those in favour 
please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer   
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — All those opposed 
please rise. 
 

[Nays — 43] 
 
Moe Stewart Wyant 
Reiter Morgan Harpauer 
Doherty Duncan Beaudry-Mellor 
Hargrave Heppner Boyd 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ross 
Weekes Brkich Kirsch 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis McMorris Carr 

Nerlien Lambert Buckingham 
Kaeding   
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Chair, those in favour of the motion, 
10; those opposed, 43. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — I declare the 
motion lost. 
 
Clause 2, is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to agree? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. 
 
[Clause 2 agreed to.] 
 
[Clause 3 agreed to.] 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — By Her Majesty, 
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce 
Salaries of Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . That’s a statement. I recognize the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 47 be reported without amendment. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — It has been moved 
by the committee that the committee report Bill No. 47 without 
amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. Mr. House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise, report progress back to the Chair. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — It has been moved 
by the Government House Leader that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington.  
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017, a bilingual bill, without 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

amendment, and ask that the committee . . . I’ve been instructed 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cannington has 
reported Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly, 2017, without amendment. The 
minister may move third reading. I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017/Loi de 2017 réduisant les 

traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
37, An Act to Reduce the Salaries of Members of the Legislative 
Assembly, 2017 be now read a third time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation 
Incentive (Patent Box) Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to rise again today to speak on second reading 
of the Saskatchewan commercial innovation incentive bill. This 
new growth tax incentive will offer eligible corporations a 
reduction of the provincial corporate income tax rate. The 
reduction would be to a rate of 6 per cent on qualifying income 
for a period of 10 years. To be eligible for this incentive, 
corporations will need to have qualifying intellectual property 
that is commercially developed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Eligible corporations will be able to extend the benefit period to 
15 years if the majority of the related research and development 
has been conducted in our province. To ensure this new 
incentive is available to as many innovation sectors as possible, 
it will cover various types of intellectual property including 
patents, plant breeders’ rights, trade secrets, and copyrighting 
areas such as computer programs and algorithms. 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan commercial innovation 
incentive will make Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction in North 
America to offer a broadly defined intellectual property 
commercialization program. Qualification will be determined 
based on criteria outlined in the incentive’s established 
scientific and economic eligibility tests, and the National 
Research Council’s industrial research assistance program, or 
IRAP, will be a program partner in assessing the scientific test. 
 
Established in 1962, NRC [National Research Council] IRAP is 
widely respected for its long record of outstanding outcomes in 
the area of innovation and commercialization assistance to 
Canadian companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to note that extensive consultations 
went into the design of this new incentive. A working group 
was established with members from across the Government of 
Saskatchewan, including the ministries of Economy and 
Agriculture as well as Innovation Saskatchewan. The group 
consulted with innovation-focused companies, industry 
associations, relevant legal experts, local innovation institutions 
and organizations as well as small- and medium-sized 
enterprises across the province. 
 
All of this preparation was necessary to design a program that 
will improve Saskatchewan’s investment climate across all 
innovation sectors by incentivizing local companies from 
around the world to bring intellectual property to local, national, 
and international markets from our province, and promoting 
increased commercially focused research and development 
activity in the province. 
 
To apply for the Saskatchewan commercial innovation 
incentive, a company will need to successfully complete a 
scientific as well as an economic eligibility test. Application for 
the scientific eligibility test will be conducted online through 
the Ministry of the Economy. On successfully completing the 
test, this company will need to create an eligible corporation 
solely dedicated to the commercialization of goods, services, or 
processes directly related to their qualifying intellectual 
property and related research and development activities. 
 
This will isolate revenues and expenses generated through 
qualifying intellectual-property-related activities from other 
corporate income earned through other activities. We found this 
requirement was necessary to protect the integrity of both the 
program and our taxation system. 
 
In addition, before an eligible corporate entity is able to claim a 
tax benefit, they will have to demonstrate new economic growth 
benefits to our province. These could include the creation of 
new jobs, significant new capital expenditures, new research 
and development spending, and new tax revenues. The 
government will also allow applicants to propose additional 
new economic benefit benchmarks to the province not captured 
in the previous benchmarks. This benchmark must be 
pre-approved by the Minister of the Economy when a company 
first submits its scientific eligibility application. 
 
Once the economic eligibility test is successfully completed, the 
corporation can begin to claim its provincial corporate income 
tax rebate at a time of its choosing. This flexibility to decide 
when to begin the 10- or 15-year corporate income tax rebate 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

period is significant for eligible corporations because it will 
allow them to scale up operations and profitability before they 
start claiming the rebate. 
 
This new tax incentive is a fulfillment of a promise we made to 
the people of the province that will position our province as a 
world-class destination for companies looking to bring new 
innovations to market, will help diversify and strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s economy, advancing a number of our 
government’s priority listed in the plan for growth. It will also 
help ensure our province’s economic competitiveness, improve 
and expand our priority sectors by encouraging the introduction 
of new productivity-enhancing innovations, and create greater 
opportunities to secure foreign direct investment and 
entrepreneurial talent attraction. 
 
More importantly, through this incentive, our government is 
planning for a future where Saskatchewan can continue to lead 
on the innovation front for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 
people. Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive Act. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Economy has 
moved that Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan Commercial 
Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I think what’s really important is that as you look through this 
bill and we can certainly . . . From our perspective as the 
official opposition, there’s no question that we have to make 
Saskatchewan a very competitive, business-friendly 
environment. 
 
There’s always opportunity for us to showcase the history that 
the NDP had when it came to economic development strategies, 
in particular, attracting the oil and gas sector to be able to come 
to Saskatchewan, establish their businesses here, and certainly 
create the jobs and the benefits that we’ve seen for the past 10 
years, Mr. Speaker. So we’re very proud of our history of 
making sure that if we diversified the economy, we’d be a very 
attractive place in which businesses can thrive and certainly 
exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s really important I think . . . 
In meeting with a number of very solid corporate partners in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they always talk about stability, and 
predictability as well, Mr. Speaker. I think those are really solid 
hallmark messages from industry itself. 
 
So when you have the added PST on some of the construction 
industry that’s impacted, Mr. Speaker, that is not predictability. 
That is not stability, as we’ve seen evidence of the 
Saskatchewan Party undertaking at this last budget. We see 
some of the callous cuts and the billion dollars more in taxes 
that the Saskatchewan Party have placed on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So everything from children’s 
clothing to libraries closing to STC closing, Mr. Speaker — 
these are all things that add to the challenges of trying to keep 
our economy strong by keeping our families strong and our 
taxes low and our services superior, Mr. Speaker. 

So I think we have a lot of work to do on this particular file. 
Our caucus is going to be looking at this bill very thoroughly, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that the hurt that’s out there in 
Saskatchewanland is very apparent. We’re getting a lot of 
information. A lot of people are very, very, very angry at this 
government for the callous cuts that they made most recently, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is from a government that had a robust 
economy. They had money in the bank, all of which they 
inherited, Mr. Speaker. And yet here we are today facing a $1.3 
billion deficit in 2017 alone. And our debt will grow to 23 
billion. 
 
These are disincentives, Mr. Speaker, for making the 
Saskatchewan economy strong. It’s all part of the picture, Mr. 
Speaker. So when we have these bills that are coming forward, 
there’s a number of questions that we ask. And obviously, 
there’s a couple of flags that I want to point out here as well. 
Number one, the section 9(2), subsection 9(2) gives the minister 
the authority to override the economic test and grant the permit 
at the minister’s discretion, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question 
that the government shouldn’t be in the business of picking 
winners and losers. We’ve seen that act from this government 
way too often, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s a lot of things that we have to ascertain as to how this 
bill will affect the economic plan for the people of 
Saskatchewan. If there is . . . There’s obviously none from the 
Saskatchewan Party, but overall there is a corporate plan by 
many of the business communities throughout the province. 
And they need to know how this will impact their investment 
and how it’ll also affect the neighbourhood, so to speak, when it 
comes to business development and the people that are driving 
that change, Mr. Speaker. How does this impact the trade 
agreements? Is there anything within this bill that violates trade 
agreements? These are some of the fundamental questions that 
we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But obviously at the outset I would say that our caucus is 
looking at this bill. We’re looking at it very thoroughly. We’re 
going to be networking with different organizations that have 
most recently been angered by this government’s activity 
around the budget — a $1.3 billion deficit, a $1 billion tax grab, 
and hurting the poor of the poor, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
something that we’ve seen evidence of the Saskatchewan Party 
for this last several years. So we simply do not trust anything 
that the Saskatchewan Party brings forward. 
 
While we agree diversifying the economy is really important, 
being a place to attract investments is equally important, Mr. 
Speaker. But also having a strong, vibrant Crown sector, a good 
labour force, and a good pool of highly skilled people to drive 
some of the industry, Mr. Speaker. These are all basic things 
that we speak about. 
 
So this is something that we’re going to obviously be putting 
through the microscope from the official opposition’s 
perspective, and it’s something that we ought to pay attention to 
as well. So, Mr. Speaker, on that note, I move that we adjourn 
Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation 
Incentive (Patent Box) Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today to speak on second reading 
of the amendments to Bill 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations Amendment Act. These amendments to 
the Act will allow for the following change: they will reduce the 
provincial tax credit rate from 20 per cent to 17.5 per cent for 
the 2018 and subsequent tax years. The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Regulations will also soon be 
amended to reduce the program cap for pool funds from $80 
million to $70 million annually and reduce the annual fund cap 
from $40 million to $35 million annually. 
 
The amendments to the Act and regulations will allow for the 
reduction of the maximum annual foregone revenue from $16 
million to $12 million, and the reduction of the individual tax 
credit amount from 1,000 to $875 annually for individual 
taxpayers who invest the maximum $5,000 annually. 
 
In addition to the changes I’ve listed, the amendments to the 
Act will transfer the responsibility of issuing tax credits from 
the Minister of the Economy to SaskWorks Venture Fund Inc. 
and Golden Opportunities Fund Inc., where they will be issued 
electronically. These are the only pool funds registered under 
the program at this time. In the past, the Ministry of the 
Economy printed and mailed out approximately 25,000 tax 
credits to investors. However for the 2016 tax year, this service 
has been contracted out to a third party to assist in cutting costs. 
This transfer will reduce government expenses. Issuing the 
electronic tax credits will also save significant printing and 
mailing costs for the fund issuers and will allow the credits to 
be delivered sooner to investors. 
 
These amendments have been arrived at from consultation and 
collaboration between SaskWorks Venture Fund Inc. and 
Golden Opportunities Fund Inc. Government understands that 
small- and medium-sized businesses in Saskatchewan have a 
need for long-term, patient capital and we have provided 
enough resources to ensure that the labour-sponsored venture 
capital corporation industry will continue to be available to fund 
the growth of those businesses. These amendments to the Act 
will ensure the sustainability and success of these funds into the 
future while ensuring the province can meet the challenge 
presented by reduced resource revenues, for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of amendments to 
Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Economy has 

moved that Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I’m pleased to stand in my place to give the initial 
comments around Bill No. 62. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is . . . 
I’m going to be very succinct in my comments as it relates to 
not only this particular bill, but Bill 61. On one hand, we have 
the Government of Saskatchewan proposing The Saskatchewan 
Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act, in which 
they’re able to strategically give credit, tax credits of course, to 
companies that are doing certain things in certain ways. And as 
I made reference to earlier that we want to ascertain whether 
those are good programs through the business contacts that we 
do enjoy and determine whether that particular program is of 
value to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the very next Act comes along and says, 
okay well we’re going to give a special deal to the larger 
corporations, and we’re going to again evaluate those deals as 
to whether they are effective or not. But then all of a sudden 
they bring along Bill 62 which reduces the tax credit given to 
investors in labour-sponsored capital corporations from 20 per 
cent to seventeen and a half per cent, Mr. Speaker. So cutting 
this tax credit for those that want to invest in 
Saskatchewan-based businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what our argument is all the time when it comes to the 
Saskatchewan Party. We don’t believe, we have absolutely no 
confidence that they know what they’re doing because of bills 
of this sort. You have one Bill 61 that contradicts Bill 62 and 
really you begin to wonder does anybody know what they’re 
doing on that side when it comes to economic planning, Mr. 
Speaker. Because on one hand, the left hand doesn’t know what 
the right hand’s doing. And this is exactly the contrast that I 
want to make on Bill 61, where they’re giving certain 
corporations the tax breaks and, on the other hand, on the 
labour-sponsored venture capital, they’re taking away the tax 
credit, Mr. Speaker, of people that want to invest here in the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are 50,000 people that invest in this particular program, 
Mr. Speaker. We think that this will hurt our economy. We 
think this will hurt families and, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
question that even the impacts on the credit union systems that 
do a lot of investing into our communities and to our 
businesses, that’ll also hurt. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is part of the problem that we see when it 
comes to the Saskatchewan Party. We simply believe and we 
strongly believe, and I for one strongly believe that they simply 
do not know what they are doing. So here we have a 
helter-skelter approach. On one hand they’re giving companies 
a certain tax break. On the other hand there’s Bill 62, alludes to 
they’re reducing the tax credit for investors into 
Saskatchewan-based businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we go again. Confusion reigns in the Saskatchewan 
Party ranks, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s important that on 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

the official opposition’s perspective, we take the time. We 
research. We do the networking. We contact the business 
groups that know what’s going on, and we tell them.  
 
And the most recent example is a billion-dollar tax grab for the 
Saskatchewan Party that couldn’t manage their way out of a wet 
paper bag, Mr. Speaker. And here we have another example of 
the confusion between the Minister of Finance and the Minister 
of the Economy. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the reason why we 
have absolutely no confidence in their ability to not only 
diversify our economy, but to strengthen our economy because 
of the contrasting positions that they have on Bill 61 and Bill 
62. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on 
this bill. There will be a lot more capable people that will 
express their opinions, and I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 62. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 48 — The 
Education Property Tax Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to enter into debate on 
Bill No. 48, The Education Property Tax Act. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of course there’s a lot that’s going on in education 
right now in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this Act is 
but one part of it. But I think, as with all bills before us, it’s best 
that we understand it, not in isolation which causes all sorts of 
problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that we look at it within a 
larger context. 
 
So this bill that’s before us, in summary, proposes that rather 
than municipalities collecting education property tax and 
directing it to school boards, who then would submit it to the 
Ministry of Education, to the provincial government, that that 
education property tax would be collected and then directed 
directly into the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And this isn’t the first that we’ve heard of this proposal. I know 
last year I remember we did some media, and I know that the 
SSBA had some things to say about it at that time. 
 
At that point, the president, Connie Bailey, noted that their 
position has always been that education property tax should be 
made for education only. We think that our taxpayers in our 
communities, and those in education would expect that there is 
transparency on that level. So I think I’ll start with her 

comments there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that there 
was some retort that of course that would happen, that those 
monies would be directed back into education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I think that there’s a lot of reason out there for 
some skepticism about that. 
 
We see a budget before us right now that proposes to collect an 
additional $67 million in education property tax while at the 
same time pulling $54 million for the next school year out of 
the education system, the classroom funding alone. And of 
course that has had devastating impacts that are starting to roll 
in at this point. 
 
This is also . . . Part of this context is the fact that last year there 
was a contract signed with teachers which had some very 
modest incremental increases in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
the minister made a point of noting that he was only going to 
forward half the money for that contract that had his signature 
on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So boards, I think, are quite 
reasonably a bit wary, if I can use that term, that the money that 
is being collected in education property tax and then going 
straight into the GRF [General Revenue Fund], that it’ll find its 
way into our classrooms.  
 
And that’s exactly where it is needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
have a crisis of funding in our classrooms right now. But we 
also have a crisis of trust and of direction that really dates back, 
you know, not just to this bill, not even back to last year. I 
would go back, certainly all the way back to 2009 when the 
decision was made to take away the ability of boards to set their 
own mill rates. And what we’ve seen since then has really been 
an interim funding model, and there has been a real lack of 
clarity, of predictability, certainly of adequacy. And that 
adequacy was really compromised to a higher degree over the 
last several years. So this isn’t the first year that schools and the 
classrooms have dealt with underfunding from this government. 
It has been a series of years. 
 
One of things that has not been really well addressed is growth, 
funding for growth within the sector. I know growth 
traditionally, when funding was coming forth for school boards, 
the number of students, it was based on the September 31st 
enrolments, which meant when you had schools that had growth 
that sometimes there was even an 18-month lag in boards 
actually receiving that funding, the way it was calculated. And 
this, as you can imagine, when you’ve got systems like 
Saskatoon Public, for example, that are seeing about 900 
additional students in their system every year and there’s no 
funding for them, that that is a problem. I think Regina Public’s 
about 700. And certainly there are systems around the province 
that have seen growth that hasn’t been properly funded.  
 
And that is one of the concerns that school boards have. The 
issue of the funding model, again we saw that introduced on 
budget day. In fact there was a lot of information out there 
around education, but I’m afraid not a lot of answers. 
 
And I know that the school boards and I’m sure that ratepayers 
as well will want to have full assurances that any money 
collected for education finds its way back into education. And 
they want some accounting of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
want it accounted for, how much is collected within every 
school division directed into the GRF and how much comes 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

back to them. And again I mean we had legislation that was 
introduced today, a bill that will really thwart — we don’t know 
the full extent yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but will really thwart 
those local voices. 
 
We just had people go around the province. I know that we did. 
Members on this side did. But there was also Mr. Perrins as 
well as a panel that went around the province hearing from 
people. And one of the things that they heard very, very clearly 
was that people value local voice. They value local autonomy 
within education. And they don’t just mean, keep my school 
board because, you know, I like to see a picture of my school 
board trustees up on a wall. They meant that they value local 
voice, autonomy, and local decision making. They want to 
know that the money and the care that they put into their local 
school, that it is being looked after and directed by people who 
understand their community, by people who are elected by 
people in that area, and really that there’s accountability to 
those people who support those schools. 
 
And if they are not happy with their performance, they can 
phone them. I know a lot of trustees, they publish their 
cellphone numbers. They live in those communities. They shop 
and their kids go to school in those communities. And they’re 
accessible in a way that the minister would not be or anyone. 
You know, the minister in Regina won’t know what’s going on 
in Fox Valley or in Creighton or in Meadow Lake or down in 
Milestone or any place like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that 
we heard that that’s very important to people around this 
province. 
 
But the decision that was undertaken, it would appear, is to 
keep those boards, but really cut off any ability that they have to 
make decisions, to make monetary decisions, to direct how 
money is spent within the school division. I think that really 
breaks the spirit of what people were telling the panel, the folks 
moving around the province. So that sort of lends to the context 
of this bill and why there is really a lack of trust about just how 
these funds will be directed into education. 
 
You know, we’re seeing those very, very difficult decisions 
coming across right now — cutting of pre-K programs, cutting 
of busing distances, cutting of staff, cutting of support staff, 
supports really for the most vulnerable children in our systems, 
but really supports for all students, increasing class sizes. And 
I’m afraid that, you know, there’s more to come within 
education. 
 
And it is really, you know, frustrating when we have had this 
time, especially in a system like education where we’ve had all 
of this time to . . . You know, really record revenues. We 
could’ve invested in the system in a meaningful way and seen 
by now a return on that investment. Not only those kids getting 
the best education that we could possibly give them, but also 
we’d be seeing dividends in terms of, you know, kids being 
ready to learn, kids not needing additional support, children 
being able to seize opportunities to go on to post-secondary 
education and really to fulfill their potential. 
 
What we’ve seen instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will be 
careful with my words, but I don’t think that I can 
over-characterize exactly how difficult things are in our 
education system right now and how low the level of trust is out 

there, how high the level of frustration and angst. And you 
know, we hear it everywhere. And it’s amazing. Every local 
context is different, but we really hear the same things, no 
matter where we’re at, a lack of feeling of being respected and 
heard, a lack of understanding about how education . . . the state 
of education in classrooms around this province. 
 
And it really seems a funny place just in terms of, you know, 
what is, I suppose, morally right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 
of, you know, asking kids to pay for a situation that they didn’t 
create. But really an unfortunate, at best, way to deal with the 
budget crisis, to actually axe in a place like education where 
really this is our future. This is how we’re going to make our 
way. This is how we diversify the economy. This is how we 
make sure that workers and people in this province have the 
skills that they need to think creatively about the problems that 
are before us. So I suppose, you know, the taxation is one small 
part of this, but I think you really do have to look at it in the 
larger context. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I guess another question just in terms of, you know, how this 
bill has rolled out . . . We have The Education Property Tax Act 
and the consequential amendments Act, but what this does is 
actually replace a number of . . . This is a brand new bill that 
replaces sections in a number of bills. And I’m just going to see 
if I can find all of the bills that it replaces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So that would be a question that I would have is why we are 
seeing this whole new bill in front of us. 
 
So this education property tax Act replaces sections in The 
Cities Act, The Revenue and Financial Services Act, The 
Education Act, The Government Relations Administration Act, 
The Municipalities Act, The Northern Municipalities Act, and 
The Tax Enforcement Act. And so that would just be a question 
that I would have. And I know that there will be a lot of 
questions and assurances sought as we move into committee 
with this bill. 
 
I know that there will be also a lot of attention on this piece of 
legislation as well as the one that was introduced today. And we 
will be hoping that we’ll have every opportunity to meet with 
stakeholders, those who will be impacted by both, I guess all 
three pieces of legislation, and really take some serious thought 
about what it is that is going on in our education sector right 
now and where we want to go in this province. We have an 
opportunity. We’ve perhaps missed one window, but we always 
have a new opportunity to sit down and really, you know, think 
and put in the hard work and the creative vision of what it could 
look like in this province if we really invested in education in 
the way that it deserves, that our kids deserve frankly, that the 
future of this province deserves. 
 
So we will continue to meet with those stakeholders. We will 
continue to reach out to people and get their feedback on this 
bill that we see before us and the next one that I will be 
speaking to. But I think we’ll have the best opportunity perhaps 
to have some time in committee to ask some of those questions. 
 
So with that, I would like to move that this . . . Okay. With that, 
I will conclude my comments. 
 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill 
No. 48, The Education Property Tax Act be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 48, the education property tax amendment 
Act, be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 49 — The 
Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017/Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Education Property Tax Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise now to 
enter into debate on Bill No. 49, which is the consequential 
amendment Act to The Education Property Tax Act that I just 
spoke to. Again I’ll note that this is a brand new bill, so we’ll be 
having some time to look at all aspects of it, including the 
consequential amendments which is the second piece of 
legislation. 
 
And maybe just to summarize some of, you know, on the whole 
what the two bills together mean and some of the questions that 
we have, to recap for those who missed the first part, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what we have here is a proposal for 
municipalities to collect the education property tax and to remit 
that property tax directly into the General Revenue Fund. And 
this is something again that we will be meeting with 
stakeholders, such as I noted the SSBA, who had some 
comments about this back last year when this idea was first 
floated. And their main concern was that the monies collected, 
that they be transparently accounted for and set aside in a way 
that made it apparent how much was collected in education 
property tax and from each division, and how that money was 
accounted for and flowing back into the education sector. 
 
I’m just looking through some comments here. And again the 
broader context of that is, you know, not only this bill, which is 
a new bill, but really the level of trust that exists within the 
sector right now. 
 
We have seen, you know, in addition to the underfunding of 

education, some lack of clarity, transparency, long-term 
planning. You know, some of the things that school boards have 
been asking for, for a number of years — I mean going back to 
2009 for sure is what I can speak to with some first-hand 
experience — would be predictability, accountability within . . . 
for funding for that sector. And of course that major change 
going back to 2009, which was when the decision was made to 
remove boards’ ability to set their own mill rate for education 
property tax. Public school boards, I guess. 
 
And that’s something to mention. Within this legislation it does 
note — I’m just going to look for it here, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— that there are some, constitutionally there are some different 
provisions made, of course, for Catholic school boards in the 
province. But in that it respects that this is also legislation 
brought forth that does provide direction in both English and 
French, I think, which is appropriate, and this is something that 
my colleague has noted before, that that is important that we 
have that, you know. 
 
But getting back to the confidence that boards have, but not 
only boards. I think those people that are paying education 
property tax and those who are concerned about education and 
educational services in the province, we’ve seen that with this 
budget alone, an additional $67 million being collected in 
educational property tax, yet at the same time, as I noted earlier, 
a $54 million reduction in the money going right into, going 
into classrooms. This at a time . . . You know, the government 
likes to talk about opening 21 new schools, which is a real 
thing, but that doesn’t get you education alone, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You have to staff those schools, make sure that kids 
have buses to get to those schools, furniture, you know. And not 
just the teaching staff. You have the educational assistants and 
the occupational therapists, all those who maintain our schools. 
These are all important parts. Members opposite talk about the 
core services of government, but you have to understand how 
these services all fit together to be able to provide education to 
our children. You know, it wouldn’t take a long time in a 
classroom if you weren’t cleaning the desks, before you would 
find that most of your kids in the classroom are home sick 
because they do tend to, you know, have germs, little people in 
classrooms. So all of these pieces do fit together. 
 
You know, you can look at a spreadsheet and find all sorts of 
places to cut, but you might find, and particularly in education 
when you cut them, it might have some consequences that you 
didn’t understand or that have a very real impact on the core. 
 
I think we can agree that the core focus of education is students, 
student well-being, student learning. But there are many things 
that contribute to that learning that I’m afraid we’re not paying 
particular attention to, and that is going to be at the peril, I’m 
afraid, of our kids, of our education system, and ultimately at 
the peril of our province when we fail to provide these kids with 
the education that they deserve and we need them to have, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are, you know, the investment in schools, as I noted, has 
decreased by $54 million, plus we have 21 new schools, but 
also we have about 2,000 additional students coming into the 
school system. You know, I believe that the minister stated that 
there was no more important metric than the number of people 
coming in. But I would suggest that, okay, that is an important 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

metric, but so too is the ability to provide services to those 
people. We don’t want to just, you know, shoehorn people in 
and not provide any services to them. So I would suggest that, 
you know, that’s a false dichotomy. Both things are important. 
We don’t have to just look at numbers. We have to look at 
quality and effectiveness and, you know, those are monetary 
terms. 
 
But another piece of this is just the respect, the direction within 
the sector. You know, we’ve met with a lot of folks by now 
around the province. And I think that sometimes we’re seen to 
be a bit hyperbolic about just what’s going on out there, but if 
members opposite haven’t had the opportunity to go out and 
talk to school boards and go sit in a classroom or talk to 
students or parents out there, I think they would pretty quickly 
understand that it isn’t hyperbole. It’s a real issue out there in 
the province, in the sector. A lot of people who work in and 
around our schools are feeling like the intensity has gone up; 
the supports have gone down. They feel blamed. They feel 
disregarded. They feel like the work that they’re doing isn’t 
appreciated. And really, what more important work is there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, than ensuring that our kids have the proper 
education? But they’re feeling like that work is devalued. 
 
And that has very real impacts. Aside from monetary costs, that 
has impacts in terms of people. It has impact in terms of, you 
know, kids pick up on those things. They can tell when people 
around them are feeling, or the students around them, when 
they’re feeling valued and respected. 
 
And it’s not just the education system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When we talk about pulling speech and language pathologists 
out of our schools, or occupational therapists or physical 
therapists, it’s not like those cuts aren’t being made within the 
health sector as well. So there is difficulty addressing those 
needs in the community, you know, for kids that have means 
and kids that don’t, frankly. Wait-lists are very long. Child 
psychologists, child and youth services, educational 
psychologists, those wait-lists are long and the needs are high 
and rising . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And EAL [English as 
an additional language] students. That’s my colleague here. We 
have a lot of folks who’ve been involved in education for a long 
time on this side. 
 
You know, there’s never been proper support for the English as 
an additional language students who require those supports. So 
you know, these are supports that if they are provided, those 
kids will perform at or better than kids who are native English 
speakers. But they need those supports. So if we fail to provide 
those supports in a timely manner, it not only has an impact on 
that child’s learning, as well as everyone else in the classroom, 
but it has a long-term impact on their ability to catch up to 
grade level. 
 
We have to provide supports in education in a timely manner. 
And that, I guess I’ll tie it back into this bill, is anything we do 
to pull money out of education that ought to rightfully be there, 
or to obscure the process of how that money is collected and 
directed back into the school system, it’s going to be a problem 
for members on this side and, I would submit, people around 
the province. They want to know how these dollars are being 
collected and how they are flowing back out. And perhaps there 
is a mechanism for that to be accounted for and be transparent, 

and we would certainly welcome that answer if that were the 
case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But you know, I think I understand people’s lack of confidence 
that all of these issues have been properly vetted, well 
understood, that they have . . . that all of the consequences have 
been looked at because frankly there is a bit of a history by 
now. I think we’re . . . I’ve been here for a year and certainly 
that has been as punctuated, this sector, for that whole year. 
 
But going back to my time when I first served on the board in 
2009, that has been an issue. It has been an issue around the 
province and one that frankly hasn’t been rectified. So if people 
are a bit skeptical about this . . . And I’ve been told that we 
ought to, you know, well of course if we collect the money, the 
money will be there. I think it’s reasonable that they are a bit 
skeptical about that, frankly. 
 
We want to make sure that the money that is collected for 
schools makes its way into schools. At least that, if not looking 
at investing. You know, we look at investments in the early 
years education. The government’s own early years document 
notes that when you make an investment in quality early 
childhood education, every dollar that you invest returns 4 to 
$9. I know I’ve spoken about this before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but I would tell you if that were an investment that you could be 
guaranteed, we’d take it every time. And it’s an investment 
we’re failing to make in our kids. 
 
So we will be watching, following these bills with interest. 
Again as I said, we will be consulting with members on this 
side and members out in the community to make sure that all of 
those concerns are addressed. But with that I think I will 
conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
49, The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 49, The Education Property Tax 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 be submitted to the 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 50 — The Provincial 
Capital Commission Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon on Bill No. 50, 
The Provincial Capital Commission Act. Mr. Speaker, it relates 
directly to something that I cherish and I know that people 
across our province cherish, being Wascana Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right in the heart of Regina, the pride of 
Saskatchewan, the pride of Regina, this is a special park, Mr. 
Speaker, that is truly the gem of our proud city, of our capital 
city, Mr. Speaker. It’s the kind of place that our entire province 
is proud of, that connects with, Mr. Speaker. It’s a place that my 
family has always and continues to connect with, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s a place that I greatly value. It’s a place that sort of 
epitomizes that idea of, the best time to plant a tree was, well in 
this case, 100 and some years ago, Mr. Speaker, and the next 
best time is tomorrow. 
 
But it also highlights really an approach of this government that 
needs to be taken on by the people of Saskatchewan, an 
arrogant government that thinks they need to have their hands 
in everyone’s pockets, that’s taking control of local entities 
across our province that provide us strength and provide us 
value. And we see this of course with the arrogant and 
damaging takeover of NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program] in the North. We see that of our school boards and 
local education, Mr. Speaker. And we see it on other fronts, and 
it’s beyond concerning to see this government also exert its 
control to take over Wascana Park, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, this is a special place. It’s a place that people 
gather. It’s a place for recreation. It’s a place for cultural 
gathering. It’s a place for education. It’s a place of incredible 
festivals. It’s a place for conservation and supporting ecology 
and in teaching that, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the kind of place that 
we’re lucky to have. 
 
Wascana Park itself, although formally became an entity in the 
early ’60s, it’s been really, you know, a century and more of 
planning that’s made this special place happen. And it’s that 
sort of long-term vision that we should expect from government 
on other areas, Mr. Speaker. But in this case it happened really 
by way of conditions in the late 1980s, Mr. Speaker. I believe 
1980 . . . or 1880s, back in 1883, originally the dam was put in 
place further west than it is right now, Mr. Speaker, and it 
flooded a fair amount of land, which created the lake. And at 
that point it was the CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] that 
dammed the lake to cool its rolling stock, Mr. Speaker. So it 
played an important role at that place and time in our history, 
and really the settlement of and development of Western 
Canada and our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And shortly thereafter, of course, as population came together, 
it was found to be a place for recreation and for canoeing and 
paddling and for swimming and for picnics. And if you look at 
the early pictures of Regina, trees were being planted on this 
barren land at that time, and really a lot of efforts that were 
bringing together the incredible, beautiful park that we all love 

here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that it’s gone through many efforts, Mr. Speaker, a lot 
of care of many. The boards throughout time that have been 
stewards of this park, who have put their heart and soul into this 
park, the many volunteers, Mr. Speaker, the staff of this park, 
the administration of this park, that have really built something 
that is a proud legacy for all of us. But not just a proud legacy 
— the kind of place that my family, and I suspect yours, Mr. 
Speaker, and many others are able to enjoy all throughout the 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It had gone through different deepening processes I believe in 
the 1930s, creating jobs and deepening the lake and making it 
more suitable for recreation and to serve our city, a growing 
city, Mr. Speaker. Of course that happened again as well in 
2003. And you know, when you look at sort of the investments 
a government makes, that investment there, the provincial 
government, the NDP at the time, along with the federal 
government, along with the city, made an investment to deepen 
that lake. And what a special investment into this park that’s 
really given enhanced utilization of this incredible, incredible 
park. 
 
Its claim, of course, is that it’s the largest man-made park in 
North America. And Mr. Speaker, I’m proud. I think I’ve found 
every last corner of that park, whether hiking or whether 
picnicking as a family or whether jogging, Mr. Speaker, 
whether paddling, and even explored the islands, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a two-and-a-half-year-old, of course, who loves getting 
out to Pine Island, or loves, you know, getting down on the 
Devonian paths and enjoying what connects us there to Boreal 
Island and Prairie Island, which are further down the Devonian 
path. 
 
And of course Wascana Park, in the heart of the city, connects 
our entire city as well with those Devonian paths and the park 
system to the northwest, Mr. Speaker, all the way down to the 
southeast and the university. And for my entire life I’ve utilized 
that path and those parks and Wascana Park. Places like A.E. 
Wilson Park, Mr. Speaker, and Rick Hansen park, they’re all 
. . . which are there supported by Wascana Park, are really 
special places. 
 
You know, if we think of what this park means to our city, you 
need to think of just the life it brings to the city and the quality 
of life that it adds. And of course it’s a place to gather. And just 
think of the festivals and the cultural pride that’s on display in 
Wascana Park, whether it’s the annual Canada Day 
celebrations, which we always get out to and soak up and enjoy, 
gathering as an entire city, and in many ways as a province in 
this beautiful park. Or whether you’ve got the CariSask festival 
with all of its colour and its great food and its dance, Mr. 
Speaker, through to the dragon boats and SaskTel Summer 
Invasion and Waskimo fired up again, Mr. Speaker, out there in 
the winter, through to the canoe and kayak championships, Mr. 
Speaker, and all the competition and sport that occurs on the 
water, Mr. Speaker. It’s really something remarkable. 
 
Or all the running and all the races that support important 
causes, but also support health and well-being, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve run that park for the Queen City Marathon. I’ve run it for 
the Regina police half marathon. I think we’re running it again 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

here fairly soon with a bit of gentle competition across the 
floor, Mr. Speaker. We get out and we walk and we run for the 
CIBC Run for the Cure, Mr. Speaker. And so really this park is 
sort of the lifeblood of our community and it gives us life, and 
as I say, it gives us quality of life. 
 
And there’s, you know, not only we have the natural beauty, we 
have the role it plays in environmental stewardship and the 
ecology, Mr. Speaker. We know of places . . . There’s all sorts 
of environmental education that occurs with the water and the 
lands, and places like the waterfowl display park where you’re 
able to have kids and community interacting with migratory 
birds, Mr. Speaker, and with painted turtles, and all sorts of 
learning. A reminder, Mr. Speaker — don’t feed, don’t feed 
them bread, Mr. Speaker. It’s not good for them. Bring them 
some lentils or something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all the other, all the great memorials, all the great, you 
know . . . And you know, often I go around that park as I jog 
and I’ll see a bench with a little plaque on it and a story and a 
memory of someone who loved that park before. And the fact 
that the family or that person wanted to leave their mark and to 
support the park is an example of the love that we have for this 
park in Regina and in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just the same, you know, we can get outside the doors. It’s the 
place. It’s the park. It’s the home of the seat of government, Mr. 
Speaker, our Legislative Assembly, our house of democracy 
and places that support that. If you look to Speaker’s Corner, 
Mr. Speaker, you know, a remarkable space that has an 
important role in our history as a nation and as a province, but 
also in supporting civil society and the role of democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You can get outside and get to the War Memorial, which 
commemorates and remembers all those that selflessly served 
and sacrificed and that were lost from this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Or a little bit around the way you’ve got Trafalgar 
fountain, Mr. Speaker. And just past that of course you have the 
Holodomor memorial, looking back and remembering that 
terrible famine, Mr. Speaker, the terrible atrocity, Mr. Speaker, 
and an important part of the fabric of Saskatchewan with our 
proud Ukrainian Canadian roots, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course we’ve got all sorts of amazing places for recreation, 
from the rowing club to the canoe and kayak club, Mr. Speaker, 
on the shores of the lake. A hub of activity and life, Mr. 
Speaker, a place I love to get out for a paddle, Mr. Speaker. 
And then just all of the special places that people get to — 
Candy Cane Park, Douglas Park, and that incredible Leibel 
Field that’s been built through the dollars and the support of so 
many to build Regina Minor Football in this province. 
 
And this is again an example of an asset that’s valued by our 
city and what it means for Regina Minor Football. And it’s an 
example of how this park is able to take the love and care and 
passion of many, the volunteerism of many, the charitable 
giving of so many, and to build our community. And I think of 
those people that are . . . Antonini and so many others that have 
been involved in building Leibel Field. And that very much 
embodies what’s possible with a public park like this. And it’s 
why it’s important that we preserve the independence of this 
park, a gem to our entire city. 

[16:30] 
 
From a recreation perspective, you’ve got Wascana Pool, Mr. 
Speaker, and just limitless opportunities for our community to 
come together, to gather, to enjoy, and to be healthy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You go around the park on a Sunday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
and you know you’ll see families from all over our province, all 
over our city, but families that have come in many ways from 
all over the world as well, Mr. Speaker. And I find it incredible, 
on a given day as you work your way around, to see a lot of 
families that have recently settled in Saskatchewan, new 
immigrants, newcomers, Mr. Speaker, that utilize Wascana Park 
and that public space and find it to be such an incredible asset, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we’re talking about Wascana Park, we’re talking about 
a gem, a gem of this city, a gem of this province, a place that 
we’re all proud of, Mr. Speaker, and a place that we need to 
fight for. And you know, this is a place that was planned for, 
involving urban park architecture years ago, and the foresight of 
many, the volunteerism of many, the planting of trees of 
hundreds of years ago, and the organization of this incredible 
place. 
 
And we should not let the Sask Party take it over, Mr. Speaker. 
We should not let the Sask Party get its grips on Wascana Park 
in the same way that they’ve got their grips all over education 
or the way they’re taking control of so many other local entities, 
Mr. Speaker. And we see the Sask Party disgracefully taking 
over Wascana Park at the same time as that they’ve broken their 
word and have shortchanged our cities and our towns, Mr. 
Speaker, leaving our city here in Regina shortchanged, Mr. 
Speaker, and losing some of its control over this very important 
park. 
 
And I think you have to question, of course. This is the party of 
big money, Mr. Speaker, and more and more than ever of 
self-interest, Mr. Speaker. This is the party that has filled its 
pockets, Mr. Speaker, with big money, big corporate money, 
Mr. Speaker, from out of province and large corporate dollars 
and donations. 
 
And time and time again, Saskatchewan people are learning that 
they just can’t trust the Sask Party, because more and more they 
don’t know who they’re serving, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know 
if they’re serving those big-moneyed interests that have filled 
the coffers of their party, Mr. Speaker, or whether they’re 
serving Saskatchewan people — who they should be — day in, 
day out, serving as their government, Mr. Speaker. And I guess, 
you know, it’s on that front, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
people have every right to have very serious control with the 
Sask Party’s takeover of Wascana Park. 
 
We’ve learned we can’t trust them with the small stuff. We’ve 
learned we can’t trust them with the big stuff. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to question what motivations they have, what 
agendas they have, what special and big-moneyed interests are 
potentially influencing this decision, Mr. Speaker, and what 
they want to do, what they want to do with Wascana Park, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

Wascana Park serves all of us. It’s a public space for which, as I 
say, creates life in our community and adds quality of life to all 
of us, and it’s the kind of park that Saskatchewan people should 
be enjoying for centuries, Mr. Speaker. And we should not let a 
government deficit of decency, deficit of dollars, take this park 
over, Mr. Speaker. And I know that all the patrons of this park, 
all the volunteers of this park, the donors of this park, Mr. 
Speaker, the supporters of the park, and the public at large in 
Saskatchewan will rise up to fight back and to tell the Sask 
Party, get your hands off Wascana Park, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a gem for all of us, a place of pride, something that 
needs to be left in the hands, with some independence, of its 
exceptional board and administration and all those that build the 
park. And my message to the Premier and the Sask Party at this 
time where we see them breaking trust day after day with 
Saskatchewan people, is get your hands off Wascana Park. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And at this point in time, I 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital 
Commission Act. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital 
Commission Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 52 — The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I appreciate my colleague’s comments about Wascana 
too. And so many ways, this random approach to how they are 
approaching conservation in our urban parks, I have some real 
concerns, the way that they want to take over Wascana Park but 
yet step away from all the other urban parks that we have in this 
province. 
 
And of course this is a very important bill to me, as I represent a 
good chunk of my riding from 24th down along the riverbank 
fronts the Meewasin Valley, the MVA [Meewasin Valley 
Authority], and so we watch carefully. And it is a real gem, a 
real diamond jewel, you know, along the river, and it has been 
so important to the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatoon. And I really think we’ve had something so special, 
so special in this province when we talked about the six urban 
parks and the two big diamonds, you know, when you think of 
Meewasin and Wascana. 
 
But you had Wakamow. You had Weyburn, the river is called 
the Souris, and that is a very important park. It’s still there, but 
you know, now that the government has stepped aside. The 
same in Swift Current, the same in Prince Albert, and the same 

in The Battlefords where this government has forgotten its 
responsibility, forgotten its responsibility. Because the common 
factor in all of these parks is that a river runs through it and that 
river steward is this government. It’s a constitutional 
responsibility. They look after the waterways in this province, 
and these folks have stepped away from that responsibility. 
 
You know, in the Meewasin Valley Authority the makeup of 
the park is some 15,500 acres. About 40 per cent of that is 
Crown land but a quarter of that, or 4,000 acres, are classified 
as water bodies, meaning that the riverbed or banks account for 
a quarter of Meewasin’s total land. 
 
So this government would have us believe that in fact . . . They 
create this idea that urban parks are places that are playgrounds 
and that kind of thing. And a very important component to any 
urban park is that interaction between families and the natural 
environment, but it’s much more that that. There is a 
responsibility, there is a huge responsibility for this government 
to step up to the plate and be partners with the other people 
involved, the other stakeholders, and that would be the 
municipalities. And in our case, we have a university there. 
 
And we’ve seen this government step away, which is really so 
sad, so sad because, you know, when these parks, the history 
and . . . A colleague from Rosemont talked about the history of 
Wascana. We have the history here in Saskatoon where 
Raymond Moriyama was hired to look after a grand master 
plan, a 100-year plan back in the ’70s — I believe it was ’78 — 
to develop a plan of stewardship, conservation, education, and 
recreation within that belt along the Meewasin River Valley. 
And it’s a wonderful concept, was a wonderful concept. It is 
very much alive. And of course we know it is because last 
summer when this government announced that it was going 
reconsider its role, people of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, in 
fact right across the country, signed a petition of some 2,000 
names. Now that petition wasn’t tabled in the House. It went 
straight to the minister, but we received a copy. The people 
were kind enough to make sure all the MLAs involved from 
Saskatoon received a copy of that petition, so we know what the 
minister got. 
 
And so we know it is near and dear to the people of this 
province and of Saskatoon. And so there is a huge responsibility 
for the people, the minister to get it right and . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well there you go. We weren’t debating that 
part, so I would like that time extra, that time back, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. No. Actually, but there’s the key point was there were 
people who were very, very much concerned. And so we want 
to make sure this government does step up, do the right thing, 
take its responsibility. 
 
Now it is sending odd messages. This is the thing about this bill 
that is a concern. And I know the minister will say, hey we 
didn’t completely cut all of the money going through there. And 
we understand too, the universities support it. But the cut to 
statutory funding, statutory funding, is really alarming because 
what that means now is that there is no, there is no fixed 
amount that the authority can count on. 
 
And that is worrisome, you know, because the record of this 
government when it comes to budgeting, and I have to say 
we’re in for some very tough budgets. We’ve seen a very tough 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

one here that really does reek of the mismanagement of this 
government for the past many years. But I don’t think we’ve 
seen the end of it, and this is what’s concerning people in 
Saskatoon is, if they’re cutting the statutory funding, then 
maybe the other shoe next year will fall. Maybe there’s another 
shoe to come. And I do have to share that concern that in fact 
we do have some real concerns with this government abdicating 
its responsibility. 
 
And it’s not one, not one that is just an academic one. This is 
one that is constitutional, you know, in terms of the Crown land 
that’s involved, the Crown land that’s involved with the river 
valley, the waterways that’s involved. This government, this 
provincial government has a responsibility to step up and be a 
true partner. 
 
Now you know, there are many parts of this Meewasin Valley 
Authority. And it’s the leadership that has shown and has been 
recognized right across Canada, in fact around the world, in 
terms of stewardship, and now this government is stepping 
back. It’s amazing, the kind of things that they have done. I 
only have to talk about the northeast swale, Saskatoon’s ancient 
river channel. I was very fortunate to go on a tour a few years 
ago where they highlighted what a conservation opportunity 
this is in terms of the number of species that are there, the 
number that are at risk, that really we have an opportunity to do 
something beautiful, and yet we are stepping back. 
 
And of course the other part that Meewasin has played a major 
leadership role in is around Wanuskewin Park. And you know, I 
am just so excited about what’s happening at Wanuskewin with 
the idea that we’ll have bison introduced so close to the city. 
And this will become another major part of that set of jewels 
along the Saskatchewan River Valley and Wanuskewin there, 
with its history that goes back thousands of years, honouring the 
First Nations and how they came to meet in a very special place 
to hunt, to gather, for so many different reasons. And in fact 
we’ll be, in not that many years perhaps, surrounded by urban 
development with Martensville and Warman. And as that starts 
to close in, we’ll have this beautiful park in the middle with 
wild bison. What a vision that is. 
 
So this is the kind of thing that is so important for Meewasin. 
And this government needs to make sure it’s at the table, that 
it’s at the table with the leadership that it has had in the past, 
has had in the past but now is stepping away. And what worries 
me is, and it’s part of the . . . worries me with this government, 
it’s sort of a divide and conquer. And I worry that they’ll start 
to play off different parks. Who can be the best at lobbying? 
And I think what this government needs to do is step up again 
and become true partners with ASUPCA [Association of 
Saskatchewan Urban Parks and Conservation Agencies], that’s 
the Association of Saskatchewan Urban Parks and Conservation 
areas. It’s a very important organization, but they need to 
support all six parks throughout the province. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the Finance 
minister will say, once again they’re saying, where are you 
going to get the money? Where are you going to get the money, 
right? That’s what he always says in question period. It’s a bit 
of a dodge while he’s trying to think of an answer, but really, 

it’s really simple where you can get the money from. 
 
These guys here have made a choice, made a choice. And I look 
at the Saskatoon MLAs, they’ve made a choice to cut the taxes 
for the wealthiest in this province. They’ve made a choice to cut 
that tax, and that tax cut is going to cost $38 million, $38 
million every year. What you could do, what you could do with 
that $38 million. Well I can tell you, first thing you can do is 
restore the funding and actually increase the funding to 
Meewasin and to the other urban parks and make sure that the 
six urban parks are supported here in Saskatchewan. I know this 
bill speaks specifically to Meewasin, but you could do that. You 
could do with the 38. You wouldn’t even put a dent in the $38 
million. 
 
You know what else you could do with that $38 million? You 
could restore funding to STC. And you’re not even spending 
half the $38 million, you know. You could restore funding to 
the regional libraries. This is what you could do if you didn’t 
give that tax cut to the wealthiest. There you go. We are 
thinking about these solutions, and they can be done. But here 
we have a government who is bent on giving back to their 
friends, to their wealthy friends and donors. 
 
This should not be an issue here. This is affordable, and these 
are the priorities we have in Saskatchewan — health and 
education and making sure we support those things that do 
make Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, and the other cities unique. 
And that’s the rivers that run through, you know, our cities. 
And this is really interesting because quite often we don’t think 
this way about our cities. We don’t think of our cities having 
rivers running through them, major rivers with histories. Well 
we do. We do. 
 
We had the member from Rosemont just talk about the history 
of Wascana Creek, the mighty Wascana Creek. I’m sorry, guys 
from Regina. It’s not quite the same as the mighty South 
Saskatchewan. I know you get floods every once in a while, but 
we . . . I think we have a better river. And the same with the 
Souris River, not quite the same as the South Saskatchewan, not 
quite the same as the South Saskatchewan. But then you have 
the North Saskatchewan, the North Saskatchewan with North 
Battleford and P.A. [Prince Albert]. Amazing rivers. We should 
take a lot of pride in those rivers. And we should take a lot of 
pride in the fact that Saskatchewan is a unique province. 
 
This government needs to step up to the table, needs to bring 
the resources but not only the financial resources. This is one 
thing that I’ve watched very closely because, you know, at one 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was on the Meewasin Valley 
Authority Board, and I was able to see that the province can not 
only bring financial resources, but technical resources, vis-à-vis 
the park planning, because we had people in the provincial 
ministries who had that expertise. I’m not sure that we have that 
any more because this government’s cut back. We don’t have 
that expertise anymore. We don’t have the environmental 
technology expertise that we once had that the people in the 
parks could really count on. 
 
So this is a shame. This is a shame that this government has 
stepped away from its responsibilities. But this is not, as I said, 
some sort of academic responsibility or some abstract idea. It’s 
a constitutional responsibility. We are responsible for the 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2017 

Crown lands in this province. We are responsible for those 
lands, and we are responsible for the waterways and the water 
bodies. We can’t step back from that and particularly along, I 
think, the North Saskatchewan, the South Saskatchewan when 
you have serious issues around slumping, erosion, flooding. Of 
course the major dam all along the South Saskatchewan, the 
Gardiner dam, a huge responsibility. And here we have this 
government acting as if this is not a core part of government 
services. It is a core responsibility. It is core. They cannot walk 
away and say, no it’s not. It truly is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that we will have lots of questions on 
this. I know there will be stakeholders who have lots of 
questions on Bill No. 52, An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act. So we would be willing to move this to 
committee now. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill 
No. 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Are we done? Okay . . . that Bill No. 
52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 59 — The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise and speak to Bill No. 59. I’m cognizant of the 
time so I’ll keep my comments brief. And I know I’ll have the 
opportunity to speak to this bill at committee where I can ask 
the minister several questions which I do have. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to review the bill along with the 
minister’s remarks, and I’ve spoken to a few stakeholders and I 
hope to speak to some more prior to the committee meeting 
about this bill. But if there are any other stakeholders out there 
who have comments or concerns or questions and I haven’t 

reached out to them, I strongly encourage them to reach out to 
me. 
 
Now from my understanding of what the minister’s remarks 
were, it sounds like the plan is to remove traffic fine offences 
from the ability to fall under the fine option program. So 
individuals who have fines through traffic offences will no 
longer be able to utilize the fine option program if, for whatever 
reason, they can’t pay for their fines. From what it looks like 
though, that will all come out in the regulations. And there is 
the potential that this could result in more offences being 
included in the future without it going back to the House. So 
there’s always that concern, Mr. Speaker, when things get 
moved into regulations, what that means for future 
consideration on future changes. 
 
The minister mentioned that there might be a low-income 
exemption for this. I’m not too sure how that’s going to work. 
I’m not too sure what that’s going to look like, so that’s a 
question I’m going to have to the minister when we speak. 
 
The minister also said there will be savings, administrative 
savings of $230,000. I’m interested to delve into that a little bit 
more. I sure hope that this isn’t nothing more than a cash grab 
from the Sask Party to deal with their mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hope that some serious 
thought was put into this and that it’s being done in a logical, 
smart way for the improvement of our justice system. 
 
I have some concerns on how this is going to impact our 
community-based organizations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A lot of 
them rely on the volunteer service that individuals do when 
they’re using the fine option program. So instead of paying the 
fine you can spend X amount of hours doing volunteer service, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I looked, a quick search. Even Regina Cat 
Rescue here in the city relies on or allows for individuals who 
are using the fine option program to do their volunteer work 
through that. So I’m curious to know and I’m concerned about 
what this is going to mean for CBOs [community-based 
organization] that do rely on some of their volunteer work to be 
done through this program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m also concerned about what this is 
going to mean in terms of impacting our jails, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. If individuals can’t pay for their fines or don’t pay for 
their fines, they could incur jail time. And we already have 
severely crowded jails in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
And it’s not going to help the justice system. It’s not going to 
help recidivism or our overcrowding situation by having 
individuals who are charged with non-violent offences — 
because that’s what we’re talking about right now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — to end up having to serve time in jail because they 
didn’t pay for their fine or they could not afford to pay for their 
fine. 
 
So there are some legitimate concerns that I have with respect 
to this bill. I will have the opportunity to speak more to this 
with the minister. I think it’s more appropriate to have that 
conversation at committee rather than these debates, so with 
that I will conclude my remarks on this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 



April 5, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 59, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 59, The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 60 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise and join in on the debate for Bill No. 60. Similarly I’ve had 
the opportunity to review the bill as well as the minister’s 
comments and I have spoken to a few stakeholders. Again, still 
looking for more feedback from other stakeholders before this 
goes to committee. 
 
I know there are some questions with respect to this bill that I 
am hoping to have answered by the minister. In particular this is 
a self-regulated profession, Mr. Speaker, and public protection 
is paramount within this profession. And when we’re talking 
about exempting, and right now to qualify for or to be able to 
practice law under the Law Society’s rules, you have to be 
ensured through SLIA [Saskatchewan Lawyers’ Insurance 
Association Inc.] and then there’s a few minor exemptions in 
that. I won’t get into detail about that now, but it’s very 
important f from a public protection standpoint, Mr. Speaker, 
that our lawyers in the province are properly insured so when 
something goes wrong there is an avenue for individuals to get 
recourse. So I want to ensure that.  
 
And then the minister had mentioned that there’s some overlap 
in the insurance through their employer, through the 
government as well as through SLIA, Saskatchewan Lawyers’ 
Insurance Association. And I want to ensure that there is 
actually, absolutely complete overlap, that there’s no issues 
there. There’s nothing that’s going to fall through the cracks 
because this is really important stuff that we’re talking about, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. When we’re talking about protection of 
the public, it’s incredibly important that we get this right. 
 
And similarly to the last bill I was talking about, I’m concerned 

about again this being a bit of a way of a cost-saving measure 
from the Sask Party to cover up their scandal, mismanagement, 
and waste. And I’m not too sure how well thought out this has 
been, and I want to make sure that the public, the protection of 
the public is paramount when we’re talking about this particular 
issue because it does cost the government some money to have 
their lawyers properly insured. And I want to ensure that we are 
keeping the focus, like I said, on the protection of the public. 
 
So I’m looking forward to having this conversation with the 
minister. I’m hoping he’ll come or his officials will come with 
answers to my questions and the concerns that I’ve heard so far. 
So with that I will conclude my remarks on Bill No. 60. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 60, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee should this bill 
be committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment 
Act be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
It now being 5 o’clock, the normal hour of adjournment, this 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2123 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2123 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2123 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2123 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2124 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2124 
  Duncan ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2124, 2126 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2125 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2125 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2125 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2125 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2126 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2126 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2126 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2126 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2126 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2127 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2127 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2127 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2127 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2128 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2128 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2128 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2128 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Voice of Youth Leadership Summit 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 
 Maidstone Boys’ Basketball Team Takes Silver at Hoopla 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 
 Global Asbestos Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 
 Distillery Awarded for World’s Best Cask Gin  
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 
 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Gala 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 
 Remembering Oliver Cameron 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 
 Knowledge Centre Promotes Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2132 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2132 
 Management of Provincial Economy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 
 Funding for Libraries and Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2135 
 



 

 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2135 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2136 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 réduisant les traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée législative  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2136 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2137 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ..................................................................................................................................... 2139, 2140 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 réduisant les traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2141 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2141 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2142 
 Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2143 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2143 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 48 — The Education Property Tax Act  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2144 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2146 
 Bill No. 49 — The Education Property Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Education Property Tax Act  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2146 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2147 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2152 
 Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2152 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2153 
 Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 2153 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


