






















































Hansard: April 11, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 73A  TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2211 
 April 11, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would make a 
request for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues. Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery today is an 
individual who started a business in his basement in 2001. 
Today that business is approaching $2 billion in sales, about 
2,000 employees worldwide, 41 manufacturing facilities on five 
continents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the House, Murad Al-Katib. He is the founder, 
president, and chief executive officer of AGT Food and 
Ingredients of Regina. That’s one of the fastest growing 
agri-food companies on the planet, Mr. Speaker, headquartered 
right here in Saskatchewan 
 
The last few months have been pretty eventful for Murad and 
for his entire team in terms of international and national 
recognition. About a year ago, the United Nations Association 
in Canada presented Murad with their Global Citizens Award in 
recognition of AGT’s support of the World Food Programme 
and the international Red Cross. Mr. Speaker, his commitment 
to Red Cross continues. He’s currently the Co-Chair for the Red 
Gala along with another outstanding Saskatchewan individual 
whose name is Tami Wall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In November Murad was named the 2016 Ernst & Young 
Canadian Entrepreneur of the Year. Mr. Speaker, he is the very 
first Saskatchewan business person, the first Saskatchewan 
citizen ever to receive this prestigious national award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murad and his company have played a pivotal role 
in the growth of our pulse industry here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He has helped put this province on the map 
when it comes to the pulse crop industry. Saskatchewan is the 
undisputed world leader in pulse crop exports, Mr. Speaker, in 
no small part due to the efforts of Murad and his team. He is a 
major buyer and exporter of Saskatchewan lentils, peas, beans, 
chickpeas shipped to 120 countries around the world. 
 
For all of this, Murad deserves any recognition, frankly, that 
might come his way, although he is first to defer and first to be 
modest about it. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s more. As we were 
arranging this particular visit to acknowledge and thank him for 
all that he has done in this province, late last month he was 

named one of four recipients of the 2017 Oslo Business for 
Peace Award. Mr. Speaker, Murad is the first Canadian to ever 
receive this honour. Murad was recognized for “. . . his 
entrepreneurship in leading the way in sustainable agriculture 
and contributing to feeding millions of refugee families in the 
Syrian crisis.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the Ernst & Young website, they note that 
entrepreneurs dare. There’s a quote on their website that says, 
“They dare to dream, to imagine the unimaginable. They take 
enormous risks in the belief that they can bring their dreams to 
life, and those who succeed change the world.” 
 
This is the very definition of our friend, of my friend Murad 
Al-Katib. At the dawn of the millennium, he had a vision and 
he had a dream. And he worked at it and he persevered and he 
built a team, Mr. Speaker, to the great benefit not just of that 
team and the company and the customers of AGT, but to the 
great benefit of the province of Saskatchewan. And for this we 
should have and share a profound sense of gratitude for him that 
he would act on that vision, that he would step out and improve 
the quality of life literally of thousands of Saskatchewan 
employees that he has employed over the years and farmers 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On behalf of a grateful province and a grateful government, we 
want to congratulate him on all of this recognition and state for 
the record unequivocally that it is all very, very well deserved. 
We’re very proud to claim him as a neighbour and a friend and 
a fellow citizen and a business leader. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would just ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
thanking him and welcoming Murad to his Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the Premier in recognizing Murad Al-Katib here in 
his Legislative Assembly and certainly quite rightly recognized 
for the enormous contributions that he’s made to our province 
and on the community front as well within our province. And 
I’ll get to a few of his other contributions, but this is somebody 
who takes care of the small stuff within our community as well. 
And I know him and his family and his wife are highly involved 
in Regina Minor Football as well, and I believe his wife is often 
described as the lifeblood of a team and of young people within 
our community. 
 
Murad Al-Katib’s story is one of dedication, one of certainly 
brilliance by way of planning, and one of delivering through 
hard work. He made his way back to Saskatchewan in fact a 
number of years ago when he had offered to then Premier 
Romanow to be a part of helping build the exports of this 
province. A good move by then Premier Romanow was to take 
him up on that offer and to have Murad come back to 
Saskatchewan and to do some very important work with the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, as well as growing 
exports that are important to so many within this province and 
certainly our country. 
 
Murad then took on an initiative that he had been planning and 
stepped out and started with modest beginnings in his own 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

basement, as has been described, and has built a global success, 
a Saskatchewan champion that’s valued by Saskatchewan 
people and so important to producers of this province, really 
growing the entire pulse industry here in this province, 
providing employment by way of the hundreds — at least 
within Saskatchewan, maybe more — but thousands across the 
globe. And somebody that has always understood that you give 
back to your community, and to your world. 
 
And the recognition that Murad Al-Katib has received is well 
deserved, and that includes the humanitarian work that’s been 
noted with Syrian refugees, responding to the Syrian crisis, and 
the recognition that he has received through the United Nations, 
the award through Ernst & Young. We’re all proud. We’re all 
proud of that recognition that’s so well deserved, and then the 
most recent recognition through the Oslo business recognition, I 
hope I’m titling it proper, but for those very important efforts 
from a humanitarian perspective. 
 
So on behalf of a grateful opposition, on behalf of a grateful 
province, it’s my pleasure to welcome Murad Al-Katib to his 
Assembly and to thank him for his many contributions to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — With leave for an extended introduction, 
please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to introduce 
some very special guests to the Legislative Assembly today, 
and accompanying them are Melinda Carter and Amy Standish, 
the senior international officers. Please welcome, for his first 
official visit to our province, Mr. Gert Heijkoop, consul general 
of the Netherlands in Vancouver. The consul general is joined 
by his colleague from the consul general in Vancouver, Ms. 
Barry Nieuwenhuijs, and the honorary consul of the 
Netherlands in Saskatchewan, Mr. Peter Vanriel. 
 
The consul general has a very busy schedule during his two full 
days in Regina, meeting with a number of us in government, as 
well with representatives of the University of Saskatchewan, 
SaskPower, CCS Knowledge Centre, the Global Transportation 
Hub, and STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership]. 
 
During his visit, we are exploring areas of mutual economic 
interest and potential future collaboration between our two 
jurisdictions. Our exports to the Netherlands last year were 
primarily agricultural products. Saskatchewan in turn imported 
equipment and general chemical products from the Netherlands. 
 
We both have very strong agricultural industries. Indeed, the 
Netherlands is the second-largest exporter of agriculture 
products in the world, and I’m advised that the Netherlands is 
made up of 55 per cent agriculture land. And as members of this 
Assembly are aware, Saskatchewan has roughly 44 per cent of 
Canada’s arable farm land. So there may be opportunities to 

learn from each other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s two more little Saskatchewan-Dutch nuggets for you. 
The University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan 
have eight academic agreements from the Dutch institutions. As 
well, Dutch investment is helping build our province’s economy 
through the presence of agriculture-related companies like 
Louis Dreyfus, Glencore, and Hendrix Genetics. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wish the consul general and his party fruitful 
meetings and discussions as we work together to expand the 
Saskatchewan-Dutch relationship. And through you, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly join me 
in welcoming these people to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join 
with the Provincial Secretary and welcome this, an important 
delegation from the Netherlands to Saskatchewan. To Mr. Gert 
Heijkoop, consul general of the Netherlands in Vancouver; Ms. 
Barry Nieuwenhuijs, consul of the Netherlands in Vancouver; 
and to Mr. Peter Vanriel, honorary consul of the Netherlands in 
Saskatchewan, welcome to the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly. It’s a pleasure to have you here today. 
 
As the Provincial Secretary noted, the relationship between the 
Netherlands and Saskatchewan is a strong one and a lasting 
relationship. Our ties that bind run deep, a relationship that goes 
back all the way through the Second World War; in fact 83 
members of my grandfather’s own regiment with the Royal 
Regina Rifles were buried in the Netherlands. And I know how 
proud Saskatchewan people are of that service and sacrifice, 
and I know how thankful the Dutch people are as well. 
 
And it’s a relationship that continues to grow to this day, with 
strong ties in agriculture and in research and technology. And 
the very work that you’re doing here today, growing that 
relationship, is a valued one and an important one. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, a grateful opposition, 
thank you for the relationship, thank you for your presence here 
today and within the province. And we wish you a very 
constructive exchange in the days that follow. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to 
introduce a fine young man in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: Mr. 
Kevin Stockman from Beechy, Saskatchewan. Kevin, give us a 
wave if you would. Kevin just finished his first year in business 
at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. As I said, he’s from 
Beechy. His parents are Dean and Maureen Stockman. Dean’s a 
very good friend of mine. 
 
I had the opportunity to spend some time around the building 
with Kevin today. I certainly hope he enjoyed it. If I could leave 
him any message to come from today, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
to please pay no attention to anything the Agriculture minister 
told you at lunchtime. 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

Mr. Speaker, he’s very interested in politics. I hope, as I said, 
he’s been enjoying his day. It’s been just a pleasure to have him 
in the Assembly, and I would ask all members to please join me 
in welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with parcel services that serves the farms 
and other businesses. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and the sell-off of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many out of this province. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition for the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Canora, 
Crystal Lake, Pelly, Regina, and Hyas. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased again 
today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care. The petitioners believe that this government 
doesn’t have a good sense of what professional spiritual care 
workers actually do, nor does this government understand the 
impacts that they have. The petitioners point out that with this 
last budget the Sask Party has eliminated funding for spiritual 
care services, which provided spiritual care within our health 

facilities across the province; that Saskatchewan will be the 
only province within Canada to not fund this support for 
patients, residents, and their families seeking wellness. 
 
The petitioners point out that the Sask Party hid their plan to 
scrap funding for spiritual care within health region facilities 
during the election that took place just a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
And they point out, the petitioners point out that spiritual care 
responds to the spiritual and emotional needs of patients and 
residents and provides a compassionate, listening presence in 
times of crisis. It points out that spiritual care supports families, 
patients, and residents, and staff actually, Mr. Speaker, in 
making difficult decisions, and that spiritual care can provide 
support for all families, patients, and residents regardless of 
faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and support. The prayer 
reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan immediately 
reinstate the funding for pastoral care services in this 
province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Landis and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
under the direction and the request for support on anyone in the 
Assembly to help the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
fight for Prince Albert for a second bridge, I stand in my place 
today to offer a petition in that fight. And the petition is all 
about the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert, that it 
never has been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, 
communities north of Prince Albert, and the businesses that 
bring people and products through Prince Albert require a 
solution. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action; and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
all from throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising again today to present 
a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent Crown 
corporation sell-off. The people who have signed this petition 
would like to bring to our attention the following: the Sask 
Party’s Bill 40 creates a brand new definition for privatization 
never seen anywhere else that allows the government to wind 
down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum, which is in 
the Crown corporations protection Act. 
 
In ’15-16 alone, Saskatchewan Crown corporations returned 
almost $300 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. And we know those dividends should go to the people 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

of Saskatchewan, not private investors. Our Crown corporations 
employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across the province. 
And we know that under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of 
Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income 
tax, provided not less than 90 per cent of their shares are held 
by a government or province. The Sask Party’s proposal would 
allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without being 
considered privatized. So, Mr. Speaker, this short-sighted 
legislation risks sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa 
rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by citizens of Prairie 
River, Prince Albert, and St. Louis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province wish to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016 women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition to increase the funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis. Due to a loss of funding, Prince 
Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its door during 

daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in 
distress. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the individuals that have 
been falling through the cracks are individuals that have mental 
health issues in our community. And when they’ve having these 
mental health issues, if they phone the mobile crisis number, 
it’s not available during the daytime hours during the week. 
 
And so then they resort to phoning the police. And the police 
have been doing a good job at trying to address the issue, but 
it’s not the area that they’re experienced in and they’re not 
trained to provide that level of service, and it takes up many, 
many hours of resources from the police department when it 
could be easily replaced with individuals who are trained in this 
crisis intervention and who are able to provide the services 
needed for these clients and tell them where they could get 
potential long-term services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we really need this funding restored to the 
Prince Albert mobile crisis, and it would just require all the 
ministers to get together and possibly provide a little bit of 
funding from each ministry to open the doors at mobile crisis. 
So I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 
 

Mr. Speaker, individuals right across the province have realized 
that this is an issue that needs to be addressed, and these 
particular petitions that I have here today are signed by 
individuals from Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Weyburn, and 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those 
who’ve signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care 
centres are taxed inconsistently, and many of our licensed 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial taxes. This is not 
done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or 
New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. And this issue threatens both the 
number of spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. Quality child care centres 
are institutions of early learning and childhood development, 
and it’s appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as 
schools. I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions that I have signed today are signed by 
people who reside in Zehner, Craven, Regina, Pense, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and Regina Beach. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reverse to the cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker program in the 
2016-17 provincial budget. They point out that the Aboriginal 
court workers have played an important role in helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
They point out that Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres. And they 
point out that Aboriginal court workers successfully help to 
make our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are well aware that this 
government pointed to this program as part of the response on 
the part of Saskatchewan to the calls to action for the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, while at the same time cutting this 
very program, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by good citizens 
in the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to reverse cuts to Saskatchewan libraries. The 
Sask Party has cut funding for regional libraries in half or by 
3.5 million, and eliminated funding for libraries in Regina and 
Saskatoon. This drastic funding cut will have a devastating 
impact on libraries, especially regional libraries, and the many 
people who depend on them. And I think we’ve already seen an 
example, several examples of that over the last week or so. 
 
Libraries are a vital part of the communities across 
Saskatchewan, and the services they provide enrich the lives of 
many. The drastic cuts imposed on libraries will lead to branch 
closures, program cuts, and reduction in hours, which will hurt 
the many people who use library services and the hardworking 
and dedicated public servants who work in libraries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries are about more than just burrowing 
books. Meeting rooms are used by community groups; library 
staff host education programs and clubs, and the publicly 
accessible computer terminals are essential to many. There are 
services for seniors, children, employment support, language 
and reading groups, citizenship test preparation, and help for 
newcomers to build their resumés. These cuts will have a 
disproportionate impact on rural communities where libraries 

are a vital community space. Potential closures or reductions in 
services will severely impact our communities. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan renew its 
commitment to the invaluable programming, education 
opportunities, and public spaces our libraries provide 
across this province and restore the $4.8 million in funding 
for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to present a 
petition calling on the government to restore funding to 
post-secondary education institutions. Post-secondary education 
is extremely important for the future of this province and yet the 
Sask Party is making students and their families pay for their 
financial mismanagement. 
 
Saskatchewan students already pay among the highest tuition 
rates in the country, and this budget has cut $36.8 million from 
post-secondary education and 6.4 million from technical 
institutions. Funding for the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund 
and scholarships have been cut by 8.2 million, and a 2016 
election promise has been broken by cancelling the first home 
plan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
[14:00] 
 

World Parkinson’s Day 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 
April 11th, is World Parkinson’s Day, a day to increase 
awareness of this disease as well as the good work by world 
organizations dedicated to eradicating this disease. 2017 
commemorates the 200th anniversary of the publishing of the 
first essay on Parkinson’s. Parkinson’s is a progressive brain 
disease for which there is no cure. Over 100,000 Canadians and 
over 6 million people worldwide suffer from Parkinson’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know someone affected by Parkinson’s. 
Rod Gantefoer, previous Finance minister and MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] for Melfort, was diagnosed with 
Parkinson’s in 2010. Mr. Speaker, Rod has always had a 
positive outlook on his diagnosis which I greatly admire. He 
always says, and I quote, “It’s better to wear out than rust out” 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

and he keeps busy. If only a positive attitude and determination 
were enough to overcome such a disease. Advocates are hoping 
to mobilize 50 countries around the world for this project, 
bringing us closer and closer to finding a cure for those 
suffering from the disease, including Rod. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in acknowledging 
World Parkinson’s Day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

National Wildlife Week 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, across Canada each year, the 
week of April 10th is celebrated as National Wildlife Week. 
The week was chosen as a memorial to the famous Canadian 
conservationist, Jack Miner, who is credited with saving the 
Canada goose from extinction and pioneering widespread avian 
tagging operations for tracking the migratory paths of birds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Wildlife Week encourages Canadian 
people to take interest in wildlife conservation through 
ecology-related education, sporting, and tourism events. This 
year’s National Wildlife Week theme is Conserve the Wonder. 
The theme is inextricably connected with Canada’s 150th 
anniversary and the celebration of Canada’s national parks. It 
encourages people to reacquaint with the wonder they felt the 
first time they were awed by nature and to help conserve our 
ecosystems for future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have many diverse and 
beautiful ecosystems, and our wetlands are just one example. 
Wetlands are not only home to much of Saskatchewan’s 
wildlife, they help protect us from flooding and drought. The 
disappearance of wetlands through unlicensed drainage has 
resulted in dramatic changes to watersheds throughout our 
province. More must be done, and our government needs to be 
more vigilant in its role as regulator to protect our watersheds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
National Wildlife Week and to work towards the conservation 
of ecosystems like our wetlands so that future generations can 
appreciate the natural beauty Saskatchewan has to offer. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Team Wins Western Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 
the Extreme Hockey Regina Capitals became champions of the 
Western Canadian Junior B league after a best-of-seven final 
against the Saskatoon AGI Insurance Quakers. The Regina 
Capitals were victorious, winning 7-3 in their final game on 
Sunday night, after three overtime wins previously. Eric Duran 
had three goals and two assists during the championship, and 
Braydon Delorme had a five-point game, with one goal and four 
assists. 
 
Last playoff season, after a playoff run filled with overtime 
play, the Regina Capitals fell short and lost the bronze medal to 

the North Peace Navigators in the 2016 Keystone Cup which 
was held here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, the team is ecstatic to 
have another run at the cup, as they come off an east 
division-leading 34-3-0-3 record during the 2016-17 regular 
season, also winning 12 of their 15 playoff games. With 
previous experiences battling for the Keystone Cup, the team 
feels prepared and ready for what is to come and are motivated 
to go all the way in this year’s tournament. Their goal leading 
into the 2017 Keystone Cup which will be held in Arborg, 
Manitoba: no more overtimes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
athletes, staff, and sponsors of the Extreme Hockey Regina 
Capitals on their Junior B championship, and all the best on 
their journey for the 2017 Keystone Cup. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Cupcake Day Raises Funds for Animals 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Monday, February 
27th marked this year’s National Cupcake Day. This day 
supports the vital and worthwhile cause of raising money for 
our local humane societies and animal shelters by encouraging 
to people to make and sell cupcakes on their behalf. This year, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say the Prince Albert SPCA [Society 
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] held its first-ever 
National Cupcake Day, and it was a sweet success. 
 
At the beginning of February, our local SPCA put out a call for 
donations of cupcakes, which then they sold at the Gateway 
Mall. They received so many cupcakes, Mr. Speaker, that they 
actually had to extend their event and set up again on Saturday, 
March 4th. The SPCA said that community support for 
Cupcake Day was so great the event will be brought back again 
next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert SPCA does a wonderful job 
taking in lost or abused animals in and around our city. They 
are always in need of food, blankets, and toys, and the money 
raised from National Cupcake Day will help take a bit of the 
strain out of their budget. 
 
I have no doubt, knowing Prince Albert, that next year’s 
National Cupcake Day will be even bigger and better. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in congratulating 
the staff and volunteers of the Prince Albert SPCA on the 
success of their first annual National Cupcake Day in Prince 
Albert. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Hunter Brothers Win Music Awards 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to stand today and highlight some local country music 
talent. Luke, J.J., Dusty, Brock, and Ty Hunter were born and 
raised in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan. We know them as the 
Hunter Brothers. Growing up, the brothers worked on the 
family farm, played hockey for the Edmonton Oilers and 
Kelowna Rockets, and singing gospel music. 
 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

They decided to try their talents in country music. The Hunter 
Brothers joined the label Open Roads in 2015, releasing two 
singles that peaked at positions in the top 40 list in 2016 — “El 
Dorado,” and “Long Way to Love You.” Even their little video 
on Facebook, The Combines Stuck, went viral last fall while 
harvesting, hitting over 1.5 million views. 
 
They hit the road last year and did a radio tour across Canada in 
2016 performing live acoustics on TV and radio stations across 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, they have also received their fair share of 
awards. They received two awards at the 2017 Saskatchewan 
Country Music Awards — Emerging Artist of the Year award, 
and top Group of the Year award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Hunter Brothers on their great year. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Sod-Turning for Genesis Grain & Fertilizer 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, our government 
has been working very hard the last decade to make sure that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and to invest. A 
great example would be the announcement of Genesis Grain & 
Fertilizer moving ahead to build its first of a series of 
farmer-owned fertilizer super centres. Last week I was pleased 
to participate in the sod-turning ceremony of Genesis’s $25 
million facility being constructed at Belle Plaine. It will have a 
25 000 tonne storage capacity as well as a blending and 
distribution centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new facility will be designed to handle 
150 000 tonnes of product annually, products that includes local 
potash, urea, phosphate, micronutrients, and sulphur. Once 
completed, this will be one of the biggest direct-to-farm 
facilities in the country, and it’s been financed in part by 
farmers who will share ownership with Saskatoon-based ag 
input retailer, Farmers of North America, and AgraCity. The 
plan is to have seven of these facilities to be built across the 
Canadian prairies, and we’re thrilled that the first is going to be 
built here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I welcome the new Genesis farm, grain, and fertilizer facility 
and thank the farmers and companies who are investing in this 
project right here in Saskatchewan, and I invite all members to 
join me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 

Saskatchewan Entrepreneurs at G20 
Young Entrepreneurs’ Alliance Summit 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today I’m really happy to highlight the individuals 
who will be representing Canada at the G20 Young 
Entrepreneurs’ Alliance Summit this year in Berlin. The 
alliance selected 35 entrepreneurs from Canada to travel to this 
summit where they will engage with G20 [Group of 20] leaders 
and policymakers while sharing this experience with over 400 
entrepreneurs from around the globe. 

This year, three young people from Saskatchewan will be 
representing our province and nation at the summit. They are 
Regina’s own Tynan Wenarchuk and Tyler Willox as well as 
Saskatoon’s Katrina German. 
 
Tynan is Regina-born, has recently moved to Calgary where he 
founded his company, Illuminate which focuses on corporate 
culture and employment engagement strategy. 
 
Katrina is the CEO [chief executive officer] of Lifetime 
Productions, and has influenced millions of people through 
digital storytelling and online media. 
 
And Tyler Willox, who is no stranger to this government, was 
recently slated as the Chair of the board of directors for the 
Regina & District Chamber of Commerce, the youngest in 
Regina history. I’ve been fortunate enough, Mr. Speaker, to 
work alongside Tyler in many capacities, and I cannot be 
prouder of this deserving individual and the others from 
Saskatchewan to represent us and all of our young 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate Tynan, Tyler, 
and Katrina on being selected to represent Canada at the 
prestigious Young Entrepreneurs’ Alliance G20 Summit this 
year in Berlin. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of people have 
been speaking out against the consequences of the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste all across Saskatchewan. 
But the Sask Party refuses to accept any responsibility for the 
financial mess they’ve created. 
 
The Premier has become so arrogant and out of touch that he 
won’t even stand in this Assembly to answer basic questions 
about his GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. And 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, he snuck past reporters who were 
waiting to ask him questions out in the rotunda. 
 
And the rest of the cabinet of course isn’t much better. The 
Economy minister told us yesterday, “. . . we are committed to 
working with the Privacy Commissioner . . .” But from these 
GTH documents to pipeline inspection reports, they refuse to 
comply with the rulings, and they won’t follow the law. The 
Privacy Commissioner has said the facts in these certainly 
aren’t commercially sensitive, so really there’s no reason the 
Premier can’t tell us: how much money per acre did CP 
[Canadian Pacific] Rail pay for its land at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the process that we’re 
following in terms of privacy, in terms of confidential 
documents is exactly the same process that members opposite 
followed when they were in the government, and it served the 
province very well. 
 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Contracts With Public Employees 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, he got to his feet today. 
Didn’t find much of an answer, but we hope that he’ll follow 
the ruling of the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
You know, yesterday while the Premier was hiding from the 
journalists, it was the Minister of Finance that went out to cover 
for him. He was asked about the letter from the Sask Party 
government telling school divisions to immediately get started 
on negotiations with their employees to cut their pay by 3.5 per 
cent. It gave them only four days to fill out a “reporting 
template.” It said savings could not come through “. . . further 
reductions in staff levels, capturing attrition or other cost 
reductions . . .” Mr. Speaker, immediate wage cuts were the 
only option. 
 
The minister, though, told journalists, “We’re not asking them 
to break contracts, just come back to the negotiating table.” And 
then, “If that means layoffs, that’s where we’re going as far as 
an option.” Mr. Speaker, when it was pointed out that he was 
contradicting the letter, he added, “I don’t necessarily agree 
with that language in the letter.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier finally be straight with 
Saskatchewan people and commit to not ripping up contracts 
and not firing any more of the people who teach our kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there is going to be no contracts ripped up with any 
public sector unions, with any unions representing public 
service providers in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve been 
very clear about that, however, that we need to find another 3.5 
per cent reduction in the overall costs of compensation for the 
public sector, Mr. Speaker. We’ve asked that, from our side of 
it, from the government management side of it, that all options 
remain open, Mr. Speaker. We need to respect the collective 
bargaining process and see what is agreed to by both the unions 
and management. 
 
They’ll know, Mr. Speaker, that we have set that goal though to 
be achieved, a 3.5 per cent reduction, which we have taken first 
for ourselves, Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative 
Assembly have taken first for themselves. And now we’re 
going to be encouraging those tables to be engaged when 
contracts expire, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], 
for example, the contract I think expires this summer and then 
collective bargaining will occur, as it should, between both 
trustees and the STF. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, pretty rich, pretty 

offensive coming from a Premier who’s received almost half a 
million dollars in top-ups, Mr. Speaker, and has increased the 
number of MLAs by three in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Either they’re ripping up contracts or they’re not. They, you 
know, need to get their stories straight, and they need to be 
attacking . . . you know, stop attacking everyone else except 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. They need to take some responsibility 
for their actions. And yesterday of course, the Finance minister 
went out there, covering for the Premier, answering these 
questions. He says, well we have to do it; we have to do it. Page 
46 of the budget. I see the Premier holding the book here today. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they wrote the budget. They’re the ones that 
put that, and the writing was on the wall, Mr. Speaker, a long 
time ago. 
 
The fact is, they didn’t come clean to Saskatchewan people. 
And you know, at the end of the day, it’s not our teachers; it’s 
not those that are serving in our classrooms that created the 
financial mess, the scandal, the mismanagement, or the waste 
and the massive deficit of the Sask Party, and they certainly 
shouldn’t be paying for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if nothing else, if nothing else, as the Premier’s holding his 
budget book and pointing to page 46 which he wrote, would he 
look to page 47 and at least come clean with Saskatchewan 
people and admit that, under the Sask Party in the past five 
years alone, they’ve doubled the debt to $18 billion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 
for divulging the great opposition research over there that has 
determined that the government wrote the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
Of course the government wrote the budget, as a result of, as a 
result of consultations that occurred prior to the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes, the budget was tabled because it was written by 
the government. And in it, it highlights on page 47 that the cost 
savings we need to find from the public sector has to extend 
over a number of years. The bottom line is, the bottom line, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we are going to allow collective bargaining to 
determine how those efficiencies will be achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and as for debt, Mr. Speaker, as for the fiscal 
probity and responsibility of the government, I would just point 
this out to members opposite. I would point out the headline 
from credit rating agency DBRS [Dominion Bond Rating 
Service Ltd.], who I probably will trust more on the issue of 
fiscal responsibility than members opposite. They said 
Saskatchewan’s budget represents “A Determined Plan to 
Return to Balance.” Far different was their headline for 
Alberta’s budget, which is run by their brothers and sisters over 
in Edmonton — Alberta’s budget, “Large Deficits and Rising 
Debt Erode Flexibility.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can look at Maclean’s nationally, 
commentary in the National Post. They will point out that this 
province and this party and this government has gone another 
direction from what members opposite and their party are doing 
where they have a chance to control the levers, including in 
Alberta, where they decided to procrastinate, Mr. Speaker, on 
balancing the budget. 
 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

We made a different choice in this province. And to the 
member’s question on debt — he hates this answer but it’s true 
— operating debt inherited from members opposite, that big 
orange credit card, is down, Mr. Speaker, even after this budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education and Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — No clarity and no responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
And the Education minister won’t be clear about the conflict 
between what his deputy minister wrote and what the Finance 
minister said. The letter couldn’t have been more clear. School 
divisions were ordered to immediately, quote, drag teachers and 
educational assistants back to the bargaining table and to do it 
whether their contracts were due or just beginning. It doesn’t 
matter. And ordering boards, the people who work in our kids’ 
schools . . . or ordering staff, the people who work in our kids’ 
schools to accept a 3.5 per cent pay cut. The Finance minister 
said “I’m not threatening” but “If that means layoffs that is 
where we’re going.” 
  
Mr. Speaker, could the minister please help me out. If telling 
people to take a pay cut or get fired is not a threat, what is it? 
Does he stand by this letter? And will he tell us how he, the 
Minister of Education, the Minister of Labour, and the Deputy 
Premier justifies breaking a signed agreement with our kids’ 
teachers for the second time in two years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
it perfectly clear to the members opposite, to the teachers, and 
the great workers that we have in our province that it is 
absolutely not our intention to create an unfair labour practice, 
to breach the terms of a collective agreement. That is something 
we’re absolutely not going to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, though: we recognize the fiscal 
reality that our province has. We’re prepared to sit down at a 
bargaining table and have a realistic discussion about things that 
we can do to reduce the cost of employment in our province. 
We want to have those discussions with our partners in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, this budget is not without challenges. 
We want to make sure that we do it in a respectful way, in a 
meaningful way. And, Mr. Speaker, those discussions will take 
place and I want to make it clear right now that we are not 
counselling, advocating . . . and we’ve told that to our people in 
the workplace. We are not advocating breaching a contract. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that minister is the one who is 
ramming through changes to The Education Act that silences 
local voices and gives the power to guess who? Himself. He’ll 
have full control to intervene in every single aspect of our kids’ 
education from the director’s office to the classroom and 
everywhere in between. 
 
To be fair, he’s not keeping all of the power for himself. He’s 
also making it easier for the cabinet to close schools. That’s 

right. All of the protections for rural schools and local voices, 
that they brought in with so much fanfare and loved to talk 
about, they’re now scrapping. It’s clear the Sask Party has 
forgotten who they are working for, Mr. Speaker. That minister, 
that party, they’re shutting down rural libraries and arguing 
communities don’t need these community hubs. He even 
suggested yesterday that libraries should ask cities and towns 
for funding. Apparently he forgot that they’re slashing their 
funding too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister not see how arrogant he looks? 
Does he not understand why Saskatchewan families are 
opposed to this out-of-touch power grab to control our kids’ 
education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, amazingly the members 
opposite chose to accuse us of closing schools — this side of 
the House being accused by those people, the people that closed 
176 schools. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, who 
writes their questions for them, but, Mr. Speaker, to whoever 
writes their questions, I’ve got Wollaston Lake School, 
Shellbrook Elementary, Shellbrook Primary/White School, 
Canwood Elementary, Paddockwood Elementary, Domremy 
School, Canora Senior Elementary School, Buchanan School, 
William Derby Elementary in Strasbourg, Gerald Elementary in 
Gerald, Kayville School in Kayville, Radville Elementary in 
Radville, Spruce Lake Elementary in Spruce . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Crescent School in Regina, McNab 
School in Regina, Mable Brown School in Regina, Hawarden 
School in Hawarden, Elbow Elementary in Elbow, Strongfield 
Elementary, Togo Elementary, Grosvenor Park School in 
Saskatoon, Wilson School in Saskatoon, Quill Lake 
Elementary, St. Front School in Wadena, Weldon School in 
Weldon, MacDowall Elementary. Mr. Speaker, I can go on and 
on 176 times. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that minister likes to 
talk about the list that’s from 20 years ago, but not about the 
schools that he’s putting on the chopping block today because 
of his actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister who says we need fewer 
libraries because of fewer people. Well he sure changed his tune 
since 2012 when he said, when he wanted to, and I quote, we 
want “. . . to ensure that we don’t have people that are 
shortchanged or have to travel any further than they already 
do.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he wasn’t talking about libraries then. He was 
talking about three more MLAs that no one in this province 
asked for. But, Mr. Speaker, no one except for Sask Party 
strategists were asking for more MLAs. But thousands of 
people here in this province have come out to demand that he 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

reverse his attack on our libraries. 
 
Can the minister admit that the right place to cut for long-term 
benefit for our province is to move to scrap the five MLAs? 
Will he reverse his cuts to the libraries? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raised a number of issues and I’ll try and work through them in 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first he accuses us of closing schools. Mr. 
Speaker, schools that we’ve built and added, a record-breaking 
21 new schools: in Martensville, Lake Vista and Holy Mary; in 
Warman, Traditions and Holy Trinity; Saskatoon, Sylvia 
Fedoruk, Ernest Lindner, Colette Bourgonje, Chief Whitecap, 
St. Nicholas, St. Thérèse of Lisieux, St. Kateri Tekakwitha, St. 
Lorenzo Ruiz; École Harbour Landing in Regina, Plainsview in 
Regina, École Wascana Plains in Regina, Scott Collegiate in 
Regina, St. Kateri in Regina, St. Nicholas, St. Elizabeth, Sacred 
Heart. And even though the member, the critic, opposed it, a 
new school for Connaught. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister uses lines 
like that, he sounds almost as hard to believe as when the 
minister brags that they were so generous in how they have left 
the revenue-sharing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our municipal leaders do not agree. Yesterday 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
representatives said that through all the Sask Party’s cuts and 
downloadings, they have fully hollowed out the municipal 
revenue-sharing plan. They went on to say the municipal 
revenue sharing has “. . . become an excuse to hand more and 
more to our hometowns.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party use municipal revenue sharing as 
an excuse to do whatever they want. Now after blowing through 
the province’s, the Sask Party wants to raid the rainy day funds 
of our cities and towns. The Premier even said these reserves 
were funded by the province’s municipal revenue-sharing 
program so they should be used to help get the Sask Party out of 
their financial mess. 
 
But our cities and towns say that the reserves are theirs, and the 
reserve sharing went to serving Saskatchewan people. So whose 
facts would the minister like to correct — the Premier’s, or the 
leaders of our cities and towns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious 
issue, and in the wake of some city council meetings in both 
Regina and Saskatoon where the prospect of tax increases have 
been raised in both cities, although much more modestly in 
Saskatoon where clearly the council is earnestly looking at 
ways to accommodate the reduction in revenue, Mr. Speaker. 

I would point out though that here in Regina, we are suggesting 
that reserves be considered, Mr. Speaker, so that taxpayers 
ought not to face a tax hike. And in this respect, I think we’re 
joined by the current mayor, who in 2003 noted that the city of 
Regina reserves were, “Our reserves are in some senses 
excessive. They’re large and they’re growing.” He noted that 
council members should keep those numbers in mind when 
considering to hike property taxes. We agree with then 
councillor Fougere. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the then councillor and current 
mayor said that reserves, dipping into reserves specifically, that 
has been used . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well she yelled 
about 2005. That was back when there was no revenue sharing 
from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. That was when the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] was in charge, and for 16 years they 
downloaded onto municipalities. So what we inherited was a 
situation where that had to be rebuilt. But here’s what was 
suggested by the then councillor and now mayor: Fougere said, 
council has been cautious about when it dips into reserves. But 
then he said, and I quote, “That has been used judiciously by 
members of council to help cut what could be a tax increase. I 
don’t make any apologies for that,” he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the right sentiment at this point. We have a 
one-, two-, or three-year plan to balance, a short term to get 
through, Mr. Speaker. We’re asking all of us to participate in 
getting the budget to balance, including for our towns and 
cities, to share in just 3 per cent of the overall resource revenues 
that are declined. And, Mr. Speaker, we ask this in the spirit of 
goodwill, based on our record where we have cleaned up a 
municipal funding mess inherited from members opposite, now 
for the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, 2.5 times more than it 
was when members opposite could do more than talk, when 
they actually had the chance to do something on this side of the 
House. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what an utter load of 
nonsense from the Premier of Saskatchewan. What a total 
disgrace for every member of that caucus to back-pat and 
applaud that sort of a message from this Premier that twists 
around the reality that our cities are facing. The words and 
actions of that Premier and Sask Party are offensive to all the 
elected leaders in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know that Premier has suggested that he’s consulted 
mayors and councils. SUMA, the mayors and councils have 
said that’s laughable and that it’s an affront to consultation, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a Premier who couldn’t manage his own 
resources, didn’t save a dime, drained his rainy day fund, piled 
on the debt, Mr. Speaker, and now he’s telling our cities and 
towns, responsible fiscal managers, to do the same thing the 
Sask Party did? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. That’s not on in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is our cities and towns are going to do all 
they can. They’re now looking at options, our two biggest 
cities, to actually charge the province for the school sites, Mr. 
Speaker. And how can you blame them? Their pockets have 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

been picked by this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: we know he 
didn’t have the decency or the . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Everyone needs to hopefully raise the 
decorum in this Assembly. I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition 
to ask his question now. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We know the Premier of Saskatchewan 
didn’t have the decency or the backbone to look directly at 
municipalities before cutting these needed dollars — 
mean-spirited, short-sighted, and damaging, Mr. Speaker. Will 
he finally do the right thing and sit down with the 
common-sense, elected leaders of our cities, towns, and villages 
and scrap this damaging cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what my hon. friend forgets is 
that, in fact, we went right to SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and said everything was 
on the table, including revenue sharing which we kept whole, 
including the municipal surcharge which we kept whole, Mr. 
Speaker, and yes, including grants-in-lieu to which there was a 
change. 
 
He’s, Mr. Speaker, in high dudgeon today, talking about what 
might be an affront. What was an affront to the municipalities 
of this province is how the NDP treated them for 16 years, even 
when they were sitting on a pile of their own money, even when 
provincial government revenue, Mr. Speaker, was huge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what SUMA said. According to SUMA . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well they don’t want to hear this, 
Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to hear. This is their record. This 
is why they sit in the number they sit over there. According to 
SUMA, municipal revenue sharing was cut back by as much as 
60 per cent from ’91 to ’97 and stagnant until 2003. In the 
2017-18 budget, Mr. Speaker, Regina will receive, Regina 
alone will receive $40.5 million in revenue sharing. 
 
And here’s one other point I would share with members 
opposite if they’re worried about what’s an affront to 
municipalities. The provincial government under the NDP froze 
municipal grants at $85 million in 2005. While they were 
enjoying record revenues in oil and resource revenues, they 
froze it at 85 million. In this budget, which they’re decrying as 
some cuts to the municipal sector, what’s revenue sharing 
today? $258 million. We’ll put our record on sharing with 
municipalities and infrastructure in municipalities against their 
record any day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan can try to disgrace the elected leaders of 
Saskatchewan, of our cities and towns and villages, all he 
wants. But we’ll stand with them and we’ll stand with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

You know, the Premier makes a mockery of accountability day 
after day as he dodges question after question on his scandal, 
and he makes a mockery of consultation with Saskatchewan 
people. And don’t take our word for it. That’s what SUMA is 
saying. The elected leaders and the mayors of our villages and 
towns all across Saskatchewan who said actually that, they said 
it was almost laughable for the Premier of Saskatchewan to 
suggest the tiny mention in his speech, of some mention of 
grants, as some sort of consultation. They said almost 
laughable, Mr. Speaker. And what they’ve said is that in fact 
it’s an affront, Mr. Speaker, to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consequences are real. This is a Premier that 
broke his word and has broken trust with Saskatchewan people. 
This is a Premier that’s adding a billion dollars of new tax hikes 
to Saskatchewan people, that can’t balance the budget, and 
that’s cutting and selling off things we count on. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, this Premier’s very actions are 
putting our municipalities in a position to be forced to bring 
forward more tax hikes and service cuts to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Why did the Premier not have the decency to be 
straight with our cities and towns and Saskatchewan people? 
Why is he making them do his dirty work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on this particular option in terms of the choices that 
municipalities can make, we very much are standing with 
taxpayers. We are saying, we are saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
municipalities have enjoyed fairly and it’s absolutely true to say 
record revenue sharing over 10 years, so much so that they’ve 
been able to put more into reserves. The city of Regina’s 
reserves have doubled since 2010. In part that’s due to the 
generous revenue sharing . . . In part it’s due to the generous 
revenue-sharing formula of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So they have these significant reserves. And I credit Saskatoon; 
they’re looking at a very modest tax increase, maybe not one at 
all. We’re asking all municipalities to look at the short-term 
measure of reserves that were in fact aided by the revenue 
sharing on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, to help share in 
the balance plan budget of the government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
make no mistake, we have a plan to get to balance in three 
years. 
 
I don’t know what members would offer on that side of the 
House but we could only go by their past record. What did they 
do when they faced the fiscal challenge? How about 176 
schools closed? That’s what they did when faced with the 
challenge. How about 52 hospitals closed? That’s what they did 
when faced with the challenge. How about 1,100 long-term care 
beds shut down? That’s what they did when faced with the 
challenge — fewer teachers, 600 nurses fired, and 21 tax hikes, 
and the worst job creation record in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what. That’s turned around. These 
challenges are real. We will meet them and we will ensure what 
has been the second-best job creation record in the country and 
some of the fastest population growth we’ve ever had will 
continue, Mr. Speaker, under this plan. I look forward to 
hearing what members have to offer opposite. 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 50 — The Provincial 
Capital Commission Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join 
debate on this particular bill and especially at this particular 
junction, Mr. Speaker, because with The Provincial Capital 
Commission Act, what this government is trying to accomplish 
is a takeover of the Wascana Centre Authority, Mr. Speaker. 
They talk about a whole bunch of different things and they’ll try 
to imply that the partners in the University of Regina and the 
city of Regina have somehow, by commissioning a report back 
in 2011 and into 2014, that they’re somehow on board with 
these changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But of course last night, Mr. Speaker, in estimates, we couldn’t 
get . . . You know, after repeated questioning, the minister 
could not produce proof of whether or not the city’s on board or 
the university’s on board. They’ll talk around a bunch of 
different things, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes down to it, 
when they are asked to produce the evidence that, you know, 
these are changes that would make this an amicable thing, 
something about the best interest of the Wascana Centre 
Authority, Mr. Speaker, when they’re asked to produce that, 
they can’t do it, Mr. Speaker, because that’s not what happened. 
 
And in terms of this partnership, Mr. Speaker, that’s been 
around since 1962, that’s built on the great work of master 
plans dating back to 1913, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 
way that this government fumbles its file on this score, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s hard to imagine what the real end game is in terms 
of the Wascana Centre Authority and the assets that belong with 
that entity. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a lot of 
questions for this minister as regards the plans for those assets. 
 
And I guess if the best indicator of future behaviour is indeed 
past behaviour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again to use one of the 
favourite sayings from the Premier — that’s always so nice 
when he coins that one, Mr. Speaker — if that is indeed what 
we can expect, Mr. Speaker, once they get their hands on the 
Wascana Centre Authority, once they get control of that board, 
Mr. Speaker, you know, mark my words: the sale is going to be 
on like it’s on throughout the rest of the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of that tremendous public good, that tremendous public 
asset that is Wascana Centre Authority, Mr. Speaker, the way it 
is valued so deeply by the people of not just Regina but 
throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, the way that this 
government takes 55 years of partnership and throws it away 
with a takeover bid, Mr. Speaker, where . . . And again this is, 

you know, this is someone who should know, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the councillor from the city of Regina by the name of 
Robert Hawkins, a man who ran for that party in 2011, Mr. 
Speaker, who came within 200-odd votes of becoming the 
Member of the Legislative Assembly for Lakeview. Since went 
on to serve in civic government, Mr. Speaker. Also a professor 
at the university, well known to many of us here. 
 
When the budget came down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did 
that individual say about this government and about this 
measure in particular, Mr. Speaker? He said that this budget 
came like a thief in the night, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said 
about this budget. And he said this budget has darkness around 
the corners. And what was he talking about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? He was talking about the plans on the part of this 
government for Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, right now as it stands in the board where the 
decisions are made by the Wascana Centre Authority, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve got a balance between the parties. You’ve got 
five board members appointed by the province. You’ve got 
three appointed by the university, and you’ve got three 
appointed by the city. And, Mr. Speaker, that has been a 
balance of partnership that has served us more or less well for 
the past 55 years. 
 
And they want to take that partnership, Mr. Speaker, and as we 
see on so many other fronts, it’s not enough to have partnership. 
They want to have control. They want to take that board and 
change it to a balance of three appointees from the province, 
one from the university — that the province will pick from the 
list submitted by the university, Mr. Speaker; they can’t even do 
that by themselves — and one in a similar manner from the city. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you wonder why that is. How can it be that 
. . . You know, it’s existed 55 years. It made it through the big 
dig, Mr. Speaker. It’s been so well valued by the people of 
Saskatchewan. How is it that they’re coming forward with this 
measure at this time? Well, Mr. Speaker, again I would refer 
you back to the remarks of Councillor Hawkins as regards this 
budget coming like a thief in the night and as regards the 
darkness that is there around the corners of this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so when you’re listening to different officials on the part of 
this government try to explain this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 
the reason for it, and you may be struck by the feeling that, you 
know, what they’re saying doesn’t make any sense, Mr. 
Speaker, you’re not alone. You’re not alone, Mr. Speaker, 
because what they’re saying doesn’t make any sense. 
 
They can talk about how a co-operative, collaborative process 
has served the park very well, and then on the other hand, well 
we want to streamline that. And well you know, they were part 
of commissioning that report, Mr. Speaker, that made those 
suggestions around governance, but no, they didn’t actually 
endorse those governance recommendations. But we’re going to 
go ahead with them anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what the heck is this all about? When are we going to get a 
straight answer from this government about the real purpose of 
the move to take over the board of Wascana Centre Authority? 
 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

[14:45] 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this is at the same time when they’re 
moving to one big health region; when they’re moving to take 
over the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education system in 
this province; when they’re writing terms for the budgets of our 
post-secondary education institutions, Mr. Speaker. When 
they’re taking a run at the reserves out there in our provincial 
library system that don’t exist, Mr. Speaker, and they’re using 
that as some kind of cause for going after those reserves. 
 
When they’re taking what has been a positive, productive 
partnership with our municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and doing 
damage to that, and passing along cuts and tax increases to 
those institutions to make, to do the dirty work of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s all part of a whole. It’s all part of 
a whole on the part of this government. 
 
And you know, this is a government of course that came 
forward with Bill 40 because they wanted to use The 
Interpretation Act to go after a privatization agenda, Mr. 
Speaker. They couldn’t get it past the people in the light of day, 
Mr. Speaker, so like the budget, here it comes like a thief in the 
night, Mr. Speaker, to try and get it past people because they 
know that that permission isn’t forthcoming. It wasn’t coming 
at election time, and it wouldn’t be coming at a referendum 
time, Mr. Speaker. So they go after The Interpretation Act to try 
and get through a trick that which they can’t get on the face of 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, you can almost set the timer to when the different 
deals are going to come forward to privatize chunks of our 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, those public assets that have 
been built up by Saskatchewan men and women over 
generations. And you don’t have to . . . Again, if the best 
predictor of future behaviour, Mr. Speaker, is indeed past 
behaviour, you can’t even take them at their word when it 
comes to something like the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 
 
This is something that they said was an essential service. They 
said it was safe, that it was a needed service, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s not even a year after the election when they said all of these 
things, looked the people straight in the eye, said those things, 
made those promises. And they come back with a broken 
promise, Mr. Speaker, that throws hundreds of lives into chaos, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again . . . I hear the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 
hollering from his seat. And again I think, you know, having 
shared a platform with that individual during election time, 
talking to seniors, Mr. Speaker, if they had the plan around STC 
then, Mr. Speaker, he should have talked about it then. He 
should have had the guts to tell the seniors about the plan, Mr. 
Speaker. But we didn’t hear anything about that. It waits for a 
year later, Mr. Speaker, to come again, as Councillor Hawkins 
has said, like a thief in the night. So again, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government has lost its way so badly that, you know, 
couldn’t find their moral compass with a map, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular bill, it’s just one more part of a pattern, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of a government that I don’t know if they’re 
going to come back with a new definition for The Interpretation 

Act around partnership, Mr. Speaker, because they preach 
partnership but what they practise is something very different. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the discussion that’s going 
to take place on Bill 50 in the committee. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d invite my colleagues opposite to do what they need 
to do to move it onward to committee so we can have that 
discussion. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Central Services that Bill No. 50, 
The Provincial Capital Commission Act, Crown and Central 
Agencies, be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 50, The Provincial Capital Commission 
Act, be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the 
Committee of Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 61 — The 
Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) 
Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this one’s interesting 
because this is something that they actually ran on and now are 
moving to keep the promise in the platform, Mr. Speaker, you 
know. Unusual for its . . . Remarkable for its quality of, you 
know, not being a broken promise to add to the list over there, 
Mr. Speaker. And again I haven’t been around for a million 
years. I haven’t been as long around as some, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I, you know, will not name names certainly. But 
I’ve been around long enough to know when the government 
put the list of promises made, promises kept up on the 
government website, Mr. Speaker, as a government document. 
And here we see, Mr. Speaker, a promise that was made in the 
election — fair enough — and a promise that they’re moving to 
keep. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of fostering innovation in terms of 
the work that’s going to be done under this incentive, we look 
forward to having a more detailed discussion with the minister 
about that in committee. 
 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

But, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is signal for what it is 
not, which is another broken promise on the part of this 
government or another promise where they talk, you know, sort 
of vaguely about keeping Saskatchewan strong, and then come 
forward with a billion dollars of tax increase. Or where they 
come forward with cuts for, you know, the . . . Again the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company stands out, Mr. 
Speaker, because they said it was an essential service. They said 
it was a needed service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, you know, it’s almost like the members opposite, 
it’s almost like they were taking over after a decade of some 
other government being in power, and then going to open the 
books and see where things were at, and to find out what they 
could and could not afford, Mr. Speaker. But of course that’s 
not the situation here. This is not the situation. This follows on 
a decade of those individuals in government, Mr. Speaker. So if 
they’re acting surprised, Mr. Speaker, I’d suggest that it’s heavy 
emphasis on act, because it’s those individuals that sat in the 
cabinet seats, Mr. Speaker, that made the decisions around the 
timetable of holding off the budget until after the election, that 
set up this phony-baloney transformational change process after 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again yesterday in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we heard 
the Premier talk about, you know, how they started to talk about 
transformational change after the election, Mr. Speaker, like 
that’s some kind of a mandate. You know, again, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of the kind of sand that that entails, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not where you get a mandate. You get a mandate going to the 
election and saying, here’s what we’re going to do. 
 
And you know, again I hear my friend, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, chirping some more from his seat. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, I’d suggest he cast his mind back to the ’91 
election because promise number one, after all the crazy things 
that had gone on under that government, Mr. Speaker, leading 
up to ’91, promise one on the part of Roy Romanow and those 
people was to open the books, Mr. Speaker, to open the books 
and to figure out where the heck the province was at because 
this is a government over there, Mr. Speaker, that in 1990 didn’t 
even pass their last budget, Mr. Speaker. They ran that election 
on five years plus a day, Mr. Speaker. It was like they were on 
federal time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, that this government, that this government made a 
conscious effort to hold the election before the budget went to 
the people, so that people could make an informed set of 
decisions around what this government was on about. You 
know, it’s too darn bad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government didn’t have the guts to come forward and say, 
here’s what our platform is. Here are all these cuts that we’re 
going to make. Here are all these taxes we’re going to increase. 
They didn’t do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They didn’t do that. 
They didn’t do that at all. 
 
So here we are. Oh well, pardon me. They did do that in the 
exception. And the exception that proves the rule is a bill like 
this, where they actually ran on it. They’re coming forward with 
it, and good enough, Mr. Speaker. Fair enough. That’s how it’s 
supposed to work. So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
more questions about this particular piece of legislation, that we 
look forward to committee to ask them. And with that, I’d invite 

my colleagues opposite to do what they need to do to move this 
bill on to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 
a motion by the Minister of the Economy that Bill No. 61, The 
Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) 
Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee will this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 61, The Saskatchewan Commercial 
Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act be committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 63 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur 
l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what a 
bill this is. We had the Finance minister and the Premier get up 
on March 22nd, tell the people of Saskatchewan that, you know 
what? They listened for months and months of consultations. 
They heard the people of Saskatchewan. They listened to their 
backbenchers who were saying that it was very, very clear that 
the people of Saskatchewan wanted to keep their locally elected 
trustees, that they wanted to make sure that there was a voice 
that was local that the people of Saskatchewan could reach. So 
the Premier and the Finance minister got up on March 22nd and 
said, we have listened to the people of Saskatchewan; we’re 
going to keep our locally elected trustees. 
 
Well what they didn’t tell people on March 22nd was the fine 
print, and that was that they were going to remove all of the 
powers for locally elected trustees; that this locally elected 
trustees will no longer have the powers that they have right 
now; that they will be the face of education, but they will not 
have a voice. And they will not have any control over what’s 
going to happen with respect to any of their school boards. 
 
This is an offensive, offensive bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It flies 
in the face of everything that we heard from the people of 
Saskatchewan, everything that those backbenchers heard from 
the people of Saskatchewan, and completely undermines the 
system, the democratic system that we’ve been operating on in 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

this province for at least a hundred years. 
 
This bill, as I said, guts the powers of trustees. It gives the 
control over to the minister. And I don’t know why we have a 
government that’s so desperate to control everything in this 
province right now. We have amalgamations in the health 
regions. We heard about control being taken away from the 
Wascana Centre Authority, and we’re seeing it as well in 
education. And I hope that the people of Saskatchewan are 
listening and I hope that the backbenchers are listening, 
especially the ones that had the courage to speak up against the 
potential for amalgamations and the potential for losing locally 
elected trustees. And I hope that they’re speaking out against 
cabinet now. 
 
Well they should have been doing it before they approved this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know what happened. I’m 
hoping that they just failed to read the fine print and they didn’t 
realize what they were actually approving because it flies in the 
face of everything that we heard from the Saskatchewan people. 
And I’m sure it also flies in the face of everything that they 
heard from the Saskatchewan people. Because when the 
Saskatchewan people asked to keep their locally elected voices, 
they also meant that they wanted to keep those local elected 
voices to have the powers to actually affect change and to be 
able to make the changes that are important for everybody’s 
specific school divisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think all members here can understand that every region in 
this province is a little bit different. Every school board in this 
province has its own nuances, its own special challenges and 
successes, which is why it’s so important to have this local 
elected voice, why it’s so important for us to have 
grassroots-level elected politicians, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
form of these trustees. 
 
Apparently the Sask Party thinks it’s appropriate to have the 
entire education system run out of Regina. And if they don’t 
want to believe me on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why don’t we 
hear from Dr. Shawn Davidson, the president of the SSBA 
[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], who did a press 
conference earlier this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I had the 
pleasure of listening to his concerns. Apparently he’s been 
waiting with bated breath for the minister to call him and 
perhaps maybe consult with the SSBA on this bill, but 
unfortunately he hasn’t heard from him yet. I’m hoping that the 
Minister of Education finally comes to his senses and decides to 
give a phone call to Dr. Davidson and have some actual 
consultation with the SSBA. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Let me read some of the quotes from his press conference that 
he gave today. “No meaningful consultation with the school 
boards of the province in ensuring that local autonomous voices 
is preserved in the law.” And that’s with respect to this bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s clear that the SSBA was thrown completely off-kilter with 
respect to this. They had no warning that this was the direction 
that the Government of Saskatchewan was going to go in, 
which sounds like a lot of the way this Sask Party has decided 
to consult with respect to this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We’ve been hearing from mayors and councillors that they 
experienced the same level of consultation before they released 
this budget. 
 
And if the members that sit on that side of the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, don’t want to listen to their constituents, 
perhaps they’ll listen to Mr. Davidson, who made it very clear 
what he’s heard from the Saskatchewan people. And he said, 
“The public wants boards to be the voice of public education, 
not the face of public education.” 
 
These locally elected trustees should have the powers to make 
decisions with respect to their school boards. They should not 
be nothing but figureheads or the face of education system 
when they don’t have any control over what’s happening in 
their school divisions, when they have a minister sitting in his 
office in Regina or Saskatoon reaching down into a local 
elected school board in Chinook, in Prairie Valley, in the North, 
in Melfort, for example. 
 
And he gave an even more poignant quote that I want to make 
sure that the members opposite pay attention to. He says: 
 

The kids of this province deserve to have advocates. They 
deserve to have boards that are empowered and able to 
make decisions and able to bring the grassroots voice of 
the local level to education. 

 
And afterwards he called on the public to let their MLAs know 
that this is a poorly thought-out bill, that it’s going to gut the 
powers of trustees, that it’s going to gut our ability to have local 
voices enter into the discussion around education and be able to 
make decisions with respect to education. 
 
And I hope that the MLAs opposite pay attention to those phone 
calls once they receive them and pay attention to the voices of 
Saskatchewan people who stood up in opposition to calls for 
potential amalgamations back prior to the budget. And I know 
members on this side were travelling across the province, 
listening to the people of Saskatchewan as they were holding 
town halls to express their frustration over this Sask Party 
decision. 
 
And with the work of the SSBA, I know that the public is going 
to realize that despite what the Premier and the Finance minister 
said on March 22nd, they’ve done just what they said they 
would not do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s so disappointing to see this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It flies in 
the face of everything that’s good in our school system. It’s 
going to create havoc in our education system. This is a poorly 
thought-out bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know other members on this side of the House are going to 
have more comments about this bill. I hope that if members 
opposite won’t pay attention to the debate that we are giving 
and the reasoned arguments against this bill that we giving, I 
hope they pay attention to the words of SSBA president, Dr. 
Davidson. And I hope they pay attention to the words of their 
constituents. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 63. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

Park has moved to adjourn Bill No. 63. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 64 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 64 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today and speak to this bill. And 
as the member for Regina Elphinstone just mentioned, it’s my 
birthday today, Mr. Speaker. I’m 42 years old. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thanks very much. Thank you for the good 
wishes. Kind of you. Everyone’s feeling very generous and kind 
today. That’s very nice. I appreciate it. It’s been that kind of a 
day, hasn’t it? 
 
You know, as I said, it’s my birthday today — 42 years old — 
and I’m not going to be able to join my family today to 
celebrate. So I got a chance to celebrate the other day, a bit to 
my surprise. I came home from Ottawa. I was off for meetings 
at the Broadbent Institute Progress Summit and a meeting of 
Upstream. I flew home from Ottawa, and then got to spend a 
couple of hours at home and had to drive down to Regina in 
time for session. And much to my surprise, my son, who’s five, 
and his grandma, had arranged a surprise party for me — 
balloons, decorations, stick drawings of Harry Potter all over 
the house, an ice cake. It was a nice surprise. I like a surprise 
party and I think a lot of people do. 
 
But you know, there is one of the characteristics of surprises 
that I think are essential, is they have to be as pleasurable for 
the person receiving the surprise as for the person giving the 
surprise. 
 
And you know, we’ve been seeing some pretty different kinds 
of surprises these days, Mr. Speaker. You know, we had people 
who counted on the libraries in this province, counted on the 
libraries as a place to get books or go and use the computer and 
look for jobs or just a social centre. But surprise — we’re going 
to cut those libraries, cut them by a huge portion. When it 
comes to the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, no funding. When 
it comes to many, many other areas, deep cuts that certainly will 
lead to job losses and likely closure of branches. 
 
We have families who count on their kids being able to have 
good quality education, be able to have, for example, support if 
their child has a learning challenge, have support in the 
classroom. They think they can count on that to have a good 
future for their kids. Well surprise — we’re not going to do that 
so much anymore. We’re going to cut education deeply. And 

surprise — on top of that, we’re going to increase your 
education taxes. Somehow we’re going to give you less but get 
you to pay more. 
 
Maybe there’s somebody who is in hospital and dealing with a 
serious illness or the pending loss of a loved one, and would 
like some support on the spiritual side, make sure that they’re 
able to process that tragedy that’s coming up and reach out to 
that deeper part of them and, you know, they count on the 
pastoral care that’s in hospitals. Surprise — it’s not there 
anymore. We’re not going to have that service, as valuable as it 
is. 
 
Or maybe somebody counts on taking the bus, whether it’s to 
ship parts to town or out of town, out to the rural areas, or they 
count on it for transport. In fact we had people come down to 
watch the budget who took the bus down. Surprise — there’s no 
bus to go home. You’re taking a cab home. Big surprise. Big 
surprise. 
 
And you know, there’s all kinds of people who have signed 
contracts, signed contracts that they can count on, that they can 
count on their wage increases as they’ve been allotted in their 
contracts, be able to count on their wage that they’ve signed up 
to earn. Well surprise — everything is on the table, including 
things that we’ve signed with you. 
 
So a lot of surprises, you know, a lot of surprises in this budget. 
Another big surprise was for the professors and students and 
instructors at the universities and colleges across this province, 
who on budget day discovered, hey, 5 per cent cut all across the 
board and wage cuts and job losses and program losses to come 
with it. Big surprise — thought you were going to have an 
education that you could afford? Thought you could come out 
of school without too much debt? Surprise — not going to 
happen. You’re going to be doing what this province is doing 
and watching your debt grow. 
 
Well those are some pretty classic surprises from this 
government, pretty out-of-the-box surprise thinking there. But 
there’s one enormous surprise, epic surprise you might say, an 
epic surprise in this budget, and that’s for the cities of this 
province. A $35.8 million surprise to the cities. 
 
And you know, we heard it today in question period. We’ve 
heard it lots from the Premier and the members opposite — oh, 
we told you this was coming. You know, we said everything 
was on the table. We told you about grants-in-lieu. 
 
In a laundry list of potential cuts, of potential changes, you slip 
in some subtle mention of a change. That is not consultation. 
That is not letting people know. Nobody listening to that, 
nobody sensible would be listening to that thinking, oh, they’re 
going to completely yank that program that we’ve counted on 
for over 50 years in the case of many cities. It’s just going to be 
gone. That little subtle mention, we just better get ready 
because that’s clearly not going to be there. 
 
No, nobody saw that coming. Nobody saw that coming from 
such a vague reference. In fact I know the government would 
like us to think that that was some good foreshadowing, that 
that hint of what they were going to open up budget day was 
really clear. But that’s not the response that we’re hearing. And 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

I think if we want to know whether that message was delivered 
clearly, we should ask the people for whom the message was 
intended. We should ask the people for whom the message was 
intended, for example Saskatoon mayor Charlie Clark, who 
said, “We had no idea this was coming and it’s a huge financial 
impact. It’s unprecedented for the city to take a one-time hit like 
this.” 
 
Who else did we hear from? We also heard from former Sask 
Party candidate and Regina Ward 2 councillor, Bob Hawkins: 
“This budget comes like a thief in the night.” Like I said, we 
like surprises, but nobody likes the surprise of a thief in the 
night. That’s not a good surprise. Randy Donauer, Saskatoon 
Ward 5 councillor, described it as a transfer of a tax burden 
from one level of government to another, just because they can. 
Because they have the power to do that, and the cities have 
really no choice but to take that. Regina mayor Michael 
Fougere said it came out of nowhere. Many municipalities have 
already set their budgets, and that’s why there’s some angst and 
concern and anger from this council. Moose Jaw city manager 
Matt Noble said that, “This is out of the blue. It’s a total 
blindside.” And Yorkton mayor Bob Maloney saying, “Just to 
pass along what’s been dumped on our plate, we need a 10 per 
cent increase in taxes. That transfer of that deficit onto the cities 
really can only be responded to by cutting services or increasing 
taxes.” And perhaps the strongest message from North 
Battleford mayor Ryan Bater, saying, “Well, outrage is putting 
it lightly. We were absolutely blindsided by this budget.” 
 
Surprise, surprise. So why the shock at this particular surprise? 
Because we’ve seen really, perhaps among the strongest 
responses to this pretty troubling budget across the board, has 
been to this program, the cut to this program of grants-in-lieu. 
And I think if you ask most people in Saskatchewan a few 
weeks ago what grants-in-lieu were, they would have had no 
idea what that meant. It’s a pretty arcane, little-understood 
program. But when you actually look at what it does and the 
purpose it plays, it is a payment in place of property taxes. 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy, in place of property taxes, deliver 
5 per cent, a levy of 5 per cent to ratepayers that is then 
delivered to the cities. And then that money is given to the 
cities. That money is given to the cities. 
 
It’s a historic arrangement that’s been in place for many 
decades. And the revenue-sharing formula, to which this 
government refers almost every day as a wonderful thing that 
they’ve done and practically invented, that revenue-sharing 
formula was put in place with the understanding of how 
grants-in-lieu worked, and that grants-in-lieu were in place. 
 
The revenue-sharing agreement and the design of that formula 
was done with an understanding of the ongoing grants-in-lieu. 
And we’ve heard a lot about the revenue-sharing formula, as I 
pointed out, and we hear this every day from the Premier that 
there’s unprecedented contribution from the province to the 
cities. But actually when you combine revenue sharing, 
grants-in-lieu, and capital expenditures, and the transfer, you 
actually see a decline from a peak in 2011 to actually a pretty 
steady decline over the last few years, with 2016 the lowest 
year in the last decade when you combine capital with revenue 
sharing with grants-in-lieu. Now that you’ve extracted 
grants-in-lieu you’re going to see a much bigger drop from the 
per capita transfer from the province to the cities.  

[15:15] 
 
How big of a drop? Dozens of cities having a huge decrease in 
their inputs from the province. You’ve got Regina with a loss 
from SaskEnergy and SaskPower combining to . . . adjusted 
from the 18 million that was expected down to 10,661,722 is 
predicted for 2017-2018. We have Saskatoon at the same 
number, 10,661,722. Those are obviously the two largest cities, 
the two biggest hits. We also see Moose Jaw from a combined 
. . . from SaskEnergy losing 934,242 and SaskPower, 
1,778,202, for a total of 2,712,444. A pretty big hit for a city the 
size of Moose Jaw. 
 
And we’ve heard from some cities that this is amounting to well 
over 50 per cent of what they were receiving from the province 
from other sources. Now that has been adjusted to some degree, 
but these are the numbers that are being predicted: Prince 
Albert, 2,433,854; Yorkton, 1,657,902; North Battleford, 
$1,132,155; Estevan, $896,328; Weyburn, $765,715; 
Humboldt, $477,319. We’ve seen protests in Humboldt over 
those numbers, as we’ve seen lots of people really upset by the 
size of the hit to that small city. Melfort, 420,390; Melville, 
334,267; Swift Current, 523,490; Lloydminster, 191,031. Those 
are the cities that will lose from SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 
 
From SaskEnergy alone we also see, ranging from the tens to 
hundreds of thousands, losses to Lloydminster, Kindersley, 
Warman, Nipawin, Martensville, Battleford, Tisdale, Rosetown, 
Assiniboia, Meadow Lake, Moosomin, Unity, Esterhazy, Maple 
Creek, Canora, Biggar, Shaunavon, Fort Qu’Appelle, Kamsack, 
Wynyard, Indian Head, Lumsden, Carlyle, Wadena, Eston, 
Wilkie, Oxbow, les beaux gens de Gravelbourg [Translation: 
the good people of Gravelbourg], Langenburg, Preeceville, 
Grenfell, Kipling, Kerrobert, Balgonie, Watrous, Leader, Carrot 
River, Kelvington, Gull Lake, Whitewood, Rosthern, Carnduff, 
Foam Lake, Wakaw, Redvers, Birch Hills, Macklin, Delisle, 
Wolseley, Rocanville, Watson, Strasbourg, Lanigan, Herbert, 
Cudworth, Stoughton, Churchbridge, Broadview, Kinistino, 
Arcola, Eastend. 
 
The list goes on: Lampman, Balcarres, Sturgis, Langham, 
Elrose, Bruno, Qu’Appelle, Cupar, Midale, Bienfait, Milestone, 
LeRoy, Kyle, Cabri, Norquay, Asquith, Luseland, Lafleche, 
Mossbank, Saltcoats, Yellow Grass, Star City. I was in Star 
City the other day. They’re very upset at the loss of the funding 
to the library; very upset about the loss of STC. Lemberg, Duck 
Lake, Burstall, Arborfield, Allan, Eatonia, Rose Valley, 
Alameda, Wapella, Bredenbury, Morse, Colonsay, Sintaluta, 
Zealandia, and Scott — all of those towns. 
 
And I read that out. I know that sounds a little bit like I’ve been 
everywhere, man, but when you think about just how many 
towns, how many smaller communities and large cities are 
really being deeply hurt by this, you realize it’s a big problem. 
 
And those cities are also being hit in other ways. The cities are 
losing funding for libraries, whether that’s the library cuts 
across the province or an actual complete elimination in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
We’re seeing cuts to parks and conservation areas, the 
Meewasin Valley Authority being cut deeply and changed from 
its statutory funding. Wascana being handed over to the 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2017 

province from the city, and the risks that are involved in that 
that have been so well elaborated upon by my colleague from 
Regina Elphinstone. 
 
And of course we shouldn’t overlook the impact that the PST 
[provincial sales tax] will have, especially when we’re looking 
at capital expenditures. As you’ve added this on now, you know 
it’s a 1 per cent hit on many, many things, but a 6 per cent 
increase on really substantial expenditures, including capital, 
when you look at construction. That’s going to hit cities badly. 
A million dollars has already been predicted just in the current 
budget for the city of Saskatoon. If they want, if the universities 
want, if any other major facilities want to have capital 
expenditures, it’s going to be a much more expensive 
proposition going forward. 
 
So what has the Sask Party response been to this? When they’ve 
heard back, when the cities came and said, we’re blindsided, we 
don’t like this surprise. This is going to hurt us badly. What 
have they said? Dig into your reserves. You’ve got too much 
money sitting around; use it up. And maybe that’s the one 
non-surprise from this budget, is because that’s the Sask Party’s 
approach. When they see a reserve, they want to spend it. When 
they see a rainy day fund, well it could be sunny outside but 
we’re calling it rain because they want to drain those reserves. 
 
And we see that, we’re living the results of that when you look 
at other resource-rich jurisdictions around the world. They’ve 
been building their sovereign wealth fund, whether that’s 
840-some billion in Norway to 3 billion in the neighbouring 
province of Alberta. Here, what’s our sovereign wealth fund? 
Well I don’t know. Maybe I’ll find some coins in the cushions 
of my chair here, but I’m certainly not finding any sovereign 
wealth fund. I encourage you to, you know, check in the seats 
there. See if you find any coins in the cracks because that’s 
about all we’ve got for a sovereign wealth fund. It’s entirely 
gone. We’ve been wasting the reserves of the province, and 
now the province wants us to waste the reserves of the cities, of 
the universities, of the schools. We want to use it up. 
 
And that’s not . . . And that’s been an accusation, an accusation 
that these are just too much, that these reserves are enormous 
amounts of money. Let’s look at what SUMA president Gordon 
Barnhart had to say about the reserves: 
 

Many communities do not have large reserves, and besides, 
reserve funds are a contingency plan for snow removal 
emergencies, major water main breaks, and other 
unexpected catastrophic infrastructure needs — not for last 
minute, permanent cuts by the province. 

 
So these reserves are of value, whether it’s saving up for a 
capital investment or being able to respond in a time of crisis. If 
we exhaust the reserves at the level of the province, the level of 
the cities, the level of all of the important institutions — 
schools, universities, health regions — our ability to deal with 
shocks, already damaged, only gets worse. But this government 
has emptied its own pockets and now wants to empty the 
pockets of every other institution in the province. 
 
And what will this mean for cities? What are they going to be 
able to do in response to this trouble? Well their options are 
really limited, and the jury is out. We don’t know exactly what 

every city will do, although we’ve started to hear now. We had 
Saskatoon giving us a bit more direction on what they’re going 
to do. The reality is, the options for cities are few. They’re in a 
box because they don’t have what the province has in terms of 
opportunities. They can’t run a deficit. They can’t do things like 
this government did: change taxation. They don’t have the 
options that this government did when designing the budget. 
 
This government did not have to decrease corporate income tax. 
They did not have to drop personal income tax for that highest 
level. There was no need to do that, and it’s not a helpful thing 
for the economy. It’s a helpful thing for a very, very small 
sector. 
 
And what have they done instead? They forced those tax cuts 
down to . . . Using those tax cuts, they’ve forced those costs 
down to the cities where they don’t have the option. All they 
can do is cut services or charge people more taxes. So when we 
see hikes to municipal property taxes around the city, it should 
be very clear to the people of the cities that I listed that those 
tax increases are Sask Party tax increases. That’s your surprise 
gift from this government, is they’ve decided to cut the funding 
transmitted to the city and give it . . . Really what they 
announced when they did that, they were announcing a tax 
increase in the cities of this province. 
 
We’ve already seen Saskatoon tried to keep it low, but they still 
had to do a 1 per cent increase and wage freezes across the 
board. We have not yet heard what Regina will do, but we’re 
hearing lots of talk of closing services, leisure facilities, etc., 
and lots of towns and cities talking about increases in their 
property tax. 
 
What is very clear is that this Sask Party surprise will be passed 
on to Saskatchewan residents. And this is already a levy from 
ratepayers. This is already something that’s being charged, that 
5 per cent that’s on SaskPower and SaskEnergy. It’s charged to 
ratepayers, and it’s transferred to the city for municipal 
services. But now, it’s not going to be transferred to cities 
anymore. Yoink, it’s just being taken. It’s a surprise grab of this 
fund, and is it going to reduce costs for ratepayers? No. Is it 
going back to the Crowns? No. Very strangely, and this is one 
of the weirdest things about this bill, it’s just going into the 
GRF, straight into the General Revenue Fund. For some reason, 
a property tax that isn’t being paid by the Crowns, that 5 per 
cent levy for that is going into the General Revenue Fund. And 
that’s very strange. 
 
And it’s also strange in the context of the minister having 
mused about this only being a one . . . actually really interesting 
to look at estimates. I wanted to mention this. When the Finance 
minister was asked about this, the Finance minister was asked, 
where is this money going? Is it going into the Crowns? He 
said, yes, sure, it’s going into the Crowns. And then he had to 
be corrected because he didn’t actually know, but instead he 
had answered with the logical decision. But instead we have an 
illogical decision, something that doesn’t make sense. 
 
And we’ve also heard talk of this being just a one-year change, 
that this is something that’s just going to be for this year, and 
back, perhaps to mollify, to placate some of the resistance 
because the resistance and the anger about this is pretty serious. 
But we had Minister Harpauer suggesting it might be just a 



April 11, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

year, but it’s a strange thing to do to, to have us talking now 
about legislating something that’s only going to be for a year. 
Are we going to come back and legislate it again in a year, in a 
year’s time? Are we? And that comes back to the lack of 
stability, the lack of ability to really forecast and trust what’s 
going to be able to happen. 
 
And also in this bill we see added in here the indemnity, the 
inability for the cities affected to take this government to court 
retroactively or in the future. And to me that says that what 
we’re seeing is a tacit acknowledgement that a word has been 
broken, that a contract, an agreement that’s been going on for 
decades and decades has been ripped up at a moment’s notice 
without any prior notice, that this is something that this 
government would be vulnerable to suit for. And that’s why 
they’re putting that clause in to protect themselves from that 
suit. 
 
So what we have is a lack of respect for contractual agreements. 
We’ve seen that all over from this government. We also have a 
mix of false promises, a mix of false promises, things that 
cannot be counted on, and then sudden surprise changes, sudden 
surprise changes that make it difficult to plan, hard to look 
forward, and essentially impossible to trust this government. I 
don’t know how cities can move forward with a relationship 
where they can possibly believe the assurances that they’re 
getting that the revenue-sharing formula won’t be tampered 
with. How do they count on that? And how do they budget? 
 
They’d already budgeted for this year and then, yoink, big 
surprise, you’re losing your grants-in-lieu. How do you go 
forward trusting? And you know, it’s when you get to that 
point, it’s when you get to that point that your party cannot be 
trusted, that you’re unpopular, that you need a name change. 
And you know, we’ve heard a name change before: the 
Progressive Conservatives, now the Sask Party. Well you know, 
it looks like you might need a new name. You might need to 
change your name to the surprise party because that’s what 
you’re doing. You’re giving unwelcome, unpleasant surprises to 
the people of the province. And what we really need is a more 
stable relationship between the cities, the province, and the 
Crowns. 
 
And it’s for that reason that I will be joining my colleagues in 
voting against this bill. And I adjourn debate for today. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 64. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Opposition House Leader 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With the intent to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

[15:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank my colleagues opposite, particularly the Government 
House Leader, for bringing to my attention a former member of 
this Assembly seated in the western gallery. I’m referring to 
Kevin Yates, Mr. Speaker, who served as the member for 
Regina Dewdney from 1999 to 2011, first elected in a 
by-election, and anyway, Mr. Speaker, served in a variety of 
capacities both in government and in opposition. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been a while since I’ve seen Mr. Yates, and I don’t 
think I’ve ever seen him up in the gallery. My frame of 
reference is right here on the floor, Mr. Speaker. So if I’ve got a 
bit of a filibuster going here, my apologies to colleagues. Leave 
to make an extended introduction. But anyway, with that I’d 
ask, Mr. Speaker, all colleagues to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Kevin Yates to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to join with the member from Elphinstone in welcoming Mr. 
Kevin Yates. I had the opportunity to come after him in that 
seat, Mr. Speaker. I had a chance to get to know him a little bit 
after that. His grandson is quite a young athlete and so we’ve 
seen each other at different sporting events throughout the city. 
And he’s working on behalf of people in the province, still 
serving, and I believe he works up in Prince Albert area. So I’d 
like all members to once again welcome Mr. Yates back to the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Move that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:32.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2211 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 2211, 2212 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2212 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2212 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2229 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2229 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2213 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2213 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2213 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2213 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2213 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2214 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2214 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2214 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Parkinson’s Day 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2215 
 National Wildlife Week 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 
 Regina Team Wins Western Hockey Championship 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 
 Cupcake Day Raises Funds for Animals 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2216 
 Hunter Brothers Win Music Awards 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2216 
 Sod-Turning for Genesis Grain & Fertilizer 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2217 
 Saskatchewan Entrepreneurs at G20 Young Entrepreneurs’ Alliance Summit 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2217 
 Contracts With Public Employees 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 
 Funding for Education and Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2220 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2220 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2220 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2222 
  Merriman (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ...................................................................................... 2223 
 Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2223 
  Merriman (referral to Economy Committee) ....................................................................................................................... 2224 



 

 
 Bill No. 63 — The Education Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur l’éducation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2224 
 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2226 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


