






















































Hansard: March 14, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 57A  TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1661 
 March 14, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before introduction of guests, I have a special 
introduction. Today at 12:14 a.m., Ephram Henry Duncan was 
born today. The father is the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Would everyone please welcome Ephram into the 
world. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an annual event for me as the minister. I’m 
pleased to introduce several visitors seated in your gallery this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. These are articling students who have 
been working with the Ministry of Justice or the courts in this 
province since last summer. I had a chance to speak to them in 
my office just before session, Mr. Speaker, and I must say that 
the crop of this current crop of legal minds entering the 
profession is truly encouraging. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that all of the 
articling students are graduates from the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Law. And, Mr. Speaker, Mallory 
Maloof, Lisa Smart, and Danielle Schindelka have been 
articling with the Ministry of Justice. You can give us a wave. 
There you are. 
 
Mallory has a broad range of legal experience, including time 
with prosecutions and the Canada Revenue Agency. Mallory 
has a strong connection to the First Nations community in our 
province and has also volunteered with Read Saskatoon as a 
literacy and math tutor. 
 
Lisa Smart also has a varied background in justice, even having 
worked as a dispatcher for the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police]. She volunteers her time with the Pro Bono 
Students Canada and has also served as a provincial debate 
judge. 
 
On top of her legal background, Mr. Speaker, Danielle 
Schindelka comes to us after extensive work in science and 
agriculture. Along with her academic accomplishments, 
Danielle’s community involvement includes volunteering with 
Green Legal, Soup Sisters and Broth Brothers, and the 
Alzheimer Society of Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like now to introduce Janelle Souter, Julia 
Kindrachuk, and Jeremie Roussel, and Jon Ponath, who have 
been articling at the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 
 
Janelle was awarded the College of Law’s Thomas Dorwick 
Brown Prize for the most distinguished graduate. Janelle holds 
a degree in pharmacy and has served as the editor and 
co-managing editor of the Saskatchewan Law Review and has 
volunteered at CLASSIC [Community Legal Assistance 
Services for Saskatoon Inner City Inc.] in Saskatoon, offering 
legal services to the residents of the inner city. 
 
Julia Kindrachuk was awarded the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan’s silver medal for the second-highest average in 
her class. And she certainly has some interesting work ahead, 
Mr. Speaker. In June she will begin as a foreign law clerk at the 
Supreme Court of Israel, followed by a similar posting with the 
Supreme Court of Canada. And we certainly wish her luck in 
those endeavours. 
 
Upon graduating from the College of Law, Jeremie Roussel was 
awarded the F.C. Cronkite Prize in Jurisprudence. Throughout 
law school, he remained dedicated to his growing family, 
commuting from North Battleford to attend school in 
Saskatoon. He is currently celebrating the birth of his second 
child this past week, and for that we congratulate him. 
 
Along with the pursuits related to his legal career, Jon Ponath 
has a degree in commerce from the Edwards School of Business 
where he received an award for academics and community 
service. While at the College of Law, he served as the 
vice-president of athletics for the Law Students’ Association. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Alanna Carlson has been articling 
with us as a law clerk at the Court of Queen’s Bench. While in 
law school, she received the Volunteer Recognition Award and 
continues to work as a child activity volunteer with the Regina 
Transition House. She has also served as the editor of the 
college student newspaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say I’m very proud of this group of 
articling students, and I’m confident we’ll see great things from 
them in the years to come. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask my 
colleagues in the legislature to join me in welcoming this fine 
group of individuals to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you, I’d like to join with the Minister of Justice in 
welcoming these articling students to the legislature today. 
Based on the resumes I’ve heard, it sounds like they’re all a 
very, very impressive crop of people. 
 
In particular I want to give shouts out to the students that have 
worked with Pro Bono Students Canada and CLASSIC and 
Green Legal. All of the work that you’ve done in terms of 
volunteering to your communities, on top of the studies that 
you’re doing, is absolutely commendable. And I know that the 
province and the people that you serve greatly appreciate it. 
 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

I also want to welcome you to the profession. It’s a little 
pre-emptive; I know you have about a month left in your 
CPLED [Canadian Centre for Professional Legal Education] 
course. It’s just one step away from finally being able to be 
called to the bar. 
 
The Minister of Justice spent his practising days in Saskatoon. I 
spent my practising days in Regina, but I did have the 
opportunity to visit quite a few of the local bars throughout the 
province, and I do know that you will be welcomed 
whole-heartedly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Bar 
associations. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, not everybody knows 
the legal term “bar” in the way that I know it. I apologize for 
that.  
 
But I do want the students that are here today to know that 
they’ll be welcome no matter where they choose to practise in 
the province. And I do hope sincerely that you do at some point 
either come back to Saskatchewan to practise or continue on in 
your careers in this great province. So again, I’d like to have all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members 
of the Legislative Assembly, 25 grade 4 students from MacNeill 
School. Give us a wave, guys and gals. That’s wonderful. 
 
Now accompanying these students is their teacher, Ms. Tia 
Coffin. And they also have some chaperones, some parents and 
chaperones that are also accompanying them today. We have 
Lori Crone, Chad McCormick, and Kelly Fuessel. 
 
So I have the opportunity to meet with them this afternoon. 
They get to answer a little Q & A [question and answer] with 
them, to be able to find out their questions and their concerns 
about the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. So I look 
forward to spending time with these bright, young students, and 
then we’ll have a picture taken. We’ll have some juice . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Blizzards? 
 
Ms. Ross: — No, it’s too cold for Blizzards. But it’s going to 
be a good opportunity for them to tour the facility and find out 
what we do here. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to take this opportunity to single out one of the 
articling students who I’ve known since she was a young girl, 
particularly because I worked with her parents, but that’s Julia 
Kindrachuk. 
 
Julia’s parents had very distinguished careers with the 
Department of Justice Canada. Her mother, Christine Haynes, 
was a significant prosecutor and did a lot of the narcotics 
prosecutions work here in Saskatchewan. And her dad, Mark 
Kindrachuk, has been to the Supreme Court several times on 

behalf of the citizens of Canada and appearing before the 
Supreme Court of Canada. Very distinguished law careers, and 
they both recently retired. So I’m sure they’re thrilled that 
Julia’s now done her studies and will be actually working hard 
to make a living as a lawyer. 
 
But Julia has come from very strong stock as lawyers, and I 
think she will serve, Canada and abroad, serve us very well as a 
lawyer. So I just want to say hi, Julia, and welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s a pleasure to welcome a friend that’s seated in 
the west gallery. He’s already been introduced, but Chad 
McCormick. A pleasure to have you here today, Chad. Chad’s a 
heck of a good guy. His wife, Jolene, is a exceptional 
schoolteacher here in Regina. I know that he’s here with one of 
their children here today. 
 
Chad knows his way around this building. He also knows his 
way around a hockey rink, Mr. Speaker. And a notable piece for 
me is that he was my first campaign manager back in 2007. And 
he’s a tremendous guy who cares deeply about his community 
and our province. So I ask all to welcome my friend, Chad 
McCormick. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Martensville, Borden, Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Biggar, 
Warman, and Shellbrook. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to reverse cuts to the Lighthouse 
program, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that in April 
2014 the minister of Social Services said that the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, 
hospitals, and police cells while keeping people safe, especially 
in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that the minister of Health said, “We want 
to ensure that individuals with mental health and addictions 
issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

It’s important to note that this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. And 
these same ministers are now trying to place the responsibility 
for repairing their budget deficits on those experiencing 
addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and who are living 
from day to day without proper services, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again under the direction of my colleague from Prince Albert 
Northcote that she needed some help for this Prince Albert 
petition, and obviously we want to support her in this effort to 
bring this petition forward. And the need for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. And Prince 
Albert and communities north of Prince Albert and all the 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. And the prayer reads as follows. They: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition that we presented 
day after day after day, signed from community after 
community after community, Mr. Speaker, and we are once 
again proud to present more pages on this petition. There’s two 
here and the people that have signed these petitions for this day 
are from Regina, they’re from North Battleford, and they’re 
from all throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 
today to present a petition with opposition to Bill 40 and the 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The 
individuals who signed the petition today are wanting to bring 
to the attention of the Assembly the following: that Sask Party’s 
Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization that allows the 

government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum. That in 2015-16 alone, Sask Crown corporations 
returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, 
hospitals, and roads. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. 
 
That our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province and, under the section 
149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are 
exempt from corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 
per cent of the shares are held by government or province. The 
Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of the 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized, and that 
this short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the folks who have signed the petitions today 
are from Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Regina, Caron, and Indian 
Head. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province would like to bring to 
your attention to the following: that the citizens of this province 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity, and that all women should be paid 
equitably, and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on 
average 63 cents for every dollar a man makes; and in Regina, 
women earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man 
makes. According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national 
gender wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every 
dollar a man makes. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
that we provide a framework under which this can be done 
within this term of this Assembly, and that the 
Saskatchewan government call upon the workplaces within 
Saskatchewan within the private sector to eliminate the 
wage gap between women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

Saskatoon, Colonsay, and Wakaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in the province. And those signing 
this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: to the 
fact that many of our licensed non-profit child care centres pay 
commercial property tax, and the fact that this is not something 
that is done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
That child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres 
struggle to simply balance their budget. This issue threatens 
both the number of child care spaces as well as the quality of 
care. Quality child care has an enormous positive impact on a 
child’s future outcomes and yields high rates of economic 
return, something that benefits the whole economy. 
 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools. Mr. Speaker, I will read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina. 
I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reversal to the cuts in the 
Aboriginal court worker program. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker program in the 
2016-17 provincial budget. They point out that the Aboriginal 
court workers play an important role in helping Aboriginal 
people in criminal and child apprehension cases, Mr. Speaker. 
They point out that Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional centres and they 
point out that Aboriginal court workers successfully help to 
make our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Saskatoon, Wymark, Hudson Bay, and 
Debden. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
Citizens of Saskatchewan are very concerned at the lack of 
support for victims of domestic violence. Financial stability and 
a supportive work environment are vital for any victim of 
domestic abuse, and victims of domestic abuse, Mr. Speaker, 
should not be further victimized at work. Employers lose $77.9 
million annually due to the direct and indirect impact of 
domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted such legislation and 
Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid work days and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and Weyburn. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today and 
present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of the 
Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. For the last 
40 years, Mr. Speaker, NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher 
education program-Northern Professional Access College] has 
provided good quality instruction, has been a well-organized, 
well-administered program allowing the students who graduate 
from there as teachers to teach anywhere in the province. But 
the majority of those teachers, Mr. Speaker, choose to stay in 
the North and provide that important service to the North. 
 
NORTEP has had a set of residences, Mr. Speaker, that have 
been available for students of that program in order to stay there 
without additional cost. It’s been extremely important for the 
members of the North to be able to access that education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the Northern Teacher Education Program and continue to 
fund these programs in La Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people of Cumberland 
House, Air Ronge, Jans Bay, and Canoe Narrows. I do so 
present. 
 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Increase in Number of Physicians 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
inform the House that there are over 750 more physicians 
working in the Saskatchewan health care system today than 
there was 10 years ago. This is a 44 per cent increase, and it 
represents a great improvement in residents’ access to physician 
services in Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Speaker, attracting and keeping physicians has always been 
a priority for our government. This stands in stark contrast to 
the dismal record of the NDP [New Democratic Party]. It 
wasn’t long ago that Saskatchewan had the worst physician 
retention rates in the country, as hundreds of doctors joined 
with thousands of other Saskatchewan people who fled the 
province in search of a reprieve from the disastrous policies of 
the NDP. 
 
Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a different story under the 
leadership of our government. Together with health regions, 
we’ve demonstrated our commitment to retaining and recruiting 
physicians by offering competitive compensation packages, 
hugely increasing the number of medical training seats, 
developing a made-in-Saskatchewan assessment program for 
internationally trained physicians, and training more family 
medicine residents in communities outside Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 750 new 
physicians and in thanking them for their leadership and 
commitment to providing high-quality, patient-centred care. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s Thundering 
Ahead Campaign 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on February 9th I, along with my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre, had the pleasure of attending 
the launch of the Thundering Ahead campaign by Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park. Wanuskewin Heritage Park is embarking upon 
one of the most significant initiatives to celebrate indigenous 
people in our nation today. The park is a living reminder of 
pre-contact indigenous life on the great plains and serves to 
honour that distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wanuskewin is a link to our past and a bridge to 
reconciliation unlike any other historical site in the country, 
which is why they are launching the Thundering Ahead 
campaign, a bold $40 million plan to help Wanuskewin reach 
its full potential as one of Canada’s top natural and cultural 
destinations. 
 
The initiative consists of four pillars including moving their 
status from an archeological dig site to a centre of excellence, 
from a national historic site to a global UNESCO [United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] 

destination, returning the bison to Wanuskewin’s plains, and 
preserving the ecological landscape of the area. 
 
Although both the bison and 6,000 years of indigenous history 
may have faded from view in our province, they are not lost. 
And it is through the hard work of Canada’s Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park that we can begin to see them return. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in supporting the 
valuable work of Wanuskewin Heritage Park and the 
Thundering Ahead campaign in working hard to preserve and 
restore the natural and indigenous history of our province. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Number of Indigenous Students Rises at 
University of Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to share some exciting news about the rising numbers of 
indigenous students at the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the StarPhoenix recently reported that 31 First Nation, 
Métis, and Inuit students are currently enrolled at the University 
of Saskatchewan’s College of Medicine. Since 1972, 71 
indigenous doctors have graduated from the college. 
 
Through planning and a commitment to the TRC’s [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] calls to action, the University of 
Saskatchewan has strived to support all indigenous students 
who attend their school. The College of Medicine designates 10 
seats for First Nation, Métis, and Inuit learners, as well as 
offering supports for indigenous students throughout their 
studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has also been reported that over 2,400 First 
Nation, Métis, and Inuit students are currently enrolled at the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. Our government is 
pleased that since 2007 there has been a 43 per cent increase in 
First Nation and Métis enrolment at the U of S alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of the advancements our 
post-secondary institutions have made on the path towards 
reconciliation. I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
the University of Saskatchewan on their continued success in 
promoting educational opportunities for indigenous people 
throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Fundraising for École Connaught Playground 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my pleasure 
today to rise and to recognize the accomplishments of the 
Connaught SCC [school community council] playground 
committee. After École Connaught Community School was 
demolished a few years ago, a new playground committee was 
formed. And over the past two years, members have included 
hard-working parents such as Sarah Truszkowski, Kaiti Webb, 
Crystal Cozma-Wood, Jennifer Draper, Kevin Perrey, Jennifer 
Richards, Michelle Dakiniewich, Amy Roherand, and Bobbi 
Gans, as well as dedicated teachers like the fantastic Tara 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

Dryburgh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in less than two years, this committee has raised 
nearly $55,000 to pay for several new playground pieces, and 
this committee is about $15,000 away from their $70,000 goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cathedral and Lakeview and surrounding 
communities have rallied in a truly beautiful way to help 
support this rebuild of the Connaught playground so that 
children at the school and in the community will have a fun and 
safe place to play. The committee has received grants from 
community organizations, support from a wide variety of 
community businesses, and have raised over $12,000 from 
school fundraisers supported by parents and community 
members. And I probably have a tub of cookie dough to sell, 
Mr. Speaker, if anyone is interested. 
 
I would ask all members to join me today in recognizing the 
contributions that the Connaught playground committee are 
making for children in their community and extend a thank you 
to all of the families, staff, and community businesses that have 
so generously supported this important community project. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Daughters of the Vote Celebration 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure as both the Vice-Chair of the Canadian Region of the 
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, as the CWP 
representative of the Government of Saskatchewan, to be in 
Ottawa last week on International Women’s Day to celebrate 
Daughters of the Vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an amazing event. Young women between 
the ages 18 to 23 from every constituency across the country 
took their place in all of the 338 seats in the House of Commons 
in Ottawa. This was an incredible event, and women leaders 
past and present spoke to the young women, and the young 
women also had the opportunity to ask the Prime Minister some 
pretty tough questions in the Q & A. Further, there were 
workshops and events for these young women that really 
prepared them so they can consider seeking public office, 
equipping them to run for public office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Equal Voice did an incredible job of organizing 
this worthwhile event. Mr. Speaker, it was a great privilege to 
represent our government and our province. It is truly inspiring 
to see future politicians, future business executives, and leaders 
from all across the fields together with a vision to see the world 
in a better place. Although there is still plenty of work to do, 
this event marks a century of women’s suffrage in Canada. It 
was a momentous milestone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly and 
join me in acknowledging a successful Daughters of the Vote in 
Ottawa. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

Thanks to General Manager of Lloydminster 
Agricultural Exhibition 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure of 
attending an appreciation event for volunteer staff and sponsors 
of the Lloydminster Agricultural Exhibition Association. Mr. 
Speaker, it is important that we recognize agriculture in our 
province as a strong, stable industry and an economic driver. 
 
The key moment of the night was when long-serving general 
manager Mike Sidoryk was given special honours for his 35 
years of service. This association is so important to 
Lloydminster and, with the great leadership and commitment 
from members like Mike Sidoryk, has brought success to our 
agricultural industry. 
 
Mike has been an institution with the agriculture exhibition for 
longer than most people can remember. He began working at 
the exhibition when he was 12 years old doing odd jobs, and 
was hired full-time in 1981. He has held various positions 
within the organization through the years and was named 
general manager in 1989. 
 
Since that time, he has provided leadership in the organization 
and ensured that each year the exhibition hosts amazing events 
for all ages. Mr. Speaker, not only has Mike been instrumental 
in his leadership at the events in Lloyd, but he has also helped 
champion exhibitions across the prairies. I suspect that all of us 
have a memory of attending an agricultural fair to see the 
livestock, enjoy the entertainment, participate in fair events or, 
of course, eat the food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this House to join me 
in thanking Mike Sidoryk for his 35 years of service and 
dedication to both the Lloydminster Agricultural Exhibition 
Association and exhibitions across western Canada. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 

Remembering Courtney Milne 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 
Stonebridge in Saskatoon was Stonebridge the suburb, it was 
open prairie and spotted with acreages. That’s not very long 
ago. And just about where the Tim Hortons on Preston Avenue 
is now, internationally renowned photographer Courtney Milne 
lived on one of those acreages. One telling insight into his 
career passion is the fact he took 40,000 photographs alone of 
reflections in a small pond behind his home. 
 
Sadly, Milne died in 2010, but I was reminded of his career and 
his remarkable talent in the Sask 150 series that’s currently 
running in the StarPhoenix. 
 
Milne’s photographs took the prairie photograph to a whole 
new level, full of light and life. He published 12 books; his best 
known and best selling, Sacred Earth included a forward by 
none other than the Dalai Lama. 
 
In 2005, he and his wife Sherrill Miller, who unfortunately 
couldn’t be here today, launched the Centennial Project in 
partnership with SaskTel. They created Coolscapes, a 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

5,000-image website for Saskatchewan students and residences 
to use in educational projects, a website now run by the U of S 
as part of Courtney’s archive. 
 
Milne Crescent in Stonebridge is named after the Milne family, 
and Milne also received the Sask Order of Merit posthumously 
in 2011. A great Saskatchewanian, Mr. Speaker, one I like to 
call an honorary constituent. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we can’t get 
an answer from the Premier on their GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal. But the Deputy Premier has also 
spent a long time around that cabinet table. He was there every 
time this GTH scandal was discussed at cabinet. So I’ll ask a 
question about his personal knowledge about this scandal and 
hopefully he’ll find his feet and his voice, unlike our Premier. 
 
When did the Deputy Premier first learn that the original seller 
of the GTH land was the landlord of the former minister of the 
GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course the auditor has looked into this matter. The auditor had 
access to all of the documents to which she requested access. 
The auditor had access to all the individuals involved in this 
transaction, Mr. Speaker. The auditor availed herself of the 
opportunity to review those documents, to interview those 
individuals and, Mr. Speaker, the auditor came to a conclusion. 
And I would quote the auditor which she said on an open-line 
radio show: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags. 
And because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s totally 
unacceptable for the Deputy Premier not to be able to take his 
feet and answer that question. That same sort of unacceptable 
approach we see from this Premier day after day with this very 
simple, straightforward question about simply their personal 
knowledge of this GTH scandal that ripped off taxpayers. 
 
Let me ask another question from another one of their growing 
scandals, Mr. Speaker. They signed on with Vinci, the 
multinational conglomerate from France and beyond, with the 
Regina bypass. Of course it was supposed to be $400 million 
but now it’s $2 billion and counting, Mr. Speaker. They’ll say 
that the project scope has expanded — well sure, an extra 

interchange or two, a few extra kilometres of highway — but 
how did it get to $2 billion? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this contract would have gone through cabinet. 
Has the Deputy Premier opened up that contract to see what’s 
going on? How can he honestly stand by this contract and this 
billion-dollar-plus overrun with Vinci as he disgracefully breaks 
contract after contract with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I find that question to be absolutely remarkable. That 
member knows, the interim leader of the New Democrats know 
that the contract, Mr. Speaker, the value-for-money report, and 
the fairness opinions are all online for anyone in Saskatchewan 
to go and have a look at them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve given him a technical briefing of the 
project, Mr. Speaker. He knows, he knows the scope of this 
project has expanded greatly since the beginning when it was 
first proposed, Mr. Speaker. $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, was the 
original estimate and that’s what it’s costing to build this 
bypass, Mr. Speaker, with the additional 30 years of 
maintenance on top of it. He knows the facts, Mr. Speaker, and 
he should be straight with the people of Saskatchewan when he 
stands on his feet. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pathetic and it’s weak 
that the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan can’t take to his feet. 
It’s beyond incompetent that the Government of Saskatchewan 
can’t manage its contracts, one that went from $400 million to 
an overrun of over a billion dollars. 
 
And this is the Deputy Premier that’s bringing cuts on his 
many, many ministries. He’s doing it for workers; he’s doing it 
in kids’ classrooms, but he won’t answer on this very important 
project. 
 
You know, day after day he actually likes to ask questions of 
this side of the House. I think he has to remember that he sits in 
that cabinet on that side of the House, and he has to do some 
answering, Mr. Speaker. You know, and it’s also that he sits on 
that side of the House and gets that extra pay as minister for 
which he’s unwilling to give up just a 20 per cent reduction on 
that extra pay, Mr. Speaker, to show just a little bit of 
responsibility for the mismanagement, scandal, and waste of 
this Sask Party. 
 
You know, the Premier has also failed to answer a very simple 
and straightforward question on another front, and I’ll ask it 
here today to the Deputy Premier. How much of the $2 billion 
contract will stay in Saskatchewan? How much of the money is 
going to France and beyond? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned before, 
all these contracts are all online. All the material, the fairness 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

opinion, and value-for-money report is all on there. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve also reported to this House and through the 
media, Mr. Speaker, that fully 73 per cent of the work that’s 
being done on that bypass is being done by Saskatchewan 
companies, Mr. Speaker — companies like Broda Construction, 
companies like Graham Construction, Mr. Speaker, who are 
primarily responsible for the construction of this facility, Mr. 
Speaker. Forty kilometres of dual-lane highway, Mr. Speaker, 
12 overpasses, most of which is being done through the work of 
people from Saskatchewan and companies from Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, just like the finances, it 
seems that they’re making it up as they go. Here the Justice 
minister says that the contract is online. That is not the case. 
Will the Justice minister or the Deputy Premier commit to 
making sure that $2 billion contract is available to all 
Saskatchewan people today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, since the financial close of 
this transaction which happened last year, Mr. Speaker, the 
contract is online. The fairness opinion is online, and the 
value-for-money report is online, Mr. Speaker. We made that 
clear to the interim Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve given him technical reports, Mr. Speaker. We’ve given 
him a technical briefing on the whole project, Mr. Speaker. He 
only has to go online to look at the documents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, every time we ask that Finance 
minister about the finances, he climbs onto his high horse, looks 
down his nose, wags his finger, and says, it’s a revenue 
problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, from their $1.5 billion carbon 
capture tax to their GTH scandal, all the way to the 
billion-dollar overrun on the Regina bypass, it’s pretty clear it’s 
a mismanagement, scandal, and waste problem too. 
 
But let’s get back to the revenue. The minister acts as if he’s 
surprised that commodity prices are volatile. No kidding, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s almost like you should maybe save during the 
good times so you would have extra during the bad times. You 
could call it, oh I don’t know, maybe a rainy day fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain to us why they spent 
billions that should have been saved for the rainy days while the 
sun was still shining on our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. I 
think if the member looks back on November 16th of last year, 
Mr. Speaker, just about a week before we delivered the 
mid-year report in this Chamber and delivered to the people of 
the province, that very member said that we have a revenue 

problem, Mr. Speaker. Matter of fact, she was quoted as saying 
it’s no wonder why they have a revenue problem given where 
commodities are at. That’s what that member said on November 
16th last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also had . . . Since then we’ve had FCL [Federated 
Co-operatives Ltd.], Federated Co-op, come out and say, look, 
“The company’s declining revenue and profit are largely 
attributable to a $774 million decline in energy sales . . .” in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, that translates into revenue for the 
province. 
 
We’ve also had CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] 
come out, an organization I’m sure that the members opposite 
are familiar with. CUPE not only said, “Saskatchewan’s 
revenues from non-renewable resources are expected to have 
dropped in half in two years . . .” Mr. Speaker. It goes on to say, 
if these revenues hadn’t declined — from potash, oil, minerals, 
and Crown land sales — then the province would run a surplus 
this year as it would have last year. The report goes on to say, 
Mr. Speaker . . . This is in the same CUPE report, on page 7: 
“Clearly Saskatchewan’s deficit hasn’t been caused by 
excessive overall spending, but by a shortfall of revenues.” Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what CUPE said. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, same old act, same old lines 
from that minister. From the beginning they were dipping into 
that fund every year. They had the rainy day fund and a huge 
surplus left to them by the former government. They had it all 
and they blew it all. 
 
And now they’re attacking and shaking down Saskatchewan 
people, saying everyone has to do their part. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
what about them? Why won’t that cabinet show a little 
leadership and take a cut of 20 per cent from their pay? That’s 
the kind of measure we might find to expect in a fiscal stability 
Act which the minister promised. It would hold the cabinet to 
account when they mismanage and waste money.  
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the fiscal stability Act that that minister 
promised? And from where does that minister get the arrogance 
to condescend, when he’s so ashamed of this work that he 
won’t even hold himself accountable for his failure to manage 
Saskatchewan’s budget? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you. This is an interesting 
debate, Mr. Speaker. Now they’re complaining about spending 
in the province, that we blew it all. Mr. Speaker, here’s where 
we blew it all. We took 112,000 low-income people off the tax 
rolls altogether, Mr. Speaker. That’s where we blew the money. 
We took the seniors’ income plan in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
a program for the most vulnerable senior citizens in this 
province, that they didn’t have the heart, the heart, to increase 
by so much as a dime in 16 years in office. We tripled the 
seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker. That’s where we blew the 
money. 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

We are building a new children’s hospital, a new mental health 
care correctional facility in North Battleford, 13 long-term care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker, doubled capital in this province, 40 new 
or rebuilt schools in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s where 
we blew the money. And now they’re complaining about 
overspending in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the very purpose of rainy day funds 
are to provide relief when times are tough, and it was this 
government’s job to ensure that their rainy day funds were 
available when Saskatchewan people needed them most. 
Instead they blew through their own savings when times were 
good, and now they’re taking money from our schools to pay 
for their financial mess. 
 
Like I said yesterday, the Sask Party is stopping our schools 
from using their own reserve funds. And if this government 
won’t let schools use their savings to ensure that our children 
get the education that they deserve, I can’t help but wonder 
what the Sask Party is planning to use them for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Education refused to 
answer. So I’ll ask the question again: was this the Sask Party’s 
plan all along, to raid our schools’ rainy day funds to make up 
for their recklessly wasting their own? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raises the issue of reserves. Mr. Speaker, spending reserves is 
spending money out of the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. It’s 
exactly the same thing. On what? On summary financial 
accounting. Who asked for summary financial accounting? The 
members opposite did. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not saying to the schools, you can’t use 
reserves. We’re saying it runs a deficit when you run them. 
We’ll work with you. We will do everything we can. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the nature of summary financial accounting, 
Mr. Speaker. They asked for it; they have it. We will continue 
to work with it. 
 
We support our school system. We value our teachers. We 
value the trustees and, most of all, Mr. Speaker, we value the 
students and want to do what’s right for them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that’s laughable that they’re valuing 
our schools when you look at what’s going on around this 
province. And never one to take responsibility for their own 
actions, this government has underfunded, undervalued, and 
disrespected teachers and the people who worked in our kids’ 
classrooms. They’ve threatened to cut school boards, to 
eliminate local voices, and now they’re telling schools that they 
can’t use their own reserves to relieve the financial burden that 
this government is forcing on them. 

Mr. Speaker, the minister cannot honestly believe that the 
money that they’re desperately scraping away from our 
education system won’t affect our children’s classrooms. So 
will he tell us the truth? Does he know exactly how much that 
they’re going to take away from our kids’ education? And what 
does the Sask Party plan to do with our schools’ savings? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
doubts our commitment to education and doubts our 
commitment to the children in this province, I would ask her to 
do this. I would ask her to take a drive down Elphinstone in 
Regina. I would ask her to take a drive though her own 
constituency, and this is what she’s going to see when she 
drives down Elphinstone in her own constituency. She’s going 
to see the new Scott Collegiate under construction. She’s going 
to see the new Sacred Heart school under construction. And do 
you know what else she’s going to see, Mr. Speaker? The new 
Connaught school which she opposed. And when you look at 
her website even today, she touts on there how proudly, how 
she was opposed to the new Connaught school. Mr. Speaker, I 
say this to that member: she ought to have a look and see what 
happened to Cam Broten when he opposed a new school in his 
constituency. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Northern Teacher Education Program Student Residences 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Advanced 
Education failed a simple test. She failed to answer a 
straightforward question about NORTEP’s assets, and that’s 
troubling for people in the North. They’re concerned about 
control of their program, run by and for northerners for four 
decades, Mr. Speaker. And they’re concerned about what that 
means for their communities and their neighbours for whom 
NORTEP has been an opportunity to create opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NORTEP’s residence buildings have been key to 
opening up access to education for people from across the 
North. Can the Minister of Education try again? Can she tell us 
what her plan is for NORTEP’s residence buildings? Are they 
just another part of the Sask Party’s plan to sell off what 
belongs to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the apartments that the member opposite is 
referencing, it will be a matter of negotiation, and I hope 
collaboration, following any final decision that’s forthcoming. 
NORTEP council is responsible for those units. And it’s 
regrettable that there are millions of dollars in repairs needed to 
maintain those residences. 
 
We have health and safety concerns, particularly with 
mechanical and electrical work that is needed. We take the 
health and safety of our students very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re evaluating all options related to post-secondary 
education providers in the North. A decision will be 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

forthcoming very soon, but above all must be made for the best 
interests of those students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Northern Workers 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday with my colleague from Prince Albert, I asked how 
recruitment and retention efforts in the North would be helped 
by cutting the wages by three and a half per cent. Neither the 
Minister of Social Services or the Minister for Rural Health 
could give an answer. Cutting supports for the North and from 
the North will hurt northern people and northern communities. 
They both said that retention and recruitment is the biggest 
problem. 
 
So I’ll ask them once again: can either the Minister of Health or 
the Minister of Social Services stand tall today and give a full, 
straight answer, a full, straight answer to a very clear question 
of how cutting the salaries of nurses, doctors, and counsellors in 
the North is supposed to help us recruit and retain more of these 
health professionals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in the House again today and talk about some 
of the supports that have been added to our northern 
communities in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to talk about northern 
medical services and how that’s been expanded by well over 60 
per cent in funding, how the northern health regions have gotten 
well over the average of the province when it comes to regional 
spending — in fact, 70 per cent average in the northern health 
regions as opposed to approximately 50 throughout the rest of 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through northern medical services we have 
full-time primary health care clinics in four communities; 
visiting clinics in 15 communities; almost 200 specialty clinics 
including obstetrics, ophthalmology, orthopedics, surgical 
assessments, infection disease, and other services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talked yesterday about some of the recruitment and 
retention and training efforts. Mr. Speaker, in fact we have 26 
LPNs [licensed practical nurse] who are First Nations or Métis 
that have graduated, and living and working in the North 
through programs that are delivered in the North, Mr. Speaker; 
mental health and addictions workers; 11 First Nations health 
directors; 10 RNs [registered nurse] specifically targeted in 
those areas, Mr. Speaker; psychiatry numbers that I referred to 
yesterday. And I’d be happy to answer more questions on this 
subject. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Provision of Court Services 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last week I asked the Minister of 

Justice about the impact Sask Party cuts will have on our justice 
system. Asking for a three and a half per cent rollback will 
mean less access to judges, Crown prosecutors, court workers, 
and legal aid lawyers to work through cases before the courts. 
 
And with the Supreme Court’s recent Jordan decision, any 
defendant who doesn’t have their case heard in a timely manner 
will have their charges thrown out. That doesn’t do anything to 
make our communities safer or to bring justice and closure to 
families and victims. 
 
Last week the minister said he is “very comfortable with respect 
to where we are with the justice system.” He said that there was 
no problem even though three cases were recently thrown out 
because of delays. What analysis has the minister done to know 
how many more cases will be thrown out because of the Sask 
Party’s cuts to court workers and Crown prosecutors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have an ongoing dialogue with the chief judge at the 
Provincial Court with respect to time-to-trial delays, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re quite comfortable in the position we are in 
Saskatchewan. Certainly we see from across the country some 
significant issues with regard to time to trial. And I did report 
last week that there were three cases that had been lost because 
of trial delay, Mr. Speaker, simply because of the fact that 
witnesses couldn’t be located to give testimony at those trials, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So from a systemic perspective within the justice system, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re in very good shape in terms of meeting the 
timelines. We’re not even close to the timelines that have been 
set out in the Jordan decision, Mr. Speaker. But we will 
continue to monitor those time-to-trial issues, Mr. Speaker, in 
consultation with the judiciary, to make sure that the ends of 
justice are served with respect to the delivery of those services, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Health Care Services in Craik Area 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the cuts keep coming to our 
health care system. Now their plans for amalgamation and cuts 
to public sector workers will further reduce quality of care for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Sadly this government’s mismanagement of our health care is 
nothing new. This time last year the people of Craik expressed 
their frustration with the lack of accessible health care in their 
community and begged this government to take down a 
misleading and potentially dangerous sign on Highway 11 that 
points to Craik’s 24-hour care facility, a facility that the Sask 
Party had shut down years before. Shamefully, today that sign 
is still up. This adds insult to injury, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can this minister prove his government is capable of better and 
commit to stopping their callous cuts to our health care system? 
And if he can’t do that, can he at least commit to taking down 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

that sign after all these years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy again to 
stand in this House and talk about some of the things that we 
have been able to accomplish with the help of the people in the 
area as well as their region when it comes to health services in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact we know that Craik had an issue recruiting and retaining 
a doctor. Through the work of the region — two regions 
actually, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with Davidson — we now 
have a number of doctors serving both Davidson and Craik and 
fulfilling the obligations of this government there. 
 
When it comes to issues of highway signage, we agree that 
there is an issue with some of the signage in the province that 
doesn’t reflect properly the services available in those 
communities, and we will be working with the regions and 
throughout the different ministries to make sure that those signs 
do reflect the services available in those communities very 
soon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Staffing Levels in Health Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, how long does it take to take a 
sign down, Mr. Speaker? I’m happy to take a screwdriver on 
my way home on Thursday and take that sign down for that 
minister. 
 
Yesterday I asked the minister about a 74 per cent surge in 
violent incidents in RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region]. 
Instead of answering the question he flat out denied the 
relationship between staffing and violent incidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CEO [chief executive officer] says most of 
these incidents take place in long-term care. There, 
understaffing is an everyday reality. But of course the minister 
does know this. It was plain as day in his very own CEO tour 
reports that were filled with complaints of understaffing. The 
staff are run off their feet, but residents’ needs still are not being 
met. There is just too much for too few staff to do. It is a recipe 
for disaster, one that’s become real in RQHR, and one only 
worsened by the Sask Party’s endless cuts. 
 
Will the minister stop denying reality and do something to fix 
the mess their cuts have created in seniors’ care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that was a wide-ranging preamble to that question, so I’ll try to 
touch on as many of those comments the critic made as 
possible. Mr. Speaker, first of all to the point about, as she 
refers to it as cuts in long-term care, is simply not the case. The 
issue that she raised yesterday about Regina Qu’Appelle, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply wrong. There’s 21 per cent more staff in 
those positions than there were when we were given the 

privilege of forming government. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just in 
long-term care. It’s right across the entire health spectrum. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have over 3,000 more nurses of every 
designation than were in place when we formed government. 
We have over 800 more long-term care workers than were in 
place when we were given the privilege of forming government. 
Mr. Speaker, you heard today in member’s statements, we have 
750 more doctors than we did then. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member talks about taking down signs. 
She would be good at it. The NDP would be good at taking 
signs down. They took down 52 hospital signs when they closed 
those hospitals when they were in government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — I request leave to move a motion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Committee Membership 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to move the following motion: 
 

That the names of Paul Merriman and Don McMorris be 
substituted for the names of Glen Hart and Randy Weekes 
on the Standing Committee for Public Accounts, and the 
name of Glen Hart be substituted in the name of Hugh 
Nerlien on the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies.  
 
That the name of Hugh Nerlien be added to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services and the name of Paul 
Merriman be added to the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills, and  
 
That the name of Ryan Meili be substituted for the name of 
Carla Beck on the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? We’ll 
take the motion as read. All those in favour say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion passes. 
 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 247 through 250. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to 247 to 250. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 251 through 258. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 251 to 258. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 259. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
answers to question 259. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 260 through 267. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the answers 
to questions 260 to 267. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get into some of the comments, the bill 
that’s being introduced and the amendments. And before I do 
that, I want to give a little bit of I guess a story about back on 
the farm. 
 
My grandfather had a farm, a small homestead. Grandma and 
grandpa had 13 kids, and on that homestead, you know, they 
wanted to have, you know, opportunities. They wanted 
opportunities for their children, you know. And when you look 
at a phone . . . And I was thinking about this, remembering on 
the farm, we used to go out there on the weekends. We spent a 
lot of time on the farm with our, you know, our cousins and 
different family members. You’d come together, and you’d 
spend that good quality time. But I do remember, I do 
remember getting, I think, the first phone that grandma and 

grandpa ever got, and it was a party line. It was nice to see, 
finally, a phone. 
 
But why I relate that little story, Mr. Speaker, because I think 
it’s important, you know, being that grandma and grandpa 
worked hard on the farm. Grandpa was a war vet, you know. He 
did his best to serve his country, and he’s a very proud 
Aboriginal Métis man. Very proud for his family. And you 
know, when I think about having access . . . And I think that’s 
why he was so strong in his belief of a government that’s 
supposed to take care of all people, not just selected individuals, 
or to make sure that they take care of everyone. 
 
So when you think about this, I did a little bit of thinking about 
the bill and what impacts it might have today and have on 
people. And when I think about . . . Phone was the best one to, 
like as a little boy, looking at that, having that phone come in. 
And I’m sure with power, and as SaskPower, SaskTel, as those 
Crown corporations, you know, were brought forward by many 
good people of this province, the good work that was done by 
many, I think about my uncle who worked for SaskTel who 
actually put up the lines. And he was a crew boss, and he did it 
for many years out of a family that was involved in that Crown 
corporation. And you know, they did a great job. They did the 
work that they needed to do. And at the end of the day, they got 
a paycheque, you know, provided for their families. 
 
When you look at the work that’s being done by our Crown 
corporations, and by those individuals who are very proud, 
they’re proud of the job they do . . . And there’s so many 
whether, you know, it’s SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], whether it’s, you know, SaskTel, any of our Crown 
corps, SaskEnergy, SaskPower — the list goes on of Crown 
corporations. But I think some of the Crown corporations that, 
you know, some of the ministers have been responsible for . . . 
And I’m going to get into some of those, the ones that probably, 
you know, shed some light on, and I think has got a lot of press, 
a lot of people watching one of the Crown corps, the GTH. 
People are really paying attention to that one right now. And I 
think it’s going to be good, and I’ll get into a little bit of that 
first. 
 
But I guess I look at some of the comments and the minister’s 
comments and some of my colleagues talked . . . [inaudible] . . . 
why do we need this interpretation. And you know, the 
interpretation of what the Crowns are, like that’s interesting, an 
interpretation of what the Crown is. And they go back into 
talking about, okay, what’s this, you know, what’s this about? 
And people are asking, like why do all of a sudden do we need 
an interpretation of our Crowns? I think it’s very simple. The 
people of this province have said it very loud and clear many 
times to the government. 
 
And I think about it. And I was doing some, just some going 
down memory lane. And I’m going to go back to 2003. And in 
2003 there was a provincial election. And at the time the leader 
was, I think, would have been . . . Who was that leader in 2003? 
I’m thinking of his name. Hermanson, I think could have been 
the leader of the Sask Party. And you know, he went through an 
election. And at the end of the day, you know, it was interesting 
where he allowed the public to be aware that he was going to 
sell the Crown corporations or that he was looking at, he could 
sell the Crown corporations. He may sell the Crown 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

corporations. Well lo and behold, the people of this province 
sent a very good message to the Sask Party, a very good 
message. They sat in opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Asking leave to raise a point of order? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Yes, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you could 
call to attention for the members opposite the fact that they’re 
not supposed to be interfering with a member of this Assembly 
when he’s on his feet making a speech in this Chamber. If you 
could please do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to weigh in on this point of order. I think it’s 
been a long tradition — outside of maiden speeches, which the 
new member that is sitting in this Assembly, that we gave him 
the respect to do that — of a good banter back and forth across 
the floor, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t understand what the 
significance of this versus any other bantering that has gone on 
in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t think the point of order 
should be . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve been listening closely to the debate on 
the floor and the little bit of banter back and forth, and I am able 
to rule on this point of order that I will not take it as well taken, 
the point of order from the Opposition House Leader. I believe 
there is a role for some of the banter that goes back and forth as 
long as it isn’t disruptive of the person speaking, and that if it 
gets to a level that I think it is, I will ask order, and hopefully 
members will come to order at that time. 
 
I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To get in where I 
was saying and the message that was sent in 2003 was, don’t 
mess with the Crown corporations. The people of this province 
are very proud to own the Crown corporations. And you know, 
we talk about the assets, and my colleague earlier in question or 
in the member’s petition talked about the profits and where 
those profits go. They go to cover our roads, our health care, 
our education. 
 
But unfortunately we have a government . . . In 2003 that was 
the Sask Party. Now they have a different Premier, a different 
leader, and obviously they had to . . . I guess they sent him on 
his way in 2003 after the election. And he lost because he was 
going to sell the Crowns, something that was very crucial, vital. 

So the Sask Party does have a record. The Sask Party 
government has a record. They like to mess around with the 
Crowns. They’ve got a message, a new leader, a Premier, and 
then that Premier wins in 2007. You know, 2007 comes along 
and we have a new Premier of the province, which is fine — 
Sask Party, leader of the Sask Party. 
 
The interesting thing is, you know, he said we will not touch the 
Crowns; the Crowns will be protected. They played that game 
very well. You know, very well they played that game with the 
people. Lo and behold, and I’ll get into a little bit about, you 
know, what got sold off and some of the stuff that they’ve got 
rid of, you know, and some of the legislation that might have 
been changed, proposed, brought in. 
 
But you know, truly at the end of the day when I start thinking 
about the challenges that are coming in to this province, and we 
look at the cost of living, you know, I’m going to think about 
Sask Power. You know, I think about those individuals right 
now who pay their power bill. But unfortunately in January of 
this year, they’ve seen another increase in their power rates. 
And we wonder why. Why are they seeing increases of the 
power rates? 
 
Well I guess when we have a talk with individuals and we share 
this, people are wondering about our Crown corporations, how 
proud they are. And I’ve said that, how proud they are of the 
Crown corporations. SaskPower is one of them, a good work, a 
great job. But you know what? We see some increases. 
 
And when the Sask Party wants to take money and take the 
assets and utilize the assets for whatever they want to do, well I 
guess it’s because of their mismanagement, their waste, their 
scandals. That’s where we see some of our good earned dollars 
and our retained earnings as a Crown corporation. We all own 
those. Those are ours. They belong to us as a province — very 
proud. 
 
I myself, when you think about SaskTel, you think about a 
Crown corporation. With our house, you think about our house 
phone. For years we’ve had a service that provides a great 
service — very proud. I have talked highly of SaskTel, the 
service we get. Like anything, are there some challenges? Sure 
there is, but SaskTel’s always willing to work out, make sure 
that you’re comfortable, you’re happy with the service. They do 
a great job and they do this province a good service, and we 
know that. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But unfortunately, you know, when you see a government that’s 
playing around with our finances . . . And I say that because 
they are. They are playing around with the finances because at 
the end of the day, if and when . . . And I think in 2015-16 there 
was something like $292 million that was given back to the 
province to help pay for like our schools, our roads. And if you 
look at some of the information that’s come out about, now that 
it is a Crown corporation, SaskTel, and are we paying mobility 
prices that are way out there? No, I think we’re getting a pretty 
good service. And I mean the people I’ve talked to are very 
proud. They’re saying, you know, it’s affordable. You can get 
on certain plans. SaskTel does a great job. They do a great job 
of advertising, of promoting what the service is. It’s owned by 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

the people. 
 
And when I think about all the different Crowns that are owned 
by the people and those assets that are shared in this province 
. . . So to give an example, you know, the $292 million that was 
shared with the government that the government didn’t have 
access to. So the government’s thinking, well okay, we’ve got 
this money coming in. We’ll do a little more work. Well maybe 
we don’t have to tax the people as hard because the good people 
of this province have paid for those services. It’s a Crown 
corporation. They’ve paid to have that service. We’ll let those 
profits stay within our province. 
 
And my colleagues have expressed that very well and some of 
them articulated excellent. I agree with that, but the facts are the 
facts. At the end of the day, you have $292 million that goes 
into the General Revenue Fund, or the government uses the way 
it needs to use it. 
 
But the good people of this province want the government to 
use those profits well. They want them to manage them well, 
not have scandals, waste, and mismanagement of their funds. 
Those are taxpayers’ dollars, and at the end of the day they will 
hold this government to account. They will. 
 
Like you know, the backbenchers, I send this message to those 
individuals back there. Sit on your hands, say nothing, but you 
watch the debt going up. You see what they’re trying to sell off. 
Mr. Speaker, you see what’s going on. And at the end of the 
day, the people will hold those members to account, those 
members. 
 
It’s a long time, yes. I’ve said this in this House before: brag 
about your 50-some members. That’s good. You mock. You 
laugh. The good people of this province who have paid the 
price will send you a message. So keep mocking them. Keep 
laughing and doing what you’re doing. Waste their money. But 
the taxpayer will hold you to account. We know that. 
 
So as I was getting into that where we say about profits, and 
SaskTel was one of them and a number of the Crowns who 
bring in all of those profits, and they share amongst the 
province. And if it lessens having income tax or the PST 
[provincial sales tax], there’s different ways. But this 
government wants to sell off our Crowns. Oh they say, no, no, 
no. We’ve heard the Premier say, no, we’re not going to do that. 
No, we’re not going to do that, no. You know, they go ahead 
and they do this and they pass. Whether they knew this or not, 
whether they do this or not . . . 
 
You talk about income tax. Right now, our Crown corporations, 
they’re owned 100 per cent by Saskatchewan people, all of us. 
We pay no income tax, nothing. We don’t pay. We could take 
those assets and we can use them the way we want. Well 
unfortunately the government of the day has got to use them. 
But they have wasted so much — mismanagement, scandals. 
And that happens. So that’s interesting. 
 
Now if they get rid of 10 per cent as some of my colleagues and 
share with them . . . And I think about the critic for, you know, 
the Finance one. I think about the member from Nutana, how 
she has expressed it very well. Did the government know? Did 
they not know? Did they not care that if you sell off 10 per cent 

or more of our Crowns, you will have to pay income tax on 
those that are no longer? So less than 90 per cent from my 
understanding, then you will pay income tax. 
 
Well lo and behold, they’re trying to get a definition, and 
maybe you’re hearing, well we might sell off 49 per cent of the 
Crowns. Let me be very clear. I think the Saskatchewan 
people . . . 
 
And you know, I want to welcome the member from Meewasin. 
He was on the doorstep. I was on the doorstep door knocking. 
And it’s interesting hearing those individuals in that 
constituency who made it very clear, very clear: do not touch 
our Crowns. 
 
I had conversations with people saying, you know what? I 
supported the Sask Party government. I voted for them. I did. I 
voted two terms. For two terms, three times I voted for them. 
But I am not voting for them this time because they’re going 
after our Crowns. They’re trying to sell off SaskTel. They’re 
trying to sell off something that we’re so proud of that’s such an 
asset. 
 
So those members, those constituents in Meewasin sent a 
message. They elected an NDP member to this House. And let 
me tell you, we have ourselves a member who is very 
passionate, caring. And I think, you know, when you look at his 
roles that he will play in this House, it will be grateful and we 
will be grateful and I know the constituents will be. So I 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly and as part of official 
opposition. 
 
But having said that, and I want to go back to our Crowns 
again. And it’s important any time you have members who want 
to mess around with our Crown corporations. And you know, 
it’s funny because on the weekend I was talking to . . . I don’t 
want to age them but a couple of constituents that, you know, 
they’re celebrating their 70th birthday and stuff like that, and 
it’s amazing, you know, as you talk to them and you talk to 
individuals. And I met up with some . . . I was in Saskatoon and 
I met up with another family and a couple of individuals, and 
they said, why is this government even mentioning or trying to 
. . . What’s going on with our Crown corporations? We’re all so 
proud. 
 
Like you guys, you spend so much money on polling. Like you 
love doing polling. So what would you . . . You love spending 
money. The Sask Party, you love spending money. They do so 
much polling. Well maybe somebody volunteers to do a polling 
for you. But anyway at the end of the day, you know, they get 
them polling. I’m sure, I’m sure at the end of the day the 
government must be getting messages. And I wonder what 
messages they’re getting when they’re checking out. Oh, maybe 
you’re not doing polling to see, well is it a good idea to sell our 
Crowns or not. But I think you’re probably doing a little bit. 
And maybe it’s another . . . Maybe you don’t hire anybody. 
Maybe it’s somebody is doing it out there out of the goodness 
of Saskatchewan people, and they might be doing it, a research 
group or something. And that’s great if they are. I thank them. 
And I hope they share the results with the Sask Party because I 
think you’re going to get the answer loud and clear: don’t mess 
with the Crowns. 
 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

But having said that, I referred to some of the backbenchers, 
Mr. Speaker. I was talking about some of the challenges that are 
out there. And I think some of the backbenchers are not going 
to be here next election. You’re messing around with our 
Crown corporations, and you can laugh and think it’s funny, 
you know, and that’s all right. That’s all right. You can heckle 
and you can do what you want and you can have your argument 
and your day and your challenge. But at the end of the day, the 
good people of Saskatchewan do not want their Crowns touched 
in any way. 
 
They don’t want you to sell 5 per cent. They don’t want you to 
sell off this small piece. And we’ve seen how the government 
has sold off different parts of our Crowns. And the people are 
paying attention and they’re watching and they’re sending you a 
message. And you got sent a message. But having said that, we 
look at the great work, the service that is provided to 
Saskatchewan residents, you know, whether it’s SaskEnergy, 
and I’ve talked about whether it’s SaskTel, whether it’s 
SaskPower. 
 
And I think about SGI. People are glad they’ve got a service of 
SGI. It’s a Crown corporation, and there are many Crown 
corporations, you know, that provide a good service to 
Saskatchewan people. Some of them maybe make a profit. 
Maybe some of them have challenges or hard years, but a 
government’s supposed to support them and the people. 
 
And I think of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] as 
a Crown corporation, and yes, the government does give STC a 
subsidy, and at the end of the day . . . But there’s a service that 
is provided to many Saskatchewan residents, and I think about 
the rural area, the North. They use STC and that service to bring 
in goods and services for our farmers. When I think about the 
passengers, when I think about our seniors who may not have a 
vehicle, may not have a driver’s, they use STC to travel to 
medical appointments, and that’s a good thing. So we know that 
there are good assets. They do a good service, and the people 
are proud of that service. 
 
But having said that, when we see a government so willing to 
have the interpretation they call it, The Interpretation Act, they 
want an interpretation. I wonder. Make a few phone calls. Go 
visit with some of your constituency and find out what they 
think about your guys’ proposed Bill 40. Let’s talk about those 
men and women who work for the Crown corporations. What 
do they have to say? I think we’ve seen about 1,500 of them 
that were here on last Wednesday. Might have been even more 
of them. And they were expressing their frustration with this 
government. 
 
You see the cuts, but you know what? It’s okay. Oh well, 
maybe there was 2,000 of them here. But you know what? It 
was amazing to watch. We had probably some of the worst 
weather and they showed up here. I think the Sask Party didn’t 
realize what they’ve done. You’ve woken up many people in 
this province, even your own supporters. 
 
You know, I may as well share this. I get around back home, 
and I like visiting and I visit with so many different people back 
home. It doesn’t matter if they’re Sask Party, if they’re a 
Liberal. I don’t care. I just visit, socialize, and you treat people 
with respect and dignity. And I think about these individuals, 

and actually they’re individuals that support your party. They 
voted for your candidates and they think . . . You know, that’s 
great. That’s what they believe and that’s fine. I understand 
that. I still respect them and we can still have a coffee, you 
know, and have a talk. 
 
But I want to make it very clear. This individual said, he said, I 
don’t care. Tell the Premier. You could tell every one of the 
ministers in the Sask Party I’m a true supporter but I do not 
appreciate them even looking at selling off the Crowns. What 
do they think they’re doing? I cannot believe they would even 
go there. And I said, you know what? They don’t care; they’re 
going there. Well I’m not going to tell you what else he had to 
say in the words because I can’t use that language here in the 
House. So I’ll just say it wasn’t, the words that he used wasn’t 
very nice when I would say that. As my grandkids would say, 
that’s not nice language. 
 
So having said that, if you must be getting from your own 
members, that your own constituents must be approaching you, 
telling you, what are you guys doing? Well maybe you don’t 
even go visit your constituents because you don’t want to hear 
what they have to say. Because you should be paying attention 
to them because I know they’re not happy. They’re not happy 
with what you guys are doing. And coming up with legislation 
and to amend an Act, you know, we see through that; 
everyone’s seeing through that. And they’re trying to send you 
a message. 
 
You know, if something isn’t broken, why would you want to 
amend it and fix it? And then you blame it on, oh, well if the 
government back then, the NDP government when you 
introduced this Act, the protection Act, why didn’t you fix this 
and have this interpretation and fix this? You know, that side of 
the House, you had an opportunity to bring in amendments. 
You could have amended that legislation when it was 
introduced, but you didn’t do that. You didn’t think about that. 
But now, now you want to do it. Well I think at the end of the 
day the good people of this province can see through what 
you’re trying to do and the good people will send you a 
message. I know that. 
 
But having said that, you know, I want to go into a little bit 
more about . . . And I want to correct myself here because I did 
say 292 million and it’s 297.2 million that was shared with the 
rest of the province in 2015-16. So I want to be clear: it was 
even more, more money that they shared, the good people of 
this province shared with the government of the day to say, 
please take care of our dollars. Take care of our tax dollars. 
Don’t mismanage it, you know, the scandals. Don’t get into 
that. Don’t use our dollars to do that. 
 
And I think as things unfold, the public will get a better look at 
everything. As the finances unfold on the 22nd, we get the third 
quarter and all those things, and the people will see. And at the 
end of the day we’ll say, you know what? These Crown 
corporations that have paid back dividends, dividends after 
dividends after dividends, year after year after year, to help 
lessen the taxes, to help pay, to help pay for this province’s 
health care, education, for the services that are needed. 
 
I think about some of, you know, the challenges that are faced 
in northern Saskatchewan, and I think my colleagues have 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

shared that. We have shared that. The leaders from First 
Nations, Métis leaders, the mayors, those individuals back 
home, health . . . you know, the front-line health workers have 
shared about the challenges that they’re facing when it comes to 
suicides, when it comes to addictions, when it comes to mental 
health. There are so many areas that you could take these 
dollars and do some good thing . Can you just quit please with 
the scandals, mismanaging the money? Can you actually do 
what’s needed to be done for northern people, for people across 
this province? 
 
Share with them. We’re willing to share. We want to share, but 
we need help. We’re asking the government for help. Many of 
the leaders are asking the government to please do more. Do 
more. Yes, I know you think it’s funny. You don’t care about 
the North; I understand that. You don’t care about the people in 
the North, and that’s clear. You can heckle; you can say what 
you want. But I want to make it very clear. I want to make it 
very clear. The good people of northern Saskatchewan, the 
people that I represent in the Cumberland constituency, are 
tired, tired of a government not . . . And they’re starting to use 
their voice. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I think about the different organizations that are coming in 
and they’re saying, we want you to take the resources. And 
there’s many resources that come out. But I know the money 
that I talked about, the 297.2 million as I corrected it, could do 
so much to help so many in our province. Whether it’s North, 
rural, First Nations, Métis communities, whether it’s the urban, 
there is so much that could be done, and those dollars could be 
used. Every time a government wastes money, you overspend 
on land . . . And I mean that stuff’s all going to come out. And 
you do different scandals. You do waste. You have a 
billion-dollar, you know, over cost, whatever it is. 
 
You know, when you look at some of the challenges that you’re 
asking people to face, the good people of our province have to 
endure tough times. And then you come out with legislation 
when they tell you, do not sell off our Crowns. They’re used for 
many of us and should be used for our generation. And I think 
about this and, you know, I was kind of thinking about, Mr. 
Speaker, I was thinking about some of the members, the 
backbenchers, and I think about the members. Like one day you 
will leave here. Maybe you’ll retire. That’s fine. Maybe the 
good people send you a retirement. But at the end of the day, 
what you leave and what we leave for the next generation, I 
hope you’re proud, that you can stand and say, look, we did the 
right things.  
 
Like I hope you . . . Honestly I hope you can, and I wish you 
well on that. Because right now what I see, that’s not 
happening. And I think there’s going to be troubled times 
coming. But having said that, you could, and you have an 
opportunity as backbenchers, stand up to the government, stand 
up to the ministers, voice your concern, voice your concern. 
You need to stand up and fight for the constituency. But that’s 
okay. I understand that you laugh and you think it’s funny. 
You’re just going to roll around and do what you want to do. 
You do that. 
 
Now let’s get back to of course talking about Bill 40. As the 

Speaker will say, you know, Doyle, make sure you stay on 
topic. But I just want to show some examples of what now, 
when you look at the Crown corps, and I talked a little bit about 
all the different employees. You know, how many employees 
do we have that work for our Crowns? Well we know yesterday 
we have, you know, some that are losing their jobs as yesterday 
they got the notices. And so we don’t know who else will get 
the notice that they’re going to lose jobs. The government says 
that they’re going to do some cutting. 
 
Well when we see the budget on the 22nd, it’s going to be 
interesting to see what exactly will be in that budget, the third 
quarter finances. We’ve been hearing government . . . You put 
out these balloons and you say all these different things that 
might happen, could happen, and then you come back in the 
House after and you say, well it wasn’t as bad as it really was. 
I’m worried, and I’m worried if you have access to selling off 
49 per cent of our Crowns, and you say we still own it because 
we own 51 per cent. Every time you . . . [inaudible] . . . you 
deal with that, and you put that out in the public. It’s very 
simple. I don’t think the public wants you to sell off 1 per cent 
of any of the Crowns. It’s clear. Don’t sell off SaskTel. Don’t 
sell off our Crowns. But you have done that. You know, little 
parts of it you have sold off and out of the good people of 
Saskatchewan. You know, they’re going to send you a message, 
and I know that message is going to come. 
 
And at the end of the day, we think about how our Crowns, you 
know, have started and as they came forward and they were 
developed of the good people of this province. You know, it 
took time to have the assets that we have and the quality of life 
that we have. You know, we think on this side of the House that 
you will get a message soon. I’m hoping you do some polling, 
and if you don’t do some polling, you know, do some polling or 
even do some phone calls and do a little bit of checking out on 
what’s going on and how the people of this good province do 
they think . . . You guys will come up to another election and 
maybe you guys are going to be having a leadership race. You 
never know. You never know what happens with your side of 
the House and you never know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Who? Oh well, we never know what that’s going to be like. 
And I’m sure, you know, they won’t want to hear that you want 
to sell off their Crowns. 
 
But having said that, you know, when you look at the Crown 
corporations and the jobs across the province, Mr. Speaker . . . I 
talked about the good-paying jobs. Let’s just say an individual 
works for our Crown corporation, and we know that some of 
those are . . . They’re good-paying jobs. They’re good-paying 
jobs for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So if you have somebody who works for a Crown corporation, 
it’s good for their local community as far as the economy. They 
buy a house in their community. And we know that there’s 
government employees throughout the province in northern 
Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, the rural, the urban. We 
know there’s lots of them all over. They do a great job, but they 
provide for their families and that’s all they want. Some of 
them, they buy a house. It’s good for the economy. They pay 
their taxes, they buy services and goods in their community. 
These are good-paying jobs. 
 
So if you sell those off, will they have the same benefits? And 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

we see some of the benefits that some of the Crown 
corporations get. We have individuals who get good health 
benefits. We know that they have health benefits. So if they 
have health benefits and good services and they can provide for 
their family, isn’t that what we want? We want society to have 
good-paying jobs. We want them to be able to provide for their 
families, have health coverage, and be involved in the local 
community. 
 
You know, when I think about some of the work that the Crown 
corporations do, and I heard some of my colleagues talking 
about the different organizations that our Crown corporations 
. . . They do fundraising and they help community, they 
volunteer. The hours that are put in by our Crown corporation 
employees, whether it’s SaskTel, SaskEnergy, you name it, 
SGI, they all do certain things and they get involved in the local 
community. And they’re coaches. They’re volunteers. They do 
some great stuff out there. And they fundraise for different 
causes. And I give them credit that they do a lot of great work 
and they put in. 
 
But I think we’re seeing more and more of . . . those employees 
that work for those Crowns are starting to see something, and 
they’re starting to see through. I think a lot of them voted for 
you last election. As I remember, the Minister of Education and 
Labour, I remember him saying, heck, we had 55 per cent of 
them vote for us, like you know, stuff like that. 
 
When you have that, I think, you know what? You’ve woke 
them up. You’ve got their attention; trust me, you have. You 
have got the unions. You’ve got the working men and women 
of these Crown corporations. You’ve woken them up; they’re 
paying attention. You’re now starting to bring stuff forward, 
and you’re waking them up. And they should be woke up. 
Unfortunately, you know, you did the spin to them — oh no, 
no, we’ll never touch our Crowns in the election. We didn’t 
hear that on the doorstep from any of your candidates. Oh we’re 
going to sell the Crowns. We’re looking at this. We’re looking 
at . . . Oh no, no, no, we won’t do that. We wouldn’t even 
consider that. So it’s interesting how that plays out. 
 
But now you have them awake, and you’ve got some of them 
paying attention, and I hope more and more of them pay 
attention. And I hope they send letters — those that are in your 
constituency — I hope they send you letters. I hope you get 
phone calls. Coffee . . . They visit you at your constituency 
office to tell you how important our Crowns are protected and 
left alone. I hope you’re getting that. 
 
I hope you understand they want you to scrap Bill 40. It’s so 
important. They want you to scrap Bill 40. None? The Finance 
minister has no calls, nobody bothers you. Okay, well that’s 
good. Maybe I’ll encourage people out there if you’re paying 
attention, please contact the Finance minister. He would love to 
hear from you because he’s saying nobody cares about Bill 40. 
Nobody cares about selling off our Crowns. Get a hold of the 
Finance minister, the guy that’s in charge of the dollars who’s 
actually . . . We’ll see what happens on his budget, you know. 
He says no calls, nobody’s worried about it. Well we’ll see 
about that. So that’s good when I see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many, so many people out there that 
are truly worried about this. If at the end of the day we have our 

Crowns sold and we lose the assets, and I’ve talked about the 
297.2 million that was paid back, I think it’s in 2016, ’15 from 
the Crowns to help. If those profits are made by another 
company, a private investor, a private company, do we think 
that they’re going to give us back that money? That they’re 
going to give it to Saskatchewan people to pay for our 
education? That they’re going to give that to pay for our roads, 
our health care? Do we actually think that that money’s going to 
come back to the province? Some of it may in taxes. Some of 
those, you know, may be in taxes. But having said that, once 
you sell off our Crowns, they’re gone. They’re gone for good, 
and we don’t get them back, you know. 
 
But you know what, unfortunately, that’s the other thing, you 
know, and I had talked about that. You know, if you sell off 
more than 10 per cent of a Crown you’re going to have those 
tax dollars. They’re going to go to Ottawa, to Justin Trudeau 
and the federal government to utilize. And I’m sure he’d thank 
you because he could use the dollars. So when I think about 
that, and you know, we refer to some of those comments in 
here. It goes back to this. Is the profits . . . We’ve seen exactly 
what this government did. We seen our privatization of our 
liquor stores. We’ve seen the government do that to those 
profits. And we’ve seen how some companies were not happy. 
Saskatchewan companies were not happy with that process and 
what happened with that. Are those profits going to stay in 
Saskatchewan? Are those profits going to leave? Well I would 
assume and I would think . . . You know, we want nothing sold. 
We don’t want it sold, but if you’re going to and you did that, 
you answer to those companies. You answer to those 
Saskatchewan companies. And you’re the government of the 
day, you make those choices. 
 
So I leave it at that. And I think at the end of the day, you know, 
my colleagues have expressed, we have heard from people all 
over: do not mess with the Crown corporations. You have lost a 
leader because of that. You lost an election in 2003 because of 
that. Now you guys are messing with that. I think, you know, 
you may lose. So having said that, you just keep going steady 
course doing what you’re doing. Just keep doing what you’re 
doing. Take the people of this good province for granted. I’ve 
told you, you know, the people trust you. They gave you a 
mandate; here it is. 
 
You did not share this. Mr. Speaker, that government did not 
share with the people of this good province in 2016, in April, 
that they were going to sell off the Crowns, they were going to 
do anything of this, what was coming. They did not share that 
with anyone. You see the billboards, the advertising, 
everything. No, you didn’t share a word with people, not a 
word. Now you’ve got the mandate. You’re there now. 
 
And I’ve had people that . . . Well I’ll share this. I’ve had 
people who didn’t support me, who came to me and said, you 
know what Doyle, for this . . . And I’ve had people say that: I 
didn’t support the NDP; I voted Sask Party. But I’m not going 
to be voting for them next time, trust me. That’s fine. I mean, 
that’s their choice. That’s the message the people . . . I hope you 
guys are hearing that because if you’re not, sit up and pay 
attention. Scrap Bill 40, you know the interpretation, Mr. 
Speaker. Scrap Bill 40. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good people of this province are asking the 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

minister, the cabinet, the Premier, those members to scrap Bill 
40. Many people are asking. We don’t need this interpretation 
Act to define what it is. What the good people of this province 
want is you to manage their finances, their tax dollars well. 
They don’t want you not to mismanage. They don’t want you to 
waste. They don’t want any scandals. 
 
They want you to take care of those assets and use them for the 
goodness of all of us, for our next generation, our grandkids, 
our kids. That’s what the good people of this province want, 
and they entrusted you with that. And you have turned your 
back on them. I hope you can reverse your decision and scrap 
Bill 40. I hope you will. You’ll hear the concerns, and you will 
scrap Bill 40. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping that after a few 
days the government will say, you know, we’ve reconsidered 
this and we’re actually going to scrap this bill. We’ve thought 
about it and we’re going to scrap it. Let’s just hope they do. 
 
But having said that, you know, to join in. And like I said, my 
colleagues have expressed many great points. And I admire 
them, the way they articulate well their skills, and how they 
shared with Saskatchewan residents and the public, with the 
members about the challenges that many Saskatchewan people 
will face. Because if you lose those profits and they’re not 
going into government coffers, somebody’s going to have to 
pay. And unfortunately it’s going to be the most vulnerable, 
those people back home who will have to pay. They will have 
to pay whether you raise taxes, PST . . . because, you know, the 
good tooth fairy isn’t going to show up and give you guys the 
297.2 that you got to spend and those . . . [inaudible] . . . when 
you think about that, there’s nobody going to show up and just 
give you a donation. You’ve got it . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well, 2015-16. 
 
So having said all that, again I want to express my thanks to my 
colleagues for those members out there in the public who are 
fighting to say, this is the wrong way to go. This is very 
dangerous. It’s the wrong place to go. This is the wrong 
legislation to change the interpretation. 
 
[15:15] 
 
They say, oh it doesn’t mean anything. People are paying 
attention, and they’re worried. And I think they should be 
worried. We have a government, I think at the end of the day 
they’ve always had their agenda and their idea. They were just 
smooth how they did it. And now we’re here today, and I think 
the good people of this province I hope will send a message to 
them. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m really, I’m not sure, you 
know, how much more a person can share and what we want to 
share, but I’m hoping that they’ve heard our citizens. We’ve 
heard our unions, our colleagues, and I think different 
organizations will weigh in on this. 
 
You know, when I was thinking about the . . . and I had asked 
about some of the costs of . . . and I’m just going to see, and I 
was thinking about this, you know, some of the costs and when 
we had . . . if you look at what it costs right now for cell 
service, Mobility, you look at different companies and the 

service that SaskTel provides. I think about my own phone, you 
know, and the rates. You can call in once in a while and you 
can say, you know, I’d like to look and see how much is my 
phone bill. Is there a better plan I can go on? And it’s amazing 
to watch. SaskTel’s willing to work with that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, and I pay a portion too, just like you do, I 
hope. 
 
And I say that, you know, at the end of the day I see SaskTel 
and, you know, you have a Mobility bill that comes in. And like 
I said, I check on it and see, is there a better plan I can go on? 
But lo and behold, I’ve seen some reports and I think I’ve seen 
even on some comments on Facebook, and people were talking 
about how the costs compare to owning our own Crown 
corporation, so SaskTel with Mobility, and the cost and the 
savings that come back to Saskatchewan residents. Even though 
we have cheap rates, we have a great service. Money goes back 
into government coffers for all of us to share, and that’s the 
process. 
 
If you sell that off . . . And the government has said, well we’ll 
look at all offers; if we get an offer we’ll look at it. Well no, it’s 
not for sale, but if we get an offer, well we’ll have a minister 
that will be responsible in case we get an offer. You know, 
wink-wink, nudge-nudge. Okay, really? That’s how it’s going 
to be? Well you know what? The good people of this province 
will see through that, and I think they’re sending a message. 
 
So having said that, we have a good service. It’s cheap rates, 
and we still make profits that go back in to help pay for health 
care, for all the different things. So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
again I go back. I’m hoping the government will, will, will 
make the right decision and withdraw Bill 40 and make sure 
that our Crown corporations . . . 
 
And you know, if you want to make amendments and changes 
that protect them, we’d probably work with you and I’m sure 
Saskatchewan people would work with you . . . [inaudible] . . . 
But to have, you know, a definition, a definition, you know, a 
definition, a definition, you know, if you want to . . . and 
strengthen our Crown corporations, as the minister says he 
would like to do that, you know, that’s good. I hope he does. If 
it’d strengthen our Crown corporations so that they can’t be 
sold off, then that’s a great thing. And you know, fine. We can 
talk about that and we can have a discussion if you want and 
maybe debate it, whatever. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve expressed my 
thanks to my colleagues, to those out there, to some of the 
challenge that facing . . . and you think some of the . . . You 
know, the last thing I want to share is, I think in 1908 is when 
SaskTel was founded, you know, in 1908. Here you go. You 
think about SaskPower, you know. You think about it, a Crown 
corporation in 1929. SaskEnergy in 1952. I mean these have 
been with us for so long, and the people are proud of them. 
Don’t mess with them. They’re asking the government of the 
day, do not mess with our Crown corporations. They pay back 
so much to Saskatchewan people. So having said that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill 40. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 40. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
wade into the debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment 
Act, 2016. It’s always a privilege to represent the people of 
Saskatoon Riversdale and the people of Saskatchewan in this 
debate from my chair here in the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a few things that I’d like to talk about today with 
respect to Bill 43. I think context is incredibly important, the 
context of some recent oil spills, Mr. Speaker. A recent audit 
. . . well actually not recent auditor’s reports. Auditor’s reports 
dating back to 2012, Mr. Speaker, and to 2014, the fact that 
we’re still waiting for the government’s investigation of Husky 
Energy, Mr. Speaker, which is overdue. That is a little bit of the 
context under which this . . . or in which this bill has been 
presented here to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So let’s just cast our minds back to the summer, last summer, 
summer 2016, where there was a spill of 225 000 litres of a leak 
of heavy crude oil and dilutant from a Husky Energy pipeline 
into the North Saskatchewan River, Mr. Speaker. It impacted 
everybody along the North Saskatchewan. Communities 
particularly hard hit: North Battleford, P.A. [Prince Albert], 
Melfort were three cities who were impacted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It impacted the drinking water of more than 66,000 residents 
here in the province. And in fact it forced communities to shut 
off their intakes from the river and find other water sources for 
nearly two months. In fact actually the city of North Battleford 
even in November was still piping in their drinking water from 
a neighbouring town, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It impacted people in a big way. It impacted the economy. It 
impacted businesses in these communities. It impacted wildlife, 
access to clean water. And water that we can drink and we can 
cook with and we can bathe with is important to life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important to note that actually there’s another bill 
before us, which I know my colleague will be speaking to, 
that’s tied into the importance of water here in Saskatchewan as 
well, Mr. Speaker. But this particular oil spill had a huge impact 
on many people for a very long time. I know that colleagues of 
mine . . . The member from Prince Albert Northcote actually 
was on the ground there, and many of my colleagues actually 
made their way north to talk to people and find out what the real 
impacts were. I know when you think about restaurants and the 
inability to provide the services to customers, Mr. Speaker, not 
being able to turn on your tap — we all take that for granted — 
and have clean water coming out of that tap, it’s a huge 
concern, Mr. Speaker. 

I talked a little bit about context of the auditor’s reports. I’m 
going to take us back to 2012 when the Provincial Auditor first 
did a chapter on regulating pipelines, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
important to remember that to ensure success and sustainability 
of Saskatchewan, the people in Saskatchewan deserve a 
government that will support our resource sector while also 
ensuring the protection of the air we breathe, the water we 
drink, and the land on which we grow our food, Mr. Speaker. 
So strong regulations around pipelines are critical. Companies 
need to know what the regulations are and how they will impact 
their business, Mr. Speaker, but also that those regulations will 
be in fact enforced. 
 
While I’m still on the topic of oil spills, Mr. Speaker, in January 
of 2017 there was a spill on the Ocean Man First Nation where 
a pipeline leaked 200 000 litres of crude oil on First Nations 
farm land, and it’s important to point out that the Sask Party 
government failed to inform the public and have not said when 
that pipeline was last inspected. 
 
Going back to the Provincial Auditor’s report of 2012, that’s the 
2012 report volume 1, chapter 5, I’d like to read those 
recommendations into the record, Mr. Speaker. There were 
important recommendations in 2012, and I will . . . So in 2012 
the Provincial Auditor recommended seven recommendations, I 
believe, but I will get to them here. 
 
So her first recommendation was that “We recommend that the 
Ministry of Energy and Resources develop written policies and 
procedures to guide staff when assessing pipeline design, 
monitoring pipeline construction, and evaluating pipeline 
operations.” 
 
The second recommendation the auditor recommended, “. . . 
that the Ministry of Energy and Resources consider seeking 
responsibility in law to verify that pipeline operators clean up 
contaminated sites to an acceptable condition.” 
 
She recommended “. . . that the Ministry of Energy and 
Resources consistently document its assessments of pipeline 
license applications for compliance with the law prior to issuing 
pipeline licenses.” 
 
She recommended “. . . that the Ministry of Energy and 
Resources assess the resources it requires to fulfill its 
responsibilities under The Pipelines Act, 1998.” 
 
And her fifth recommendation was “. . . that the Ministry of 
Energy and Resources implement a risk-based assessment 
approach to monitor pipeline construction and verify pressure 
tests.” 
 
Her sixth recommendation in 2012, Mr. Speaker, so five years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, “We recommend that the Ministry of Energy 
and Resources monitor pipeline operator compliance with 
integrity management and safety processes for existing 
pipelines.” 
 
And her seventh was that, “We recommend that the Ministry of 
Energy and Resources consider seeking responsibility in law to 
license flowlines,” Mr. Speaker. So that was in 2012. 
 
And a couple years later, the auditor did a follow-up audit. And 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

I just want to point out how much work had been done — or 
how little work had been done — between those two years in 
ensuring our pipelines were safe, Mr. Speaker, and well 
regulated. 
 
So the first recommendation on developing “. . . written policies 
and procedures to guide staff when assessing pipeline design, 
monitoring pipeline construction, and evaluating pipeline 
operations.” That was partially implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Her second recommendation that the Ministry of Economy, 
which was formerly the Ministry of Energy and Resources, “. . . 
monitor pipeline operator compliance with integrity 
management and safety processes for existing pipelines.” They 
didn’t get that done in those two years. That one was not 
implemented at that time in 2014, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third recommendation, “We recommend that [the Ministry 
of Economy, formerly] the Ministry of Energy and Resources 
consider seeking responsibility in law to verify that pipeline 
operators clean up contaminated sites to an acceptable 
condition.” That one was not implemented in 2014, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s some positive news, Mr. Speaker. In 2014, the next two 
were fully implemented where the Ministry of Economy, which 
was formerly the Ministry of Energy and Resources, “. . . 
consistently document its assessments of pipeline license 
applications for compliance with the law prior to issuing 
pipeline licenses.” That one was implemented, as was the 
recommendation that the Ministry of Economy “. . . assess the 
resources it requires to fulfill its responsibilities under The 
Pipelines Act, 1998.” 
 
And then we move to partially implemented. On the 
recommendation that Ministry of Economy “. . . implement a 
risk-based assessment approach to monitor pipeline 
construction and verify pressure tests.” That one was partially 
implemented. 
 
And the final recommendation, that the Ministry of Economy 
“. . . consider seeking responsibility in law to license flowlines” 
was not implemented, Mr. Speaker. And I believe at that time, I 
was new to Public Accounts where all the auditor’s reports 
land, Mr. Speaker, for review by the Public Accounts 
Committee. And it was surprising to me . . . Obviously, we all 
have areas where we have the strongest interest or expertise, 
Mr. Speaker. And it was the first time I had heard that flowlines 
in Saskatchewan, up to about 70,000 flowlines in 
Saskatchewan, were not regulated. That came as a surprise to 
me sitting at that table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just an interesting aside that in 2014 when the auditor’s 
report came to the Public Accounts Committee, it was 
interesting. I just want to point out who one of those witnesses 
was. It was actually the deputy minister of the Economy, Mr. 
Laurie Pushor, who did in fact appear before Public Accounts. 
It was more than possible for him to appear, but it’s been this 
government who will not allow Mr. Pushor to appear for a 
body, the GTH, for which he’s responsible, Mr. Speaker. So 
that’s an interesting thing to note, Mr. Speaker, despite many 
people’s best efforts to try to get him there. There’s been many 
motions that this government has defeated, so that’s just a little 

interesting aside. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit, obviously, about the bill itself and 
what this bill does particularly. I’ve given you a little bit of a 
context. So in a nutshell, it establishes new inspection, 
investigation, and compliance audit powers for government 
staff, and it updates penalties, and it also licenses flow lines. So 
those 70,000 lines that were not licensed before are now going 
to be licensed, which is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in general what this bill does, it expands the regulation and 
licensing of pipelines to include the, well 80,000, existing flow 
lines, allows pipelines moving fluids other than hydrocarbon 
steam and CO2 to be considered under the definition of 
pipelines, gives new powers to pipeline inspectors to collect 
information and enter property. It grants immunity to 
government from litigation based on the actions of pipeline 
inspectors as long as they were carried out in good faith. 
 
It allows the minister with the approval of cabinet to create 
directives related to areas where he has regulatory authority. It 
allows for pipelines previously exempted from regulation and 
licensing to eventually be covered by the Act, at a time to be set 
out in the regulations. So we don’t know what that is yet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It increases the penalties for breaking the law, regulations, or 
directives from 50,000 to $500,000, Mr. Speaker. Prosecutions 
under The Pipelines Act can now only be commenced less than 
three years after the government learns of the infraction. The 
bill sets out new criteria and rules for the transferring of 
pipeline licences from one person to another, including a clause 
stating that the transfer must be in the public interest. 
 
[15:30] 
 
It adds new regulation-making authority so the ministry can 
require operators to put up financial assurance for high-risk 
projects and require operators to file emergency response plans. 
And the bill does not include flow line operators in the 
expropriation provisions for pipelines. Flow line operators will 
continue to expropriate land under the outdated — we’ve been 
waiting for a while — surface rights acquisition and 
compensation Act, which has not been updated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So all of this, Mr. Speaker . . . I know my colleagues and I 
support this bill in principle and have been calling for this, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve been calling on the government to implement 
this kind of regulation for a long time. But I think it’s important 
to point out that regulations are critically important, but if you 
don’t have the staff to regulate, to enforce those regulations, it’s 
a huge problem. 
 
We see this as a potential issue with respect to Bill 43, but we 
see it with respect to another bill that’s before us, the water bill, 
Mr. Speaker, which my colleague will be speaking to. And I’m 
sorry, it slipped my mind what the number of that bill is, but 
that’s . . . 44. That’s Bill No. 44, Mr. Speaker, but that is also an 
issue where you need to ensure that the resources for regulation 
are there. 
 
I think about it in my own critic portfolio when we have health 
inspectors and the scope of their job has grown, Mr. Speaker, 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

but their numbers have not. So you dump more and more work 
on a limited number of people, and the best regulations are not 
going to get enforced because you don’t have the people to do 
them. Whether it’s on health inspections, Mr. Speaker, water, 
pipelines, you need to ensure the resources are there to do the 
proper inspection. So all the regulations in the world, if you 
don’t have people inspecting, are not going to do much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think that one thing that’s important to point out, that we’re 
still waiting for this government’s report on the Husky Energy 
spill, Mr. Speaker. I understand that we’re still waiting for it. 
It’s overdue, and one has to wonder . . . I know the minister has 
referenced it coming out soon, but we also have a budget 
coming out, a very difficult budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan, that will be here in just over a week’s time, Mr. 
Speaker. So this very important Husky Energy report, the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s report, which will talk about 
penalties that Husky might have to pay — hopefully talk about 
penalties anyway — assessing really what happened in that 
situation so it can be prevented in the future, thoughts for the 
future, Mr. Speaker. We are still waiting for that report. 
 
And I think that there’s a concern on this side of the House that 
that report will be released at the time where we have a 
provincial budget that isn’t very good for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And this really important report that is about 
protecting the air we breathe and the water we drink and the 
land on which we grow our food will be lost in the shuffle 
somehow. And that might the goal of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think it’s also important to point out that this is a government 
who has been more than reluctant to be open and transparent 
around other oil spills, Mr. Speaker, or any challenges in recent 
years. My caucus has put forward several FOIs [freedom of 
information] and the government has refused to release 
information, saying that that information about spills in the past 
will jeopardize this current investigation, Mr. Speaker, which 
quite honestly does not make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People in Saskatchewan deserve to know what has transpired 
around this government’s lack of regulation in this area in 
recent years. So this is . . . It’s important. I want to just talk a 
little bit more about inspection, just quantifying that. 
 
So I understand in Saskatchewan we did . . . inspectors did 78 
inspections of pipelines last year, and in Alberta they did more 
than 2,000, Mr. Speaker. So again is that a staffing issue, the 
lack of willingness to put in place those resources to do those 
inspections? And this legislation on these regulations will only 
ensure that we need more inspectors and more work done in 
that regard. So again without more inspectors, new powers, and 
broader ability to inspect will not make a difference and will put 
our environment — and people’s lives and livelihood — at risk, 
Mr. Speaker, which is exactly what happened during the oil 
spill last summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I do know that my colleagues will have much more to say 
about this bill, and eventually when this bill gets to committee, 
there will be many good questions by our critic responsible, Mr. 
Speaker. But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 43. 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise to join in the debate with respect to Bill No. 44, 
The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. I 
know a lot of my colleagues have already had the opportunity to 
comment on this bill, and I welcome the opportunity for myself 
to add what I can to the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this bill will streamline the process for resolving drainage 
disputes between landowners and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
something that we’ve been calling for on this side for quite a 
while, so it’s a welcome change. Essentially, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been hearing from many, many people in rural 
Saskatchewan that there’s a need for a more comprehensive 
drainage strategy to help resolve drainage issues. 
 
So in particular, we are happy to see that this bill has come 
forward. However we’ll be ensuring that we’re monitoring — 
once this bill comes into force and turns into an Act — we’ll be 
monitoring how its processes are going, and whether or not it’s 
achieving the function that it’s desiring to. Similarly, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s . . . And I’ll get into this in a little bit more detail 
when I speak further. It’s all fine and good to create legislation 
that is supposed to improve processes, but if you’re not putting 
the requisite resources into that process — which is what 
actually something that my colleague had just spoken about on 
the previous bill that had been debated — if you don’t put the 
appropriate resources into monitoring or following up on the 
requirements underneath this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it really 
renders any attempts to rectify the situation and improve on the 
processes moot, Mr. Speaker. So that’s another thing we’ll be 
watching very closely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this bill will give the Water Security Agency the authority to 
order the closure or alteration of any drainage works 
constructed before 1981. Furthermore, it replaces the old 
two-step process for complaints of illegal drainage by a 
neighbour with a one-step process that the government says will 
be resolved now in 90 days or less. And that’s something we’ve 
been hearing concerns about a lot, Mr. Speaker. The illegal 
drainage situation or the drainage situation as it stands now in 
the province results in a lot of animosity, to say the least, 
between neighbours. 
 
And in fact it’s timely that I have the opportunity to speak about 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

this bill as there was a Leader-Post article that came out this 
Saturday about this specific issue. And that was dated . . . I’m 
looking at an article by Murray Mandryk dated March 12th, 
2017 titled “Saskatchewan farmland drainage hasn’t been 
neighbourly,” writes Murray Mandryk. And it’s talking about 
that exact issue, the hostilities that have occurred between 
neighbours when they’re trying to deal with drainage situations. 
Sometimes neighbours will . . . Sometimes one individual will 
do something to their land that will effectively create a drainage 
situation that flows into their neighbour’s adjacent land causing, 
naturally, quite a large amount of tension, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it seemed as if the processes that existed prior to this bill 
were not able to rectify this situation. And you only have to 
drive down Highway 5, Mr. Speaker, and rub up against the 
Quill Lakes as you do — which I have done many times, Mr. 
Speaker; I have quite a few family in that area — to see some of 
the problems that are associated with illegal drainage and how 
that can impact not only neighbours’ farm lands, but also the 
lakes, also wildlife, and highways, Mr. Speaker. So it ends up 
being quite a costly situation, quite a costly problem. 
 
So the hope is that this legislation will help to alleviate this 
problem. Like I said, it’s definitely been a concern. When I’ve 
spoken with people in the Quill Lakes area, Mr. Speaker, this is 
one of the number one concerns that I hear about is illegal 
drainage and how this needs to be rectified and how can this be 
rectified. And frankly when you talk to . . . If you reach out and 
you speak to a lot of different people, you sometimes get a lot 
of different solutions to a problem. 
 
But I was happy to see that the minister, when he tabled this 
legislation, talked about the consultation that occurred with 
respect to this legislation. He said that there was an online 
consultation that took place from October 2013 to April 2014 
and attracted nearly 500 participants who discussed various 
options for managing drainage in the province. And when you 
get a survey that has 500 participants take part, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a sign of an issue that’s hitting home to quite a few 
people. That’s actually quite a good uptake in terms of 
consultation, especially an online consultation, Mr. Speaker. 
And this was before my time, before I was elected so I wasn’t 
aware of it, but I’m happy to see that it had occurred. 
 
He also mentions that in 2015 the ministry, because it wouldn’t 
have been this particular minister because I don’t think he was a 
minister for this, the minister of Environment at this particular 
time, but his ministry would’ve met in 2015 with 15 agricultural 
and environmental and municipal groups. And then he goes on 
to list them and they’re in Hansard, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
necessarily need to repeat them, but it is extensive. 
 
And then further in his discussion when he’s tabling this 
legislation, he talks about the key messages that he heard from 
the participants. And they included things like: 
 

broad agreement that drainage provides many benefits to 
agricultural producers but, if the negative impacts of 
drainage cannot be mitigated, drainage activities should not 
be allowed; broad support for implementing regulations 
that are risk based where drainage activities of a larger 
scale or those that pose a greater risk require more 
stringent oversight; general agreement for those who 

benefit from drainage projects should bear the costs for 
building and maintaining such projects; and general 
agreement from all that existing, non-approved projects 
need to be brought into the regulatory system; consistent 
support for increased compliance and enforcement 
including the use of increased fines and closure of drainage 
works in cases where the project has not received prior 
approval. 

 
And when they did this consultation, they received mixed 
support for requiring the maintenance of some wetlands. And 
I’m assuming it looks like Ducks Unlimited was one of the 
groups that was consulted with respect to this legislation. I’m 
guessing that’s probably one of the groups that expressed the 
desire to require the maintenance of wetlands. And as we all 
know, or we should know, Mr. Speaker, that it’s really 
important that we’re preserving, that we’re balancing preserving 
our wetlands with our agricultural sector, which is an extremely 
important sector of our economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, there was good consultation that 
was done here, and I do credit the government for doing that 
good consultation, Mr. Speaker, and that there was some very 
key messages that came out of their consultations. And like I 
said, when you’re doing a consultation, you will receive many 
different solutions to many different problems. And as you can 
tell from the article and from what we’ve heard is different 
neighbours will have different positions because different 
neighbours will be on either the receiving or essentially the 
giving end of a drainage situation, Mr. Speaker, so then would 
have a different angle on how to go about this. So we are happy 
with the consultation that was done. The legislation seems to be 
good, but like I said, we’re going to continue monitoring it to 
make sure that it is meeting its goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Further, this bill also will allow appeals of decisions by the 
Water Security Agency to be heard by the Court of Queen’s 
Bench rather than the Water Appeal Board. That’s interesting to 
me. I’m not too sure why they’re removing that administrative 
function and bringing it to the Queen’s Bench. Typically if 
you’re allowing for any type of decision to go through an 
administrative tribunal, that’s generally seen as an easier 
process, Mr. Speaker, than going through Queen’s Bench which 
has a much more formalized process. There are certain rules 
that you have to follow, Mr. Speaker. There’s certain provisions 
with respect to how documents need to be drafted — timing, 
filing service provisions, Mr. Speaker — in addition to who can 
actually appear on your behalf, whether yourself or a lawyer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it actually can be a bit of a lengthier process, a bit of a more 
expensive process, and a bit of a more difficult process, Mr. 
Speaker, especially if you don’t have a legal background or you 
were unable to hire a lawyer. So the administrative body would 
provide, theoretically, and should and does provide a more 
informal method for resolving disputes, Mr. Speaker. So I 
suppose when our critic has the opportunity to ask questions at 
committee, that might be some of the questions that the critic 
will be asking is, what’s the reason for removing this function 
away from the tribunal? Why is the administrative tribunal no 
longer seen as the appropriate place to hear an appeal? I’m not 



March 14, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

too sure if this means that the Water Appeal Board is being 
folded up entirely or if there are other functions that the Water 
Appeal Board has. 
 
And actually it’s interesting. When more things are sent to 
Queen’s Bench rather than a Water Appeal Board rurally, and 
we have a government that now seeks it appropriate to close 
Queen’s Bench courthouses like they did in Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker, it makes access to justice an issue. Sometimes we 
don’t think about access to justice when we’re thinking about 
water security, but when I look at the legislation, I see some 
concerns there. 
 
Furthermore the legislation will expand the Water Security 
Agency’s authority to enter lands with machinery and carry out 
work required to enforce an order by the Water Security 
Agency when a landowner fails to comply. And I think that’s 
one of the concerns that residents had previously, that there 
wasn’t a lot of bite to the legislation, that there wasn’t an ability 
to actually enforce the legislation. 
 
But that goes to one of the concerns that I initially talked about, 
Mr. Speaker. You can have all of these provisions; you can 
have enforcement measures in the legislature. But if you’re not 
providing the requisite amount of funding to be able to have, for 
example, compliance officers or ministry staff to go in and 
actually enforce this, there won’t be any purpose to this 
legislation and we won’t be any better off than we were before, 
Mr. Speaker. So that’s why it’s so important to make sure that 
when you’re creating these sorts of extra compliance measures 
or extra enforcement provisions, that you’re also providing that 
with corresponding funding. And I know, and the critic would 
be better versed in this than me, but we haven’t seen exactly a 
wealth of funds flowing towards the Ministry of Environment, 
Mr. Speaker, since the Sask Party came to power. 
 
So I’m not too sure if the plan is to have these extra 
enforcement measures be done by existing staff, who are 
already quite busy — quite, dare I say, overburdened — and 
might be subject to a 3.5 per cent wage cut in the near future. 
I’m not too sure how that’s going to go over when they’re 
tasked with extra work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, the new legislation will expand the Water Security 
Agency’s ability to recover costs for work carried out to enforce 
an order by the Water Security Agency when a landowner fails 
to comply in this. It also ties into the fine that’s been increased. 
 
And that was, if you look again at the minister’s remarks when 
he tabled the legislation, or when he gave his second reading 
speech of the legislation, that one of the concerns was that the 
original fine, which was $1,000 a day, was not sufficient. So 
now it’s been increased. The maximum fine has been increased, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from $1,000 per day to an amount not 
exceeding $1 million per day, which is quite an extensive, quite 
a massive jump, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not an amount of 
money to shake a stick at. Frankly for me, $1,000 per day 
wasn’t really an amount for me to shake a stick at either, but $1 
million per day is quite substantial. And I think the hope is that 
some of the larger farms are some of the larger, I suppose, 
culprits in this situation, will be more encouraged to comply 
with the legislation than they have been in the past. 
 

But again it all goes to enforcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So if 
we’re imposing a fine, but we’re never actually charging 
anybody with anything, we’re never actually forcing anyone to 
pay a fine because we don’t have the supports, we don’t have 
the staff there to actually go into these communities and 
investigate and place any fines on anybody, then there’s really 
no point. 
 
And word travels very quickly as you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, around this province that if something like this bill 
comes into force but there is really no ability for anybody to 
come in and actually investigate and actually fulfill what’s 
required under this Act, then people aren’t going to change their 
habits, and people are just going to continue doing what they’re 
continuing to do. 
 
So that’s the main concern that I have with respect to this bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like I said, it’s one of the main concerns I 
hear rurally, especially in the Quill Lakes area, which is the 
place I frequent the most in terms of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I am happy to see that there is at least some 
attempts being made to rectify this problem that’s going on. But 
again we’re going to continue monitoring it to make sure that 
it’s working to its full extent and that there isn’t any concerns. 
But we do welcome any feedback, if there is feedback from the 
community and they have concerns about this bill. By all 
means, please get in touch with us, be it our Environment critic 
or any number of us. Our doors are always open, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I do want to speak, like I said, I’ve spoken a little bit about the 
importance of this legislation and the timeliness of this 
legislation. I do want to speak again a little bit more about this 
article that I found, that actually my dad alerted me to. So I 
should probably give him credit for sending this to me and 
telling me to read it. He didn’t even know I was speaking on 
this bill, but he thought it was really important because he’s 
also from the Humboldt area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so he 
understands the actual dilemma around illegal drainage. And we 
have a . . . or he has a cabin in an area where the lake is often, 
there’s often quite a bit of algae in that lake. The thought is that 
there is some drainage that’s occurring that is not supposed to 
be occurring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, into that lake, and that’s 
what creating this bloom of algae that did not exist before, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I encourage all members to read this article if they haven’t 
read it. And like I said, it’s a Leader-Post article dated March 
12th, and it talks a little bit about some of the concerns that 
people have had with respect to this and how it’s creating a real 
situation of conflict between neighbours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s really important that this bill when it comes into force 
actually has the resources it needs to be enforceable and to be 
utilized to its full potential, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we can do 
what we can to alleviate these, what’s turning into essentially 
battles between neighbours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So not only is there that concern, there’s the agricultural impact. 
And then there’s the environmental impact as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So this is a very important bill, I think. 
 
I know that I’ll have other colleagues who will be wanting to 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2017 

join in on this debate, especially the critic. I look forward to 
hearing her comments on this bill as she’s much more versed in 
this area than I am, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But with that, I think I 
will conclude my remarks for now and adjourn debate on Bill 
44. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:56.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1661 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1662 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1663 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1663 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1663 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Increase in Number of Physicians 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 
 Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s Thundering Ahead Campaign 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 
 Number of Indigenous Students Rises at University of Saskatchewan 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 
 Fundraising for École Connaught Playground 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 
 Daughters of the Vote Celebration 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1666 
 Thanks to General Manager of Lloydminster Agricultural Exhibition 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1666 
 Remembering Courtney Milne 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1666 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 
 Northern Teacher Education Program Student Residences 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 
 Support for Northern Workers 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1670 
 Provision of Court Services 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 
 Health Care Services in Craik Area 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1671 
 Staffing Levels in Health Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1671 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1671 
 



 

MOTIONS 
 Committee Membership 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1671 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1672 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1672 
  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 1673 
  Merriman (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................... 1673 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 1673 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1679 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1681 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


