






















































Hansard: March 29, 2017


FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan
____________

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 

____________

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 66A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2017, 13:30 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2001 
 March 29, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
House, an individual that needs no introduction. Her name is 
Gail Krawetz. She is a lifelong educator here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. She was a principal, as well a mother, Mr. 
Speaker. She is now, I would also offer to members of the 
House, in addition to writing a column as she used to in the 
weekly paper, she’s now an author with a book forthcoming on 
the historical origins of a certain political party in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And so we’re very pleased that Gail Krawetz 
could be here, and we’re looking forward to her book. 
 
And oh yes, by the way, Ken Krawetz has joined with her as 
well, the former Finance minister, former deputy leader and 
deputy premier. We welcome them both back to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome Gail and Ken 
Krawetz to their Assembly here today. Gail, we wish you well 
with your endeavour; I look forward to reading it. But also 
thank you so much for your life of service as an educator. In 
fact I’ve come across many across Saskatchewan that have 
crossed their paths, students and others, with your service. And 
there’s a tremendous amount of respect by many for your life of 
service as an educator. 
 
And to Ken Krawetz, it’s a pleasure to welcome Ken to his 
Assembly. I’m sure he could help me possibly describe this 
budget with a few key terms. But this is somebody who I 
always valued across the Assembly, a level of humanity beyond 
the fierce battles that would occur on this floor. In some ways I 
miss him on the floor of this Assembly, but I know, I think the 
Legislative Assembly Services, the audiovisual folks have 
turned down the microphone, or turned them up a little bit since 
you’ve departed here. Anyways it’s a pleasure to welcome Ken 
and Gail to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
point out my constituency assistant. Heather Howell-Shiplack is 
here. And I talked about her in our budget speech a little bit, 
and she does an amazing job for the people of Walsh Acres. She 
responds to calls, and I think she does a lot of the work. When 
we’re in this House, she does a lot of work in responding to 
calls and makes sure I do our callbacks. And I know that people 
appreciate the hard work that she does in our office. 

And she’s put up with me now for almost six years, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s a long time. People are surprised. My wife’s 
put up with me with 12, and I found someone else to put up 
with me for six years. So I think that shows how patient she is 
with our relationship, and I appreciate it very much and I 
respect the job she does. So join me in welcoming her to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
an individual seated on the floor of this gallery. Nigel 
Fernandez is here. He hails from Regina. He’s very interested in 
legislative proceedings, not just today but quite often. I’d like 
for all members to join me in welcoming him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, to you and 
though you, introduce three very special and dedicated women 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, to their Legislative 
Assembly. With us today are Jenifer Kostur, director of Solid 
Futures Learning Co-operative; Donna Rice who is the director 
of Stepping Stones Child Care centre here in Regina; and 
Melanie Bacon who is also a director of Play & Discover Early 
Learning Centre, also in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome these women here. They’re here to do 
something they’re very good at, and that is advocate for the 
needs of children, as they are directed to do. So I welcome 
them, and I join all members to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these people to the 
legislature today. The children of our province are something 
that is incredibly important to every citizen in this province. 
The great work that is done in our child care centres is 
something that we all should appreciate, value, and respect. 
And I would certainly want to ask all members on both sides of 
the House to not only welcome them but thank them for the 
great work that they continue to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
your gallery is no stranger to the Assembly, a former member, 
Wayne Elhard who was introduced a little earlier this week. But 
along with Wayne is Jerry Sherman who is visiting the province 
and doing some work while he’s here. So I’d like to ask 
everybody to give him a warm welcome to the Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us to know that STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with parcel services that serve the farms 
and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation service to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

It is signed and supported by many good people of the province. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, a federal imposed carbon tax would 
have a detrimental effect on Saskatchewan’s competitiveness in 
the world market. In particular, I’m thinking of places like 
Simpson Seeds and Agrocorp, Mosaic, and K+S in the Moose 
Jaw area, but the negative economic effects would go right 
across the province. I’ve already had businesses concerned with 
the increase of prices from wholesale products bought from 
Alberta where the carbon tax has already been levied. A federal 
carbon imposed carbon tax would significantly damage the 
Saskatchewan economy. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Caronport, 
Moose Jaw, White City, Chaplin, and Lajord. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place to answer the call from the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote for someone, anyone to help her in her fight to 
get a second bridge for Prince Albert. And the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and the 
businesses that send people and products to Prince Albert 
require a solution. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do each and every day, Mr. Speaker, we present 
page after page of petitions that have been signed from people 
from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on these particular two 
pages, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from the Prince Albert area. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m rising to 
present a petition of people opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 
49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. People who have signed 
the petition wanted to bring to our attention the following: the 
Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition for privatization 
that allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 
49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s 
Crown corporations returned $297.2 million in dividends to pay 
for schools, roads, and hospitals. And, Mr. Speaker, we know 
over the last decade that’s over $3 billion. Those dividends 
should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not private investors. 
 
That our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province; and that under 
section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations are exempt from corporate income tax, provided 
that not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a 
government or province. The Sask Party’s proposal would 
allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without being 
considered privatized, so this short-sighted legislation risks 
sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than the 
people of Saskatchewan. So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition that 
I’m presenting today are from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of this 
province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from the city of 
Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close 
its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resources 
to people in distress. The daytime closure of Prince Albert 
mobile has put stress on the Prince Albert Police Service, 
Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may not be trained 
and/or qualified to provide counselling and intervention 
services to clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s advertised all over the place that mobile crisis 
does offer this 24-hour service, and people who are in crisis 
may try to contact them during the daytime hours and not get a 
response, which is not a good answer for people who are in 
much need. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people across the province are indicating that 
this is a priority for them, and they would like to see this service 
offered in Prince Albert. This particular petition was signed by 
individuals from Saskatoon, Air Ronge, and Meadow Lake. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding cuts to libraries in our province. Mr. Speaker, 
those who have signed this petition today wish to draw our 
attention to the following, and it’s just but one means of their 
drawing our attention to this very important issue. In fact my 
office, as of a couple of minutes ago, has received 970 emails 
with regard to these cuts. 
 

But this is what they want to say: the Government of 
Saskatchewan has cut funding for regional libraries in half or by 
$3.5 million and eliminated funding for libraries in Regina and 
Saskatoon. The drastic funding cut will have an impact on 
libraries, especially regional libraries where many people 
depend on them. 
 
[13:45] 
 
They also want to draw our attention to the fact that libraries are 
a vital part of Saskatchewan, communities across 
Saskatchewan, and that the services that they provide enrich the 
lives of many; the drastic cuts imposed on libraries will lead to 
branch closures, program cuts, reductions of hours; and this will 
hurt people who use library services and the hard-working and 
dedicated public servants who work in libraries, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re already hearing of these cuts in Palliser. 
 
Whereas libraries are more than just about borrowing books: 
meeting rooms are used by community groups; library staff to 
host educational programs and clubs, and the publicly 
accessible computer terminals that are essential to many, Mr. 
Speaker. Whereas these cuts will have a disproportionate 
impact on rural communities and where libraries are vital 
community spaces, potential closures or reductions in services 
will severely impact our communities. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Therefore in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
renew its commitment to the invaluable programming, 
educational opportunities, and public spaces our libraries 
provide across this province and restore the $4.8 million in 
funding for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-18 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are rolling in from all over the 
province. The ones that I’m submitting today were signed by 
residents of Saskatoon, Regina, and Silton. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to ensure job 
security for victims of domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the 
dubious distinction of having the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many of them the violence follows them to 
work. 
 
Victims of domestic abuse should not be further victimized at 
work, and employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the 
direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
Manitoba has already enacted such legislation, and Ontario is 
on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Moose Jaw. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

20th Annual Breaking the Silence Conference 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 17th and 18th 
marked the 20th annual Breaking the Silence conference on 
issues of sexual orientation and gender identity and expression. 
I was pleased, as part of the conference, to attend the Friday 
evening presentation of the play The Pink Unicorn, a powerful 
story of a mother coming to terms with her child’s coming of 
age. 
 
This conference was first organized in 1997 by Professor Don 
Cochrane and his students and sponsored by the University of 
Saskatchewan’s College of Education. It is the longest-standing 
conference of its kind in Canada and aims to improve the 
conversation on the topic of gender diversity in Saskatchewan 
communities. This year’s conference had more than 100 
attendees. There was a wide array of workshops, panels, and 
talks by esteemed guests, including NDP [New Democratic 
Party] MP [Member of Parliament] Sheri Benson. 
 
One of the highlights of the conference is the Peter Corren 
Award which recognizes outstanding achievement in social 
justice for sexual minorities. This year’s winners were Anthony 
Bidulka and Herb McFaull, the founders of Camp fYrefly; and 
Fran Forsberg, the founder of Camp Caterpillar. Mr. Speaker, 
the theme of this year’s conference was looking back and 
moving forward, which was very fitting since this is the final 
year the conference will be held. 
 
With this in mind, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
celebrating 20 successful years of Breaking the Silence and 
congratulating this year’s Peter Corren Award winners, and in 
thanking founder Don Cochrane and all of those who have 
attended throughout the years for making Saskatchewan more 
gender inclusive. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Gala in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, along with my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North and our spouses, had the 
pleasure of attending the inaugural Habitat for Humanity gala 
on March 18th in Moose Jaw. The event was a fun-filled 
evening with great music, a live auction, and inspiring messages 
from its board and volunteers. 
 
Habitat’s Moose Jaw chapter opened in 2008 and completed 
their first home in 2011. Since then, Mr. Speaker, they have 
completed one home per year. Coming into this year, they have 
now committed to building two homes. The gala raised close to 

$14,000 which will go towards building their next house for a 
very deserving family in this coming spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, programs like this help hard-working families get 
homes. Habitat for Humanity not only helps families get 
through tough times, it also educates its volunteers on what 
really goes into home building and how to do it properly. 
 
This event was the perfect opportunity for the Habitat for 
Humanity’s great staff to educate its guests on what the 
organization does and exactly where the money goes, along 
with its strong impact on many communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Habitat for Humanity Moose Jaw on a 
successful inaugural gala and wishing them the best of luck in 
completing their goal to build two houses in 2017. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Hindu Society of Saskatchewan’s Annual Vegetarian 
Dinner 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on March 25th, I, along with 
several legislative colleagues, had the pleasure of attending the 
Hindu society’s annual vegetarian dinner held in Saskatoon’s 
Praireland Park. 
 
Each year this sold-out event hosts hundreds of people from all 
walks of life, and beyond providing guests with a 
mouth-watering assortment of traditional Indian dishes, it aims 
to celebrate the Hindu community’s contributions to Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, and all of Canada. 
 
This year marks 32 years since the consecration of the Hindu 
temple in Saskatoon, and ever since, Saskatoon’s Hindu 
community has continued to grow and flourish. And indeed 
they were celebrating the addition of a new hall to their temple 
this year. 
 
Throughout the evening there were acknowledgements of the 
achievements of specific members of the Hindu community. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what a talented and ambitious group they 
have. From arts and culture to sports and community service, 
Saskatoon’s Hindu community makes our city shine a bit 
brighter. 
 
The evening also included speeches from keynote speakers 
including our own Lieutenant Governor, as well as Swami 
Yogatmananda-ji of the Vedanta Society of Providence. And, 
Mr. Speaker, for those who were there, I think they could easily 
say that he might have missed his calling as a comedian, 
because he was one of the funniest speakers I’ve ever heard and 
a really beautiful man to listen to. I think the Minister of Justice 
got to sit at his table and I think he can confirm that. 
 
And later in the evening, the society entertained the guests with 
cultural programming showcasing the vibrant music and dance 
of India. And by the end of the night, everybody was up on their 
feet dancing, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Mr. Speaker, the Hindu Society’s annual banquet is a wonderful 
time where the communities of Saskatoon can experience the 
cultural diversity of our province. I welcome all members to 
join me in thanking the Hindu Society and their president Raj 
Dhir for all that they add to our province, and congratulating 
everyone involved for hosting another successful banquet. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Kenaston Kodiaks Win Hoopla Championship 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today to talk about a championship high school ladies’ 
basketball team from Kenaston. This past weekend, the Kodiaks 
defeated Middle Lake for the right to be crowned provincial 1A 
girls champions. 
 
The Kodiaks had a great season, winning 22 of the 25 games 
that were played during this entire season. For the past six years 
in a row, the team has qualified to play in the Hoopla provincial 
high school basketball championships. 
 
The provincial championship was held at the U of R [University 
of Regina], Regina, with the opening game played last Friday 
afternoon, in a game that Kodiaks defeated Lake Lenore with a 
final score of 62 to 42. The final championship game was 
played Saturday evening. A game against Middle Lake was 
hard fought with a final score of 53 to 47. 
 
The Kodiaks attributed their win to a very talented and 
dedicated team coached by Jenna Zdunich-Fisher and her 
father, Gene Zdunich, in addition to the hard work by team 
manager Paula Evans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this just confirms once again that Arm River is the 
constituency of champions. I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in offering the Kenaston Kodiaks a 
congratulations on being crowned the 2017 provincial 1A girls 
basketball champions. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Onion Lake Woman Attends Daughters of the Vote 
Summit 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take this opportunity to highlight a constituent of mine. 
Jacey Funk, a 21-year-old business student at Lakeland College, 
was one of 338 young women from across Canada to be 
selected to participate in the Daughters of the Vote summit 
which took place in Ottawa at the beginning of March. 
 
Daughters of the Vote is spearheaded by Equal Voice Canada, 
which is a national organization dedicated to electing and 
seeing more women involved in politics at all levels. Equal 
Voice invited young women from the ages of 18 to 23 to take 
their seats in parliament. One young woman was chosen from 
every federal riding in Canada to represent their community and 
to communicate their vision for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jacey Funk was thrilled to learn that she was 
chosen out of 1,525 applicants. As a young indigenous woman, 

this was important for Jacey to represent the voice of her 
community of Onion Lake. She was quoted as saying: 
 

It is something I know I can take back to my community 
and to Lloydminster and show them that instead of sitting 
there wishing you can make a difference, why don’t you 
get up and make the difference yourself. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that young women in my constituency 
follow Jacey’s words and become more active in political life. I 
ask all members to join me in congratulating Jacey Funk on 
being chosen to attend the Daughters of the Vote in Ottawa. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 

New School Planned for Rosthern 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to stand in my place today to talk about an exciting 
announcement in this year’s budget: planning dollars for a new 
school in the community of Rosthern. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has allocated $2.1 million to plan new schools in 
the communities of not only Rosthern but also Weyburn. Mr. 
Speaker, enrolment in the Prairie Spirit School Division is up 
24 per cent; operating funding is up 33 per cent. Over $130 
million has been invested in capital since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
But there is more work to do and we are getting that job done. 
 
Local mayor Dennis Helmuth joined us on budget day, and he 
had this to say, and I quote: “Our school population is growing 
considerably, and there is a lot of opportunity in our town and 
region. We need more capacity to accommodate that growth.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of viewing a video as this 
school was announced to the students at the Rosthern High 
School, and the excitement in the room was very, very clear. 
 
Since 2007, our government has built 40 new schools, including 
21 of which are just opening this year. We’ve done 25 major 
renovations. We’ve increased operating grants to the divisions 
by some 32 per cent, and we’ve seen enrolment increase by 
16,000 students in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a far cry from the days of the NDP when 32,000 
students left the province. Mr. Speaker, 176 schools were 
closed. On average they closed a school a month, Mr. Speaker, 
for 16 years. Mr. Speaker, we will never go back to the days of 
the NDP. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 
Opposition’s Position on Federal Carbon Tax 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a heavily censored 
briefing note, officials reveal that Prime Minister Trudeau’s 
own already costed $50 per tonne on carbon tax is inadequate to 
meet Ottawa’s emission targets and that the real cost of carbon 
tax should be as high as $300 per tonne. Mr. Speaker, this is six 
times the cost he said it would impose on provinces. So the 
average family in Saskatchewan won’t be paying $2,500 for 
Ottawa’s carbon tax; they could in fact pay $15,000 per year, 
according to the taxpayers federation. 
 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

Despite urging the opposition to join us in standing up for 
Saskatchewan against the costly and ineffective tax grab that 
will threaten jobs, investment, and thousands of Saskatchewan 
livelihoods, the NDP actually voted against the government’s 
motion rejecting Ottawa’s imposed carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of leadership on the opposition’s side is 
well known. And it’s also well known that the future leader of 
the NDP, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, supports 
Ottawa’s carbon tax. Just a few months ago he said, “We 
applaud the federal government’s recent announcement of a 
minimum price on carbon.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the interim leader failed to stand against Ottawa’s 
$50-a-tonne carbon tax, and now the future leader is applauding 
the secret $300-per-tonne price tag. The NDP may welcome a 
$15,000 carbon tax on Saskatchewan families, but this side of 
the House will continue to stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Investigation of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we ask 
questions on the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal. Regardless of what the Premier wants people to 
think, this scandal that the entire Sask Party cabinet signed off 
on isn’t going away. The Premier himself made a reference to 
an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigation on 
the matter, and it’s clear that there is more to come. I’m hoping 
the Premier can give us an update on that here today. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The thing is, if the case has been referred to prosecutors in 
Saskatchewan, we have a Minister of Justice in cabinet that’s 
been intimately involved in this scandal. It seems like a conflict 
of interest to me, Mr. Speaker. So to the Premier: can he tell us 
if the investigation into the GTH has been sent to prosecutors? 
If so, can he commit that it’s been sent to out-of-province 
prosecutors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank 
the member for the question. I think members on that side of the 
House and other members of the public may have lodged a 
complaint, and that has obviously been the reason why the 
RCMP are looking into the matter, Mr. Speaker, which we 
welcome. We want to co-operate in every way with that effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can share with members of the House, it 
wouldn’t be appropriate for me to know the status of any 
investigation. And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of who would look at 
the recommendations from the RCMP, I can only surmise, I 
would only surmise that given the nature of this particular issue, 
this would be the kind of matter that would be referred out of 
province. But it all is about speculation at this point because the 
government ought not to know specifics about the status of the 
investigation or how it’s looked at in terms of any particular 
prosecutions branch. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Financial Support for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s often we’re not getting 
answers from this Premier. This is an important matter. It’s very 
important that this will be dealt with out of province by 
prosecutors.  
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, at the same time as that Premier shrugs 
off last week’s budget — the one he delivered, a budget that 
hurts families and brings forward all sorts of cuts and a billion 
dollars in new Sask Party tax hikes and downloading the costs 
onto our cities and towns by cancelling the grants-in-lieu to our 
cities and towns — the Sask Party is forcing service cuts and 
tax hikes. 
 
The cuts and tax hikes are Sask Party tax hikes, Sask Party cuts. 
They’re mean-spirited, Mr. Speaker. They’re not fair. The Sask 
Party is acting like a schoolyard bully, taking the lunch money 
of our cities and our towns and even taking the taxes collected 
by our schools. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re handing tens of 
millions of that back to their wealthy and well-connected 
friends. 
 
From where does the Premier get the gall to rip money back 
from our cities and towns? And where were these tax cuts and 
these tax hikes in the platform that they campaigned on just a 
year ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for the nine or so years we’ve 
had the honour of forming government, we have spent many 
days trying to give back to the municipalities, not just the lunch 
money but the money for breakfast and supper that members 
opposite took from them when they were in office. The number 
one source of downloading on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, the number one target was the municipal sector of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, both urban and rural. 
 
And even with the changes in this budget, even with the 
changes in this budget, I hope the member will realize and 
understand and maybe even appreciate the fact that even with 
those counted into the cumulative total, revenue sharing in the 
province has doubled, Mr. Speaker. The major centres have 
gotten 2.5 times as much as they got under the NDP. 
 
On top of that, we’ve invested about 8 billion, $9 billion in 
infrastructure, for the most part in our major cities or in smaller 
urban centres, Mr. Speaker. And we can go down the list; the 
amount of support that has come from this side of the House for 
the municipal sector after years of neglect by members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, is a matter for the public record. And in 
respect of the current budget, in respect of the current budget 
we’re asking all parts of the province to share in the challenge 
that will get us back to balance in three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what an arrogant and 
dismissive approach from that Premier. There was no 
consultation on this. Just ask the mayors. As SUMA 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] says, “Our 
members are outraged and so are we.” Mr. Speaker, no kidding. 
 
It wasn’t our cities and towns that blew through all the savings. 
It was the Sask Party. It wasn’t our cities and towns that refused 
to save for the future during a period of record resource 
revenues. No, that was the Sask Party. And it wasn’t our cities 
and towns that blew their rainy day fund. It was the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier really think that everyone has 
forgotten that he and his cabinet, with their mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste, are who and what caused this financial 
mess? And does he honestly think that people will forget that 
just 12 months ago he was touring around the province, hiding 
the true state of the finances and saying that everything was 
okay? 
 
Mr. Speaker, is he so arrogant that he actually thinks there’s 
nothing wrong with grabbing tens of millions of dollars from 
our cities and towns to cover up for his mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, certainly in this 
budget there are a number of tough decisions that government 
decided to make because we’re not prepared to procrastinate on 
the need to get back to balance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an inference in the interim leader of the 
NDP’s question about what we had done with the money over 
these years. Well if you take a look at what we’ve invested in 
municipalities over these years, in revenue sharing alone, it’s $2 
billion. It’s a partial answer to his question, to the rhetorical 
question in his preamble. Mr. Speaker, on top of that, $9 billion 
in infrastructure. That’s additional dollars. That’s more than 
what was put in by his party when they were the government; 9 
billion more in the same period of time. Most of that went into 
the municipalities. Most of that went into projects that we could 
list in all of the major, all of the cities of our province, and also 
across rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CPI [consumer price index] for the time of our 
government is about, cumulatively the inflation rate is 18 per 
cent. Revenue sharing is up 103 per cent. The municipal sector 
is the biggest winner of all of the sectors in government. We’ve 
increased the funding for all of them. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a challenge for 
municipalities. I accept that. Mr. Speaker, later this day, 
ministers on this side of the House will meet with leaders from 
the municipal sector to hear from them, Mr. Speaker. And when 
they meet with our government, they’ll be meeting with a 
government that understands the importance of the partnership 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and all of the 
municipal partners. 
 
And if you need to have proof of how we view that partnership 
and how we respect it, consider the actions. Consider double the 
revenue-sharing support for those municipalities. Consider the 
$8 billion in infrastructure over and above what they used to get 
from members who would routinely download on 
municipalities until there was nothing left; not to adjust, not just 
adjust down overall increases but, Mr. Speaker, get them to the 

point where they were net negative in a big way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — A pretty key part of a partnership is 
being straight with your partner, Mr. Speaker. Speeches like 
that of the Premier don’t cut it. 
 
Let’s just look at Moose Jaw. The Sask Party cut $3.7 million. 
Councillor Dawn Luhning said, “. . . there’s only two things we 
can do: raise taxes or cut services, and neither one of them are 
good options.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the Premier doesn’t want to listen to 
our cities and towns, but I wonder if he’ll listen to his caucus 
because some of them are starting to speak up. When asked 
about why the Sask Party was now making huge cuts and hiking 
taxes, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow said, “We have 
drained the rainy day fund, and because of that we have to 
control spending and expand the PST.” When asked if he 
thought tax hikes were good, the other member from Moose 
Jaw, Moose Jaw North, said, “I’ve talked to some restaurants 
and they’re not particularly happy about it.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier listen to cities, listen to 
towns, listen to his caucus, Mr. Speaker? Will the Premier listen 
to reason and reconsider these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again I have to take 
exception with some, what I would characterize as not 
necessarily factual information or descriptions or depictions in 
my hon. friend’s preamble. Mr. Speaker, at both SUMA and 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], I 
specifically mentioned that everything would be on the table in 
the budget, including grants-in-lieu. Specifically mentioned 
grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker, and I think the president of SUMA 
and other leaders are certainly aware of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to some of the communities that are 
looking at some of the changes we want to make in 
grants-in-lieu, it is also true that they have reserves. And I think 
it’s also fair to say that, in part, they have reserves to some 
degree because of historic revenue sharing from the province of 
Saskatchewan. I note, for example, the city of Saskatoon: in this 
last budget they added 50 more jobs, 50 more FTEs [full-time 
equivalent] to their budget that they just tabled. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they put money back into reserves. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is true; the member for Wakamow is right. 
We’ve said, after three years of being short about a billion two 
in resource revenue, the rainy day fund is depleted, Mr. 
Speaker. He was saying exactly what I’ve been saying, which is 
why we must take action right now, and it’s why all the sectors 
of the province, all the segments of the province — rural and 
urban and even certain parts of the business community — why 
we’re all going to share in the challenge to get back to balance. 
And when we do, when it’s fully implemented, we’ll have the 
lowest taxes on business, the lowest taxes on families, Mr. 
Speaker, the lowest manufacturing rate in all of Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and that whole 
cabinet are so arrogant and out of touch. They’re just not 
listening. Instead they talk about their so-called tax shift. The 
truth is, like Robin Hood in reverse, they’re shifting more 
money from families’ pockets to the rich. They’re also shifting 
a massive $36 million of property taxes onto cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has run deficit after deficit after 
deficit, but cities are held under a higher standard. Unlike the 
Sask Party, cities can’t just keep blowing billions on 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. They have to balance their 
budget every year. Economists agree that property taxes do the 
least to help grow the economy. But SUMA’s CEO [chief 
executive officer] Laurent Mougeot summed up the choices 
cities are facing: “It’s either property tax increase or user fee 
increase.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party so interested in forcing 
these tax hikes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier answered 
this question previously. We all know that we’ve asked all of 
the sectors within government to please help in order to bring 
the budget back to balance. We have a $1.2 billion revenue 
income shortfall. We all know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are options that municipalities can look at, in particular 
within the cities’ budgets. The Premier mentioned the city of 
Saskatoon budgeted to move $5 million into their reserves. 
Perhaps they don’t need to do that. Of the 10.6 million for each 
of the larger cities, in this fiscal budget they only have to find, I 
believe, 7.2 of it because the fiscal years do not line up. So in an 
$800 million budget, perhaps they can find $7.2 million, Mr. 
Speaker, by looking for efficiencies, which is what we’ve had 
to do as government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Changes to Provincial Sales Tax Collection Procedures 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw something that 
we see too little of around here. The Minister of Finance 
admitted that they were wrong to have added PST [provincial 
sales tax] to diapers and said that that was no longer the case. 
And so last night the notices to Saskatchewan’s retailers were 
changed, and diapers were removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even last week on budget day, independent 
businesses impacted by the Sask Party PST increases said that 
April 1st was too soon to get their point-of-sale systems aligned 
with these sudden tax hikes. Now this confusion has made 
things worse. First diapers were being taxed, now they aren’t. 
And now with two days left, Saskatchewan businesses are left 
with even less time to scramble to make these newest 
adjustments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before another day passes, can the minister tell us if there are 

other items on the list that he’d like to make tax exempt? 
Perhaps he would like to once again make good on their “first 
promise kept” from 2011 and again remove the PST from 
children’s clothes and shoes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s important to point out that the member raises a very 
good point with respect to any time you’re making a transition 
with respect to tax policy here in the province, a shift from tax 
on productivity and income to a consumption-based tax, more 
of a consumption-based tax, Mr. Speaker, that some sectors 
have not had that tax applied before, there’s going to be some 
transition issues. I acknowledge that, and I respect the fact that 
these businesses are raising these issues. 
 
That is why we have staffed up at the Ministry of Finance over 
the course since the budget was announced, Mr. Speaker, 
fielding literally thousands of phone calls from business owners 
across the province in those sectors that have not had a tax 
applied to their particular good or service before. And we’re 
answering those questions. We’ve held numerous meetings, Mr. 
Speaker. Senior Finance officials have held numerous meetings 
with different industry associations that have been impacted by 
the changes in this budget come effective April 1st, to help 
them understand with respect to what’s going to happen in their 
particular sector. 
 
I had a conversation with an insurance industry executive the 
other day who said, every other province in Canada has this, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s simply a matter of transferring that kind of 
technology into their systems here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Are there some transition issues? There always 
will be, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what date you put the 
transition date with respect to these changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can say everything’s 
fine, but the Sask Party’s poorly executed plan to hike PST is 
hurting thousands of families and forcing a lot of extra work on 
Saskatchewan businesses. Is the minister laughing off all the 
other ways their PST hike is failing families and our small 
businesses? The Sask Party campaign on making life more 
affordable. Mr. Speaker, they are doing the opposite. Even with 
their changes to income tax, families are falling behind. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other victims here are small businesses. Not 
only are they now being forced to change and re-change their 
point-of-sale systems, but they’re now being forced to do it for 
free, and the Sask Party is even eliminating the fee they use to 
pay these businesses. That’s right. They’re hitting small 
businesses by raising taxes on their customers, and they’re not 
even going to pay the small businesses to collect those taxes for 
them anymore. Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party attacking 
job-creating, economy-driving Saskatchewan independent 
businesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, if any party in the history 
of Saskatchewan would know what burden is being placed upon 
business with respect to tax changes, it’s the NDP, when they 
changed taxes 21 times the last time they were in government, 
Mr. Speaker. When they went from a 5 per cent PST to 6, to 7, 
to as high as 9 per cent. When the PST was harmonized with 
the federal GST, Mr. Speaker, and Premier Romanow come in 
and deharmonized it. You want to talk about forcing businesses 
to have to adapt to transition, Mr. Speaker, it was under that 
party. 
 
Now with respect to the changes in our consumption tax here in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, yes we have made a change. Yes, we 
have made a change from income on productivity and income 
on personal income tax in this province, Mr. Speaker, that we 
think are going to drive jobs in this province. We have the 
lowest small-business tax rate in the country, with the exception 
of Manitoba, who I agree has a zero per cent. We still think 
small business in this province should pay some tax in this 
province, in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue to implement our growth agenda here with 
respect to our corporate income tax changes effective July 1 of 
this year and July 1 of 2019, have the lowest corporate tax rate 
in Canada, and the lowest manufacturing and processing rate in 
Canada by far, to drive jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Labour Code Provisions and Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company Employees  

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, they don’t have a plan. They drew 
this budget up on the back of a napkin, and now they’re hoping 
Saskatchewan will just give them a pass. But yesterday’s diaper 
tax change isn’t the only file where they failed to do their due 
diligence. It’s becoming increasingly clear that the Minister for 
STC didn’t do his homework either. 
 
Somehow he forgot that the Canada Labour Code applies to 
STC, and it certainly looks like he broke federal rules when he 
threw 224 workers out on the street without the required notice. 
Now either he’s going to have to pay extra severance or the 
staff to stay on the job while the buses sit idle. 
 
All this while the Finance minister reaches into our pockets for 
his billion dollars in tax hikes. Now that’s not sound financial 
management; in fact, from top to bottom it’s mismanagement. 
So what’s the STC minister’s plan? How is he going to get us 
out of this labour code pickle, and how much more is it going to 
cost Saskatchewan people to pay for their mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
and thank the member opposite for the question. I’ve spoken 
with the legal counsel for STC and they assure me that all 
appropriate steps were taken in accordance with the Canadian 
Labour Code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very empathetic to the 224 hardworking 

staff at STC, and we do thank them for their service, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but we did look at the numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, and we did look at the subsidy. Mr. Speaker, the 
subsidy went from $25 all the way up to $94, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s unsustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should just point out while I’m talking, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 1993-94 when the NDP were in power they 
closed, in those two years they closed 13 lines. Mr. Speaker, 13 
lines. Mr. Speaker, that is when the total subsidy was $500,000, 
and the subsidy per ride was $2.18 in ’93 — $2.18 and they felt 
it right to close 13 lines, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Transporting Patients to Medical Appointments 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Nigel Fernandez is here today. 
He’s from Regina and he takes the STC to get to his 
appointments at the cancer centre in Saskatoon. He has a rare 
form of brain cancer and relies on STC to get the specialized 
medical care and treatment he needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite were applauding the 
cuts in the Sask Party budget last week, I have to wonder how 
much they were thinking of people like Nigel. When they 
announced the rushed scrapping of STC, they offered no plan 
for Nigel or the other 300 cancer patients across the province 
who use STC to get to their appointments. 
 
Other than hoping that some entrepreneur pops up to take 
advantage of these people in need, what does the minister have 
to say to Nigel and those 300 families he’s failing today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very sorry to hear of Nigel’s situation. I welcome him to his 
Legislative Assembly here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I assume the member opposite has the appropriate 
consent forms signed. And while I don’t know of Nigel’s 
specific situation, I’d certainly be happy to meet with him after 
question period to discuss it, to see if we can be of assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say this: between the Ministry of Health and 
the Ministry of Social Services, we’re assuring through various 
programs that the most vulnerable in society do have access to 
medical appointments. Mr. Speaker, that’s very important to us. 
We’re going to continue to make sure that that’s the case. And 
once again, Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to meet with Nigel after 
question period. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to hear that he’s 
willing to meet with Nigel, but I’m wondering if he’ll ever have 
a concrete plan for not just Nigel, but all of the members of the 
province of Saskatchewan that are struggling to get to their 
appointments after the cuts to STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

Let’s be clear. The Sask Party is forcing people in need of 
treatment for their cancer to pay for their decade-long run of 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. He has said in the past that 
maybe these patients . . . The minister has said in the past, for 
STC, that maybe these patients can try to catch a ride with a 
friend, or lots of other communities don’t have STC service, 
and those cancer patients seem to do just fine. 
 
That’s shameful to me, Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful to every 
member on this side of the House. Nigel not only deserves but 
is entitled to fair and equal access to health care just like anyone 
else. What is the Sask Party’s concrete, specific plan to help 
Nigel and others like him get to his appointments in Saskatoon 
and across the province after they shut down and sell off STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I said, I don’t know the specifics of Nigel’s situation, but I’d be 
happy to meet with him and to discuss that to see where we can 
be of assistance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to the broad, overall question, there is a plan 
in place. There’s been a plan in place for a long time, Mr. 
Speaker. We assure that our most vulnerable have access to 
medical appointments. As of today, STC only covers 
approximately half the communities in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. So those other communities, there’s people that need 
access to medical assistance. 
 
There was a question yesterday about access in the North. 
There’s programs through the Ministry of Health and the 
Ministry of Social Services in the North for the most vulnerable 
in our society. There’s a number of programs that we can access 
in Social Services. Mr. Speaker, we’re very concerned about 
this matter, and we’re going to continue to do our best to protect 
the most vulnerable in our society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Special Needs Children 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know about the cuts 
that the Sask Party is making to our schools and our libraries, 
and they’re cutting day care centres too. They’re slashing 
funding for day care workers that help children with special 
needs, and laying off inclusion coordinators at the Spadina 
Early Learning Centre in Saskatoon. Inclusion coordinators 
help children with special needs and allow them to participate 
in the same activities as other children in the centres do. 
 
Inclusion funding has been lost here in Regina as well, with 
Solid Futures Learning Co-operative, Stepping Stones Child 
Care, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] day care, and Play and Discover Learning Centre 
being cut, leaving them no choice but laying off staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party claims to be committed to 
improving the learning success and well-being of Saskatchewan 
children. But how can the Sask Party possibly, possibly justify 
making cuts on the back of our children to pay for their 
mismanagement? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question 
and thank you for the opportunity to clarify something. We 
have not in fact cut funding for special needs child care. Mr. 
Speaker, in fact there’s been a change in the way that funding is 
being provided. We no longer offer block funding at all child 
care centres. We’ve changed it so that there’s transition so that 
individualized funding will follow the child. So if a child’s 
parents or family move and the child relocates from one child 
care centre to another, the funding will follow that child. 
 
I saw the article, the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
article earlier today, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked the officials within 
the ministry to contact that family to make sure they’ve 
completed the necessary forms to make sure that that child is 
dealt with, so that if that child moves from one day care to 
another, that the funding will in fact follow that child. 
 
We want to try and ascertain, Mr. Speaker, what a child’s needs 
are so that we can have a long-term plan for each and every 
child in our province as they progress through the education 
system. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 58, 
The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

that Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next sitting of 
the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 59, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 59 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend I went with my dad to what I guess is called an 
outdoorsman store, outdoors people store, and he was looking 
for some heavy-duty waterproof matches, among other things. 
And when he found them and he saw the price, he put them 
down right away. That’s sticker shock, he said; I cannot buy 
those. When I asked him how much they cost, he told me, four 
seventy-nine. That’s highway robbery. 
 
Born in 1940, my dad isn’t really a depression child, but he 
grew up with parents of course who had lived through the 
1930s. And to that generation, living within your means meant 
something. It still does. 
 
Last October an obituary ran in the paper of an 82-year-old 
named Peter Fehr of Warman. Peter was captured in one of the 
most enduring photographs of the 1930s as a baby with his 
parents and six other siblings who were barefoot and almost 
literally starving. Two things struck me in that piece that 
historian Bill Waiser wrote about Peter Fehr. One, that through 
the most desperate times for the family, who would eventually 
farm in the Warman area, they were too proud to seek 
government relief, and secondly, what Peter’s thoughts were in 
later years when he looked at that photo: “Oh, how good we’ve 
got it now [he said] . . . how things have changed.” 
 
Of course no one is suggesting we go anywhere back, near back 
to those desperate days or the stigma surrounding accepting 
even basic assistance when times are tough or individual 
circumstances change for the worse. But those old attitudes of 
such complete self-reliance and responsibility, not only 
generally but in the face of adversity, that’s something that we 
should always walk with a little and recall and hold on to and 
not mock. And the very positive view of Peter Fehr is about 
how things have changed and how good we have them now. 
That we should remember too, and keep things always in 
perspective. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Which brings me to this budget, Mr. Speaker, presented by the 
Minister of Finance last week. Despite challenges, of course, 
things have changed in this province over the last 10 years and 
we do have it good. We’re a have province. People are moving 
back and moving in. Our standard of living is high, as is our life 
expectancy. Income taxes are low, relative to the rest of the 
country. There’s been record investment by this government in 
tangibles for the good of all people across the province: 
hospitals; schools, including two in the beautiful constituency 
of Stonebridge-Dakota; and highways, including the twining of 
Highway 16 between Saskatoon and Clavet, all the while 
paying down operating debt by over 1 billion or 15 per cent, 
and achieving 1.1 billion in interest savings. Perspective. 
 
And for all the talk about how this measure or that measure in 
the budget might slightly affect salary, or this or that benefit, 
let’s not only not forget the past, but as the Premier told SUMA 
delegates in Saskatoon in February, remember that right now, 
real austerity is his neighbour who hasn’t worked in 18 months. 
That’s real austerity. The question now with some of the 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

challenges that we face, foremost among them of course over a 
billion-dollar drop in resource revenue, is how best to strike a 
balance. 
 
Take advanced education. Alberta is funding this sector this 
budget year to the tune of $6 billion. But of course it’s on 
borrowed money, all part of an overall budget deficit in Alberta 
this year of 10.3 billion and 71 billion in debt by 2020. That’s 
their plan. 
 
We have another plan to get our deficit under control and to 
balance our books within three years. We recognize that chronic 
deficits of course are just deferred taxation with children and 
grandchildren having to bear it down the road. As any addicted 
credit card borrower or spender will know, it’s let the good 
times roll until the bills roll in and the creditors come calling. 
That’s what we want to avoid. 
 
Of course there’s the additional irony that our neighbour to the 
west, keen advocate of course for the federal carbon tax, is 
hedging all this debt on a return of resource revenue. That’s 
when, as Alberta’s Finance minister put it, happy days will be 
here again. Sounds like a made-in-Vegas line to me. 
 
In Manitoba meanwhile, the approach to post-secondary is 
unique in another way. They appear to be legislating that 
universities can and presumably should raise tuition by 5 per 
cent plus cost of living. Interestingly, the U of M [University of 
Manitoba] president, David Barnard, recently said that due to 
tuition freezes put in place by the previous NDP government, 
the U of M is “$2,000 a year per student behind the University 
of Saskatchewan” in average undergraduate tuition fees. Had 
Manitoba been on par with the U of S in recent years, he said, 
those additional funds would have enabled the University of 
Manitoba to provide access to more students with financial 
challenges through improved scholarships and bursaries and 
enhanced programming and facilities. That’s the downside of 
tuition freezes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We prefer to not prescribe too directly what our autonomous 
universities should do, to attempt to strike a balance and let 
them make their own decisions internally. Not, we hope, by 
immediately raising tuition or instituting layoffs, but by looking 
inward first, starting perhaps with spending, travel, hiring 
freezes, looking at their disproportionately high out-of-scope 
salaries — two, three, four times that of the Premier — and 
bringing about a bit of culture change of their own. 
 
Our universities do amazing work. I’m a proud alumna of one 
of them. But there is no doubt that the face of the universities 
has changed from small-administration institutions 30 years ago 
to giant communication-, consultant-, conference-driven 
institutions today. 
 
Is what it is, perhaps. But it is interesting that 20 years ago, then 
NDP minister Bob Mitchell commissioned the MacKay report 
which asked the universities to “take the lead to reposition 
themselves to meet the fiscal, economic, demographic, and 
technological changes occurring globally and locally.” 
Intriguingly, 20 years ago the NDP government of the day was 
urging universities to “make the most effective use of scarce 
resources and ensure that universities were collaborating and 
communicating.” The then government also asked them to 

“develop a long-term process that would achieve efficiencies, in 
some cases program rationalization and innovative approaches 
to student services and program delivery.” Sounds a lot like 
transformational change to me. And 20 years later, it’s long 
overdue. 
 
I also found it interesting to read that Quebec university rectors 
recently got together to tell their provincial government that 
3.45 billion was woefully inadequate when it came to university 
funding. At least another billion was necessary, they said, or 
rooms would fall into disrepair and other basic infrastructure 
would have to go unattended to. The question is, where does it 
end? How can simply saying ever more is needed without 
instituting fundamental reform remain sustainable year after 
year? 
 
Speaking of which, I received an irate letter the other day from 
faculty members at a federated college. They were annoyed 
about public sector compensation restraint and our 
government’s respectful requests in that regard. Fair enough. 
But what struck me most about the letter was the lack of 
references to students. It was all about the faculty, Mr. Speaker, 
all about them, and how fiscal constraint would mean that the 
“best and brightest academics will easily be attracted away from 
our province by institutions able to provide the usual percentage 
increases and annual increments.” Perhaps we should take our 
chances. 
 
When it came to advanced education and our government, there 
were some difficult choices in this budget. That is for sure. But 
it is important to remember the broader context. In advanced 
education, we’ve invested 8.3 billion in post-secondary 
education over the last decade, over 4 billion to our two 
universities. Important to us has been retaining a focus on 
students and putting them first. We’re investing 137 million this 
year in loans, scholarships, bursaries, and grants, Mr. Speaker. 
That includes the universal Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, $500 a year for four years; and the graduate 
retention program — a program we are proud of, the envy of 
our neighbours, the most aggressive student attraction and 
retention program in Canada — which has seen $345 million 
paid out to 70,000 students. 
 
More important context, Mr. Speaker, is necessary around 
tuition fees. For one, some historical context: average 
undergraduate tuition fees ballooned under the former NDP 
government between 1990 and 2007 by 227 per cent. As well 
and contrary to what the member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
said, tuition across Canada is not an apples-to-apples 
proposition because Stats Canada averages all universities in a 
province. So Ontario, for example, has 20 and Saskatchewan 
has two, so it can affect the numbers. 
 
Universities are of course autonomous institutions. They set 
their own tuition. But when you compare first year arts and 
science tuition rates in our two universities compared to those 
in comparable institutions across Canada, our tuition rates 
actually rank in the lower third to lower half, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there are many voices in the post-secondary world who 
also understand our current fiscal realities. One is the 
University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. In a recent letter, 
they wrote we are “well aware that the costs of running a 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

university are enormous and that much of the funding comes 
from taxpayer dollars.” They stated, it’s of critical importance 
that a reasonable balance — they mean between government 
funding and tuition — be achieved. 
 
Another is Lee Ahenakew, board of governors Chair at the 
U of S who wrote in a recent letter, “I want to express deep 
appreciation for the current fiscal realities. We understand we 
have a key role in containing costs.” 
 
Mike Fritzler of Luther College wrote, “Ultimately we will 
have to balance our budget as we have every year. Please know 
we will continue to be careful stewards of the public funds we 
receive.” 
 
These comments are much appreciated as we face these 
challenges together and continue to undergo transformational 
change. 
 
People sometimes ask me — they continue to ask all of us — 
what does transformational change really mean? To me it’s 
always been about common sense, about getting at the root, or 
re-getting at the root, the basics of what programs should be 
about. It’s what we should always be doing: ministers talking to 
each other, ministries talking to each other, colleagues talking 
to each other and talking to stakeholders. It’s not always about 
funding. It’s about reassessing what we could do better so that 
we’re not duplicating things and we’re always collaborating. 
 
I recently met with board Chairs of the regional colleges and we 
discussed some very practical things. Why don’t regional 
colleges do joint procurement? How did one college cut its 
travel by $100,000 with the use of technology? And how did 
the arrangement between another college and a local tribal 
council, which buses students in to classes in the morning and 
back in the evening, get started? And how can other colleges 
arrange something similar? Practical, Mr. Speaker — limiting 
process for the sake of process wherever possible, and focusing 
on students. 
 
And we’re seeing practical transformational change in the 
student loan reforms we’ve brought forward, Mr. Speaker. To 
harmonize with changes the federal government is making, 
we’re introducing a new $1,000 upfront grant for students who 
apply for loans, which will make funding more predictable and 
targeted to those who need it the most. Lower income students 
in a typical eight-month program will receive about $4,000 in 
combined federal-provincial grants, and combined with the 
Sask Advantage Scholarship, 4,500. 
 
The great upside is that students will know where they’re at, 
exactly what funding is available, so they and their parents can 
make informed decisions in advance and plan for the costs of 
post-secondary education — an important reform. 
 
We’re also seeing transformational change in the North, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re redirecting funding from NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] Council to Northlands College so 
that there is only one institution in La Ronge running teacher 
education and other university programming there and across 
the North, and actually expanding it and branching into new 
areas. Some very exciting developments that will be announced 
over the coming weeks and months: a stable board, good 

governance, and equitable access for all students who wish to 
attend. 
 
Let’s let this process work now, Mr. Speaker, in the best 
interest of northern students, students who I met when I visited 
La Ronge. One told me — a mature student who had returned to 
school and was working through his grade 4 — that he wanted 
to be a plumber, which is wonderful. And a Northlands nursing 
student whose intention was to work hard and get her degree, 
she told me, so she could go back to her small community and 
help her people. Inspiring stories, and we’re so proud of them, 
as we take heart in one particularly inspiring statistic that since 
2007-2008, 48 per cent, almost 10,000 more First Nations and 
Métis graduates have a post-secondary certificate, diploma, or 
degree in this province. Let’s build on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s build on the reforming changes in this budget which, 
when all is said and done, still leave us with the lowest PST rate 
of any province with a provincial sales tax, the lowest corporate 
tax rate, the lowest taxes on manufacturing and processing, 
nation-leading research and development incentives, and no 
carbon tax of any kind. 
 
People I talk to say they don’t like everything in the budget but 
they think it’s fair, strong, and principled. And okay, he might 
be biased, but one friend told me he gets down on his knees 
every day and thanks this government for not raising his income 
taxes, which federally have gone up 4 per cent, deficit and debt 
still counting. 
 
We can never forget what we have, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 
built on, and what’s still ahead. I came across this lovely quote 
by settler George M. Grant from 1879 in one of the dusty 
parliamentary publications that come across our desks: 
 
[14:45] 
 

We looked out and beheld a sea of green sprinkled with 
yellow, red, lilac, and white, extending all round to the 
horizon. None of us had ever seen a prairie before, and, 
behold, the half had not been told us! As you cannot know 
what the ocean is without seeing it, neither can you in 
imagination picture the prairie. The vast fertile beautiful 
expanse suggests inexhaustible . . . [natural] wealth. Our 
uppermost thought might be expressed in the words, 
“thank God, the great North-west is a reality.” 

 
Let’s also not forget the words of our Premier last April 4, Mr. 
Speaker: “The best days for this province are still ahead.” And 
that is why, and for the soundness and stability and forward 
thinking contained in it, I will be supporting the budget put 
forward by the Minister of Finance and not supporting the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour and a 
privilege to rise in this Assembly and enter into the debate on 
our 2017-18 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by saying thank you to the voters 
of my constituency of Lloydminster. It is because of their 
confidence and trust in me to represent them that I am able to 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

stand here before you in this Assembly. I am humbled and 
honoured by their support. When I won the by-election in 2014, 
I assured them that they would always be my boss and that I 
would always listen and work to address their concerns within 
the government however I could, and hopefully get the job done 
right. 
 
I want to also say a thank you to my constituency assistant, 
Tracy Patterson. She is an amazing person and I am so proud to 
work with her. She is organized, efficient, hard working, always 
eager to learn, but above all I hear from my constituents that she 
is a caring and compassionate person who takes the time to 
listen, directs them to the right resources, and always does a 
follow-up with them to see if their needs and concerns have 
been met. Tracy, you are a gem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband, Kim, of 36 years of marriage, is my 
best friend and support. He keeps himself busy with his own 
work while I’m here in Regina, but understands and supports 
the time I also need to spend in my constituency when I’m back 
home. He is always there for me and helps out in any way he 
can. Thank you, my love. 
 
I also want to thank my eight children whose love, support, and 
encouragement gives me the energy and guidance to do this job 
to the best of my ability. As much as my children are grown and 
out of the house, their lives continually intertwine with mine 
and keep me interested and proud of the careers and lives they 
have created for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt this was a very challenging 
budget to prepare and deliver. I would like to first thank our 
Minister of Finance, along with my fellow colleagues on 
treasury board, all of the staff in the Ministry of Finance, and 
the ministers and their staff who worked together to create a 
plan that supports the critical services of our province, 
continues to provide supports to the people of this province, and 
works towards balancing the budget within a comfortable time 
frame. 
 
Finding the right balance between ensuring essential services to 
the people of the province are met and showing fiscal 
responsibility by trying to balance a budget was not an easy task 
this time around. And as we’ve heard, our resource revenues 
have declined by more than a billion dollars and have stayed 
low for nearly three years, depleting reserves and the rainy day 
fund. As well, non-resource revenues dropped off by 400 
million and we’ve spent 250 million so far on crop insurance 
claims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite lower revenues from the resource sector, I 
believe the Saskatchewan Party government’s budget that was 
presented on March 22nd sets out a plan to meet the challenge 
and keep Saskatchewan strong, ensuring that we are able to 
continue providing the best possible services to the citizens of 
this province at the lowest cost to the taxpayer, along with 
getting us back to balance in three years. 
 
This budget ensures critical services such as health, education, 
and social services remain a priority while still remaining 
fiscally responsible, accountable to our taxpayers, and deals 
with a $1.2 billion deficit. Our plan will make the economy less 
reliant on up-and-down resources and commodities and make it 

more sustainable in the long run, so that future generations see a 
stable and balanced sharing of both expenses and revenue 
contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just luck that our population has grown in 
the last 10 years by 163,000 people. It isn’t just luck that we 
have seen our GDP [gross domestic product] grow by 25 per 
cent since this government took over, this being the 
second-highest GDP growth among all provinces. It isn’t just 
luck that this year alone our capital investments will reach 14.5 
billion, an increase of 76 per cent since 2007. Between 2007 
and 2016, we’ve invested 143 billion into Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just luck that our exports have grown by 62 
per cent since 2007. It isn’t just luck that people are able to 
keep more of their hard-earned money in their pockets, with 
average weekly earnings increasing to $1,010.37 which, 
according to Stats Canada, is the first time in the history of this 
province that this has ever happened. It isn’t just luck that 
Saskatchewan’s retail trade has grown by 61 per cent since we 
became government. It isn’t just luck that manufacturing sales 
have grown 44 per cent, the highest growth by far among the 
provinces, including our food manufacturing subsection, which 
has seen rapid growth with an increase of 84 per cent. It isn’t 
just luck that wholesale trade has grown by 90 per cent since we 
became government, leading the provinces in growth. And it 
isn’t just luck that agriculture exports have grown by 186 per 
cent over the last decade, reaching an astounding 14 billion, the 
second-largest record of exports to 147 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our Saskatchewan farmers and the 
work they do to ensure our economy stays strong and provides 
food to the world. Saskatchewan exported 1.5 billion worth of 
canola alone in 2016, whereas we know that under the NDP, 
export sales had only reached 244 million. In 2016, 13 countries 
were the recipients of more than 200 million in Saskatchewan 
agri-food exports, making us the most diversified market of any 
industry sector in the Canadian economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just luck that private investment in 
our province has grown significantly since we took office. The 
Saskatchewan mining industry has spent close to 30 billion over 
the last decade. Even the Fraser Institute could not help 
recognize this in the 2016 annual global survey of mining 
executives who ranked Saskatchewan as the most attractive 
place in the world for mining companies to invest. Luck, you 
may think? I think not. Competitive tax regimes, efficient 
procedures, and certainty surrounding environmental 
regulations and land claims by this government were the main 
reasons for the province’s top rating. I call that strategic, and a 
significant plan for growth. Even with ups and downs in 
previous years in the oil and potash sectors, investors still made 
commitments to Saskatchewan’s economy, with uranium 
mining investing 4.8 billion, existing potash producers investing 
13.5 billion, K+S investing 4.1 billion, BHP Billiton investing 
3.8 billion, and the oil and natural gas sector investing 4.4 
billion in 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of these investments and improvements in 
our economy and population is because of luck. They happened 
because when this government took office in 2007, they had a 
plan: a plan to grow the economy, a plan to grow the population 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

of this province, and a plan to make life better for all the people 
of this province — something the NDP never believed was 
possible. 
 
We used our revenues to lower taxes, pay down operating debt 
left to us by the NDP, and built highways, schools, hospitals, 
and long-term care facilities. We used the revenues to hire more 
teachers, nurses, doctors, to reduce surgical wait times, and to 
encourage new investment and new jobs through lower 
small-business taxes and new growth incentives. These are just 
some of the very worthwhile investments that we chose to make 
with the revenue resources we had. 
 
Some examples, Mr. Speaker, are two new schools in my 
constituency: École St. Thomas Elementary School, with an 
investment of 5.7 million; College Park Elementary School, 
with an investment of 7.5 million; and a $6 million gym 
replacement to Hillmond Central School. Investments made by 
this government. Mr. Speaker, preventative maintenance 
renewal for school divisions was created by the Saskatchewan 
Party government and has been a huge benefit to school 
divisions across this province in assisting them in maintaining 
their buildings. 
 
The city of Lloydminster has seen revenue sharing go from 
713,000 in 2007 to just over 2.2 billion in 2017. That’s a 211 
per cent increase. In my constituency, we have also seen an 
investment of 6.6 million in highway repaving. Health and 
social services in my region have also seen budget increases 
year over year to deal with the growing needs of communities. 
Particularly now with the downturn in the oil sector, social 
services, along with the men’s shelter, Bea Fisher Centre, and 
the Interval Home, have received supportive funding. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just like our plan in 2007, we once again, a 
decade later in 2017, have a plan for the future of this great 
province. Nothing will be left to luck. And our plan definitely is 
not to continue running billion-dollar deficits year after year 
like our neighbouring NDP to the west. The economy is 
stronger than it ever was before, and we do not want to harm 
that as much as we can. Mr. Speaker, it takes a 
forward-thinking, strong-willed, conscientious, passionate, and 
caring leader like our Premier to tackle this deficit and, Mr. 
Speaker, I also hope the support of this entire Assembly as his 
backup, not just this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a $1.2 billion deficit. And we have to 
take action on the deficit today, not tomorrow, and not at some 
undetermined point in the future, because we’ve seen other 
governments in Canada choose to kick the can down the road 
for years, or indefinitely, which only postpones the day of 
reckoning and is being left for future generations to deal with. 
Perhaps they believe that somehow deficits will magically take 
care of themselves. We know better and are taking 
responsibility for our deficit. 
 
That’s why we have a plan. We have to begin by controlling 
and reducing spending. Rebalancing our spending and our 
revenues must reflect the new reality. We must restructure the 
tax base and expand it to reduce our reliance on resource 
revenues. Yes, we have shifted to other forms of taxes, 
including raising the PST by one point, and we have removed 
certain exemptions to help make up the shortfall in our 

revenues. But on the flip side, we are lowering the personal and 
corporate income taxes which will allow more people to keep 
money they earn in their pockets. We want people and 
businesses in this province to be productive, successful, and 
keep their hard-earned money. We will let them choose where 
they spend it and on what. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has returned investment to this 
province over the last 10 years by supporting increases to health 
care, social services, education, agriculture; creating 
opportunities; making changes to our tax system; and above all, 
investing in the infrastructure of this province, which was left in 
horrible disarray and condition by the NDP. In order to this, we 
have a plan, a plan that moves away from our reliance on the up 
and downs of our resource sector and towards consumption 
taxes. When this budget is implemented, Saskatchewan will be 
the only province in Canada with no carbon tax of any kind. 
 
On that note, Mr. Speaker, I just want to share a quick story 
about why a carbon tax is harmful to an economy. Fuel retailers 
on the Alberta side in the city of Lloydminster were hit with the 
Alberta NDP’s carbon tax on January the 1st of this year. This 
created an uneven playing field between fuel retailers as 
residents can drive two blocks into Saskatchewan and get 
cheaper fuel. With the border city’s unique biprovincial sitting, 
the implementation of the carbon tax tilted the scales 
considerably. 
 
But with much lobbying from the chamber of commerce and 
mayor, Premier Notley and her NDP government had a change 
of heart and put in place a grant program which will begin April 
1st and cover eligible fuel sales retroactive to January the 1st. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the measures we are taking now, as set out in our 
2017-18 budget and in the next few years to come, will not only 
bring us back to balance but will provide for a stable revenue 
base in the future and continue our strong Saskatchewan 
advantage. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget tabled in this House clearly shows we 
once again have a plan to continue meeting the challenge and 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. I hope the people of 
Saskatchewan will see this too and believe in the Saskatchewan 
advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do support the 2017-18 budget submitted in this 
Assembly by the Minister of Finance, and I do not support the 
amendment put forward by the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 
proud to take my place in this Assembly and say a few words 
on the issues of the day, in this case the budget 2017, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s always interesting to see what they’re going to 
pick as the slogan for different things, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly I’ve been around here long enough to have been 
through budgets when they declared it this year country. I’ve 
been around when they talked about being, you know, ready for 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

growth. You know, they’re not quite ready for growth. But 
different slogans over the years, Mr. Speaker, that sort of ring 
through my mind as I listen to the defence that has been 
rendered of this budget. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, you know, it was interesting to be 
joined today in the gallery by Ken Krawetz, and of course I 
think when the current Minister of Finance announced the 
changes to de-index the tax brackets from inflation, I thought I 
could hear a shout all the way from Invermay, Mr. Speaker, 
about, my goodness gracious, the bracket creeps are back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on front after front there are different things 
that are here in this budget that if you’ve followed the record of 
the Sask Party over the years, you’ll see that, you know, they’ve 
become in so many ways, Mr. Speaker, the things that they’ve 
criticized all these years. And so I think it was quite fitting that, 
you know, Mr. Krawetz was here to observe the proceedings 
because Lord knows they’ve come a long way in the short time 
since that member’s been absent from this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words of thanks off the top. I 
want to say thank you to my family. I want to say thank you to 
my friends and neighbours, and I want to say thank you very 
much to the people that I work with in terms of the service for 
the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
It’s an amazing constituency, Mr. Speaker. Incredibly diverse 
people from all different walks of life, from all corners of the 
globe in that constituency, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an endlessly 
interesting place to live and to be from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I’m also reminded 
of in this budget, and speaking of family, is the way that 
libraries have come in for a cut, a cruel cut on the part of this 
government. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when my father and 
my mother had yet to be married, were engaged, were still, you 
know, courting, and my father had bought the first house for 
them to start their life as a married couple at 1363 Robinson 
Street, Mr. Speaker, my mother was then in Ontario, and they 
corresponded back and forth. 
 
And certainly these are letters that my father looks to now in his 
83rd year and of course with my mother having passed on, that 
he looks at them with great interest. But one letter in particular 
is when he has written to her about buying this house on 1300 
block Robinson and describing to her that it’s across the street 
from Albert School. It’s just down the block from Albert 
Library. And my mother wrote back and she said, it’s like a 
dream come true. You know, we’re just . . . to be that close to a 
library, Mr. Speaker, because my mother was a passionate 
reader, and she passed that on to us McCall kids, every one, and 
passed along, you know, the love of a well-used and 
well-cherished library card, Mr. Speaker. So I guess in this 
speech, Mr. Speaker, I think about my mom and I think about 
all those families in Regina Elphinstone-Centre and the 
different ways that this budget impacts their life. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the good things that are in this 
budget — because you know, maybe it’s like the old saying that 
even a broken watch can be right at least twice a day, Mr. 
Speaker — in this budget there are some good things done, to 
be certain. And in terms of impacts in the riding of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, I want to draw attention and salute the fact 
that Sacred Heart will soon, the rebuilt Sacred Heart is well on 
its way to be reopened. That Mâmawêyatitân Centre, which 
incorporates the old Albert Library, which is 100 years-plus old, 
Mr. Speaker, along with the revitalized Scott Collegiate, along 
with community space, that is well on its way to being opened 
this fall. And I’m sure that we’ll see members from the 
government come to congratulate themselves for what role they 
played in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m sure you won’t hear anything about the fact that they 
announced it in the 2008 budget, back when Mr. Krawetz was 
the Education minister, and then of course we’ve had about a 
half-dozen Education ministers in between, Mr. Speaker. But 
here it is a decade later finally getting ready to open and we’re 
thankful for it, Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre in my home community of north central 
Regina. 
 
And in terms of the impact that that first-class high school can 
make in the lives of young people, many of them First Nations 
and Métis, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to that impact that is 
already there in Scott Collegiate, but can only be improved with 
a first-class facility at last, Mr. Speaker. So we’re thankful for 
those things. 
 
We’re thankful for the fact that there is some monies in this 
budget that will be going towards the ongoing crisis that is there 
in wait times in emergency rooms throughout this province, Mr. 
Speaker, but particularly at a place like Pasqua Hospital where 
we’ve seen this government go from talking about eliminating 
wait times altogether to moving targets to, you know, they had a 
newser yesterday and there’s some good work being done, but 
that still doesn’t take away from the fact that when I meet with 
seniors last Thursday at Davis Mews, Mr. Speaker, that the 
seniors are lined up to tell me about the unacceptable treatment 
that they’ve had in the wait rooms of our emergencies. And 
they don’t blame the nurses. They don’t blame the doctors. 
They don’t blame the health care professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
But they kind of wonder about the government, and they kind 
of wonder about the different things that this government has 
seen fit to put money towards over the years, in terms of the bad 
choices that this government has made in too many 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that there’s more money for the 
Cancer Agency. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, cancer is a plague 
in our society that has touched far too many families. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s an expenditure that I think should only be 
natural for a government to be making. 
 
I look forward to seeing how the crime reduction committee is 
treated in terms of the million dollars that was earmarked for 
responses to that work, Mr. Speaker. I have a lot of respect for 
the member from Battlefords, and I think he brought a 
thoughtful hand to that process. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
interested to see what impact the recommendations coming 
forward from that committee have and how they stack up 
alongside the other decisions that have been made throughout 
the broader justice system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you don’t have to look too far in the city, Mr. Speaker, to 
find places where the situation around crime and the causes of 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

crime are serving far too horrible a price on too many lives, Mr. 
Speaker. When I think about the inquest that’s going on right 
now as we stand here, Mr. Speaker, into the death of Nadine 
Machiskinic, and may her family get some justice and some 
peace out of that process, Mr. Speaker. And I think of the far 
too many young lives that are impacted by gangs, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of what’s happening not just in our inner cities 
anymore, Mr. Speaker, but throughout the province, and the 
way that lives are ruined by the gangs, by involvement with 
addictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think about the way that we’ve had different responses, 
different game plans, put forward over the years to try and make 
some progress on that. But, Mr. Speaker, I am hopeful that there 
will be some kind of action in terms of a more cohesive 
approach on the part of this government when it comes to 
helping young people exit from the clutches of the gangs, Mr. 
Speaker, and the life-and-death matter that that is for far too 
many families, Mr. Speaker, far too many communities. So I’m 
hopeful for those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this of course is against the backdrop of a budget where it’s 
hard to know where to start in terms of the critique, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s currently the 29th of March. It would have been 
what, five days to go to the election day last year, and of course 
the government, you know, was out there with the slogan of 
Keep Saskatchewan Strong. And, Mr. Speaker, you know it 
wasn’t days after the election, which they won handily, and you 
know if you want to see some back-patting going on, Mr. 
Speaker, just ask them about it. If you want to see some 
world-class coattails, Mr. Speaker, just check out the ones on 
the member from Swift Current. 
 
In terms of what happened in that election though, Mr. Speaker, 
it was absent something that was critical to the process. It’s a 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And they said, well you know, we can’t 
have the budget. And then of course the budget finally comes 
out and we start to get a closer picture of what’s happened with 
the finances in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see, you know, where it’s gone with one 
number for the estimated deficit. And it wasn’t, you know, it 
wasn’t too long before we worked our way through the year, 
and they of course, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with the quarterly report that are the people’s 
due, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the people’s money. They 
couldn’t provide that information, Mr. Speaker, and said no, 
wait for March 22nd. And apparently that was to get all the bad 
news out at once, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how else that 
operation ran because certainly there were other government 
institutions that were quite capable of getting a third quarter 
report out to the public domain. And the minister said, well you 
know, I’m busy consulting . . . I don’t know what, my magic 
eight ball or what the heck was going on with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of where we’re at, of course they were just shy of 
$1.3 billion for the deficit from last year. And you’ll forgive 
me, Mr. Speaker, if when members opposite, in what can only 
be some kind of alternate reality, Mr. Speaker, where they go 
on about the great things in this budget, you’ll get an occasional 
dipping into the question of yes, there were some tough 
decisions made. But for the most part, Mr. Speaker, the chorus 
that’s going on over there in terms of, you know . . . The 

emperor’s new clothes comes to mind in terms of what a 
beautiful suit of new clothes the emperor has got and how 
lovely they are and on and on, Mr. Speaker, with the 
self-congratulations and the incredible display of just how out 
of touch this government is from reality. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where we’re at with the deficit, 
of course it’s at $1.3 billion. So when they talk about their 
three-year plan to take on the deficit, Mr. Speaker, and you 
know, we’ll see where we’re at in three years. Well I say, like 
you know, where are we at right now? What’s the result of the 
10-year plan? Because certainly we’ve heard a lot from this 
government before about cutting up the big orange credit card, I 
think was one. They had a billboard campaign at one time, Mr. 
Speaker, bragging about the debt that they were paying off on 
the general revenue side on the one hand, but of course on the 
Crown side they were racking it up faster than you could count, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we’ve seen different approaches on the part of this 
government. We’ve seen them when they’d come to power, had 
$2 billion-plus cash on hand, Mr. Speaker, and it was . . . How 
did they describe the finances at that point? I think they tried to, 
you know . . . It was an expectation-setting exercise, Mr. 
Speaker, where they tried to say that the finances were stark; the 
cupboard was bare. You know, like, you can’t make this stuff 
up, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the track record of this 
government. 
 
So again when it comes, you know . . . They run the election 
without providing the people with a budget. They run the 
election without coming forward with all these different things 
that, you know, were in the works. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re at the, you know, one of the days of reckoning for all the 
way that they ran that campaign. Here we are, Mr. Speaker, and 
they want to . . . They would have us believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s some very tough choices to have been made and that 
they’ve got a three-year plan to tackle the deficit. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Well again, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier is often wont to say, 
the best predictor of future behaviour, Mr. Speaker, is past 
behaviour, and I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that, 
you know, we’ve seen the past behaviour of the Devine ’80s 
and the way that, you know, far too many people in that 
government were associated with the work of that government. 
Mr. Speaker, the way that, you know . . . It’s been a decade of 
this government and now they’d have us believe with a straight 
face that we’re going to finally take on the debt and deficit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be interested to see how that works out 
because certainly the debt load . . . And despite the talk about 
cutting up the big orange credit card and all that sort of guff, 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve gone from $10.5 billion in 2008, total 
debt, and they’re projecting in 2021, $22.8 billion total debt, 
Mr. Speaker. And again, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing that against 
a backdrop of some terrible choices that they’re visiting upon 
the people of Saskatchewan, making people pay the price of this 
government’s bad choices. 
 
Other of my colleagues have spoken eloquently about what’s 
going on with the completely disrespectful approach to 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

partnership that this government has got on display with the 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Gordon Barnhart has been 
driven to say that this government has disrespected the 
partnership and that the province is forcing the municipalities to 
do the province’s dirty work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Gordon Barnhart is about as diplomatic and as 
neutral a force in this province as it gets, but where he’s a 
ferocious defender of things, Mr. Speaker, is when it comes to 
the interests of democracy and fair play and being good for your 
word, Mr. Speaker. So while it’s not surprising that he would 
respond to this government’s actions in this manner, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not a surprise. 
 
When you look at what’s happened with the winding down of 
STC, and again, Mr. Speaker, this is part of an approach to the 
Crowns where I’d refer you to my speech in the Bill 40 debate. 
But again, Mr. Speaker, they ran on one thing before the 
election and then suddenly, you know, after the election, like 
things have changed dramatically. And of course, you know, 
STC went from being an essential service before the election 
and something that was definitely nowhere near the chopping 
block, Mr. Speaker, to the callous cut that we saw from this 
government on STC, and the 224 people that will lose their jobs 
and the over 1,600 passes that were bought last year so people 
could get to medical appointments, like the young man who’s 
here today. And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what they were 
running on in the campaign. 
 
We see cuts to classrooms, and this is a longer fuse on that, Mr. 
Speaker. But that bad news is going to continue to roll so that 
even in the case of something like Scott Collegiate, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to see what kind of pressures that the 
Regina Public School Board has to deal with in putting the 
appropriate complement of teachers in front of those classes, 
Mr. Speaker, so that our students might be served. 
 
I see the cuts to the libraries, Mr. Speaker. Again we’ll all 
remember the campaign of this government and the way that 
they went to the people and said, you know, we’ve finally got to 
take some action and cut the funding to libraries in half, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got to close libraries. You know, and of course, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m joking, although I wish I wasn’t because this 
is a sad thing. 
 
The cuts to municipalities around grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker, 
the cuts to community rinks, the cuts to Meewasin. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the privilege of knocking on a great number of 
doors out in Meewasin, and again I’m glad to see the member 
from Meewasin here and doing good work for the people of 
Meewasin. But again, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t a year ago. That 
was a month ago. That was a month ago, Mr. Speaker. And you 
didn’t hear a darn thing from this government about, well, you 
know, that’s going to be it for half of Meewasin’s funding and 
then maybe next year it’ll be zero. You didn’t hear about the 
takeover for Wascana Centre Authority’s board, Mr. Speaker. 
You didn’t hear that from this government. 
 
You didn’t hear about the cuts to the hearing aid plan, Mr. 
Speaker. You didn’t hear about the cuts to podiatry services in a 
province where diabetes is epidemic, Mr. Speaker. To cut the 
podiatry services to those who can least afford it, Mr. Speaker, 
is kind of mind-blowing, and the kind of pain that’s going to 

visit on far too many families. The cuts to pastoral care. You 
know, who does that, Mr. Speaker? This government, that’s 
who. 
 
Then we see their disrespectful approach to the public service, 
and again, Mr. Speaker, coming forward and saying that, you 
know, after the election, well guess what, we’re going to . . . 
You know, you’ve been through the four years of 4 per cent 
reductions and now you’re going to be up for 3.5 per cent 
reduction on your overall pay, and maybe it’s through unpaid 
leave, or I think “furlough” was the word that the Premier was 
trying to fly around on that one, Mr. Speaker. Again, they didn’t 
run on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the cuts to advanced education, you know, it’s like, 
what’s going to happen? And again the minister who just spoke 
talked about how the students were very important. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen from the students both at the University 
of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina crying out for 
that minister to make sure to involve them in discussions about 
accessibility, Mr. Speaker, because guess what’s going to 
happen after this budget works its way through those two 
institutions. Tuition is going to go up, sure as the sun rises in 
the east, Mr. Speaker. And the aid that has been on offer 
previously has been cut into the bargain by this government as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the last things I want to touch on, and again 
I’d refer you to the great speeches that have been made by my 
colleagues on many of these subjects, and if there are things 
that I’m not getting to, I know that they have addressed them in 
a thoughtful manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one thing that I just shake my head, Mr. Speaker: this is a 
government that likes to take, you know, one month of good job 
news, throw themselves a big celebration, while at the same 
time nearly 40,000 individuals are still looking for work, you 
know, double what it was when these members took power. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in the face of that circumstance, they 
come forward with the cuts at STC to those mortgage-paying 
jobs. You know, I don’t know if there is anyone harder working 
than a bus driver. Well maybe it’s the cleaners, Mr. Speaker, the 
way that this government has come forward and cut 220 
cleaners, thrown them out of their job. And there’s no certainty 
for those individuals what’s to come. 
 
I look at the way that this government has bragged about the 
record amounts that they’re spending on social services. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because there are a record number of people 
on the caseloads. You know, it’s not because, it’s not because 
they’re increasing the benefit and helping people out of poverty, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s because there are a record number of people 
on social assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, far from increasing the basic assistance 
amounts, Mr. Speaker, they’ve actually cut the transitional 
employment allowance by $20 a month, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I know that’s, you know, chump change for some of the 
members over there. But that $20 is of huge significance to the 
people, to too many of the people that I have the privilege of 
representing, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to see that translate 
into longer lines at the food bank and on. And they’ll continue 
to make a mockery of what happened with the anti-poverty 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last thing I want to say is this, Mr. Speaker: in a time . . . And 
we’re reminded again of the good work of Justice Murray 
Sinclair, now Senator Murray Sinclair, and the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, Mr. Speaker. In a time when we 
should be bringing people together, this government is either 
missing in action or making cuts or letting the moment pass, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s an opportunity we cannot afford to take 
up on, Mr. Speaker. Reconciliation is something that we all 
need to work for. And it’s time that this government, you know, 
come to it with a willing heart, Mr. Speaker, because the cost of 
not doing so, there are too many tragic ways that too many 
people in this province pay as it is, Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t 
see what needed to be there in this budget around Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission and the calls to action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of different things that I could carry 
on in terms of talking about and the cuts that were made in this 
government, the billion-dollar tax cut, Mr. Speaker. They put 
the tax on restaurant meals, Mr. Speaker. You’ve been here 
long enough, Mr. Speaker, to realize when that would have 
been, you know, sort of a mind-blowing proposition, but here 
we are. They put PST on restaurant meals, Mr. Speaker, and, 
you know, did so with this straight face. Again, swallowing 
themselves whole like that can’t be easy, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, becoming all the things that they’ve criticized over the 
years, it can’t be easy. 
 
But the hype show that continues in here, Mr. Speaker, the 
alternate reality that seems to be in effect over there, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not what you get when you talk to people out 
across the land. It’s not what you get when you talk to people in 
Elphinstone. It’s not what you get in downtown Regina. It’s not 
what you get out in coffee row at Wolseley, I would submit, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in far too many ways, this budget, instead of meeting the 
challenge, makes the challenge all the harder for too many 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. I will not be supporting 
the budget, but I’ll certainly be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
first want to begin by acknowledging a number of people before 
I get into my remarks on the budget. Mr. Speaker, I do want to 
welcome the member from Saskatoon Meewasin to the 
Chamber, in joining his place here in the Legislative Assembly. 
I’ve had an opportunity to work with him on a number of 
occasions and had a number of meetings with him in a previous 
role. We maybe always didn’t come to the same decision point, 
but I certainly appreciated the way that he presented his causes 
and his concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank those that I have the pleasure of 
working with each and every day, and not just my colleagues, 
but the people that work in my office upstairs, Elaine, Graham, 
Dustin, and Amanda. Mr. Speaker, they do such a great job 
working in the ministerial office. I want to thank the members 
of the Ministry of the Economy, the officials that I get a chance 

to work with, Mr. Speaker. This has really been a real privilege 
for me to serve as the Minister of Energy and Resources. And I 
want to thank my constituency assistant, Marcie, who does such 
a great job for the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, 
and for me, for a number of years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say a big thank you to my family. 
And I know that members opposite have said, you know, there 
shouldn’t be any bragging in this budget, but I’m going to brag 
a little bit, mainly about my family, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at home maybe watching this — although I think it’s probably 
nap time, hopefully, for one or two of them, or maybe three of 
them — my wife, Amanda, and our sons Jack and Ephram. Mr. 
Speaker, Jack is nearly two, nearly three — oh, I almost said 
two — nearly three years old, Mr. Speaker, and his younger 
brother, Ephram, is just a little over two weeks old now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ephram, so the name Ephram comes from the 
name Ephraim from Genesis, the second son of Joseph, which 
in some translations means twice fruitful or doubly blessed. 
And so we certainly thought the name was appropriate for us. 
With our two boys at home, we certainly have been doubly 
blessed in our lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go on a little bit about our . . . It 
sounds kind of weird: my boys, our boys. I’m not quite used to 
it. I’m not sure I will get used to it any time soon. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I know they’re going to grow up to be 
handsome young men but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 
beautiful boys. They get that from their mother. 
 
Jack at two and a half years old is already, you know, playing 
hockey in the living room and golfing and playing baseball and 
running like he’s a sprinter around the living room. He even 
gets down in the crouch, you know: on your mark, set, go. So 
he’s an athlete. He gets that from his mother as well. He’s a 
really sweet, sweet, genuine boy, Mr. Speaker. He gets that 
sweetness from his mother as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know I’m in there somewhere. We haven’t quite, 
we haven’t quite found out, Mr. Speaker, but I want to, I want 
to thank them for all their support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Finance minister and members 
of treasury board and caucus and the cabinet for all the work 
that goes into building the budget, especially in this year where 
a lot of, a lot of difficult decisions were made and a lot of 
challenges need to be overcome over the next number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re grappling with a significant reduction in 
resource revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously the budget does include some difficult 
measures, and we’re the first to acknowledge that, but it’s really 
because of the path that we’re trying to put the province on. 
Others have really deferred hard decisions. You don’t have to 
look very far outside of the province of Saskatchewan to see 
others have really deferred hard decisions, hoping that higher 
oil prices or better days will return budgets back to the black. 
But the Finance minister has put forward a plan to bring us back 
into balance at the end of three years. 
 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

And as I have said a number of times, it requires difficult 
choices. We acknowledge that. We acknowledge that many 
people will be affected by those choices, particularly those, who 
through no fault of their own, will no longer be in the employ of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. And so I want to talk about 
some of those decisions in a few moments, but first, I never 
really know in terms of setting up a response to, whether it’s a 
Throne Speech or a budget speech, kind of the theme that I’ll 
talk about. But more often than not, it might be something that I 
hear from the other side that kind of forms the basis of my 
remarks and my reply. 
 
And so the other night I was sitting here in the Chamber, 
listening to the member from Riversdale. And she framed her 
comments around a quote by Hubert Humphrey who was an 
American vice-president, a Democrat, who said, and I quote: it 
was once . . . And now this was the quote that she used to kind 
of frame her remarks: 
 

It was once said that the moral test of government is how 
that government treats those who are in the dawn of life, 
the children; those who are in the twilight of life, the 
elderly; and those who are in the shadows of life, the sick, 
the needy, and the handicapped. 

 
So I’m going to concede a couple of points. One, there is never 
enough money to satisfy every single need that comes before a 
government. And oftentimes . . . And Rod Gantefoer was the 
first person I think I heard say this, that often in building 
budgets, it’s not between good and bad ideas, it’s between good 
and other good ideas. And so I think we can acknowledge that 
even during times of record revenue — and I’m going to get 
back to that point in a few minutes — but even in times of 
record revenue, there still really is more calls for the 
government to spend money than there is available. 
 
I just think back to a couple of years ago. It wasn’t that long ago 
when this government did have record revenues. And the 
members opposite still voted against the budget, and each and 
every day in question period they still asked for more spending. 
And so it really . . . So let’s concede the point. There’s never 
going to be enough money in the best of years, even in the best 
of years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my second point is that I probably, for 
myself, would not — and I don’t know if I’ve ever done this; I 
hope not — but I probably wouldn’t frame a discussion around 
things like a budget, when you’re trying to do what’s best for 
the taxpayers with the resources that you have available, 
through a moral lens, through a moral test. Mr. Speaker, I think 
this is really problematic because who determines the 
parameters for that moral test? 
 
What happens if I’m a moral . . . I believe in moral subjectivity 
and the person opposite is a moral relativist, Mr. Speaker? Our 
frames are going to be different. And so when we try to apply a 
moral test around something like a budget, I think it really runs 
into some problems. And that’s probably as far as I’m going to 
go. That’s probably as far as my philosophy classes in 
university took me, but I think members get the point. When 
you try to apply a moral test, whose lens are you looking 
through? 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale brought that 
into the debate, so I’m going to try to walk through the budget 
through that lens and maybe reflect a little bit on the path 
through that same lens as I go along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so let’s look at that through those that are at the 
dawn of life, those in the twilight of life, and those in the 
shadows of life. So I’ll start with those in the shadow of life, 
and I think she was referring to “the sick, the needy, the 
handicapped” is the quote. So the sick in this budget. A $5.2 
billion health budget, the largest in the province’s history, even 
despite the fact that I think everybody recognizes that revenues 
are challenged for the Government of Saskatchewan because of 
low commodity prices, not just in oil but in potash and uranium 
and in other sectors of the economy. And the economy is still 
fairly strong. We’re seeing improvements in terms of job 
numbers and job growth, but that doesn’t always reflect back on 
the Government of Saskatchewan. So for those that she termed 
the shadows of life, $12 million to help with emergency room 
visits and trying to reduce the wait times for emergency rooms. 
 
$250,000 for the CNIB [Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind] to advance some really good programs in a change . . . in 
a different model that the CNIB has been really pressuring this 
government for a number of years. Mr. Speaker, a $3.3 million 
increase for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency that brings it up 
to $170 million. I think when the government changed, the 
budget of the Cancer Agency was less than half of it than it is 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to focus on two changes with respect to this. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we did make a decision that for long-term care fees, 
that 50 per cent in terms of the fees that are changing, and how 
that calculation is made. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note 
that the minimum today going forward is $1,086 a month. So 
those that I think would be considered the most vulnerable of 
our seniors that are in care, knowing that a small proportion of 
our seniors are actually in care — the member opposite referred 
to, the member from Riversdale — are the most vulnerable, for 
50 per cent of residents, they will still remain at the minimum, 
the 1,086. The previous high is going to move up from 2,065 to 
$2,689 per month. 
 
But it really does show, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, that the 
government will still pay. It’s not going to be 84 per cent of the 
cost of long-term care, but it’s going to drop down to 83 per 
cent of the long-term care. 
 
And I think the question that I would have, Mr. Speaker, is, if 
2,689 for the higher income seniors that are in care, if that is not 
appropriate, based on what we know in terms of people’s level 
of income, then what is that number? Should nobody ever pay 
more than $2,000 for long-term care regardless of their income? 
If they have 5,000 monthly income or 10,000 of monthly 
income, is $2,000 too much to ask in terms of that very small 
percentage, of the very small percentage of seniors that are in 
care, to pay, Mr. Speaker? So that’s certainly a test for this 
government, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But I would note that in 2000, the members opposite increased 
the maximum range at a time when they had record revenue. 
The budget of the day for the province of Saskatchewan was 
$6.3 billion in revenue. That was the highest it ever was. And 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

yet at that time they felt it was necessary to raise the income 
range in terms of what seniors would pay. 
 
And we know what they tried to do in 2002, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when people . . . If the plan that they had proposed at a 
time when the government had record revenue, because in 2002 
we had record revenue at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 
plan they brought in place would have been put in place, what 
would be considered high-income-earning seniors in long-term 
care would have been paying $1,200 more a month than they 
would under the new maximum today, Mr. Speaker. So when 
somebody wants to make the argument through a moral lens, 
they ought to be careful in terms of what the history is of the 
positions of their party. 
 
I will briefly just talk about pastoral care because I know it’s 
been brought up a number of times, Mr. Speaker. So I will 
openly say I’m a person of faith. This is something that’s very 
important in my life, Mr. Speaker, and I can imagine that for 
somebody that is receiving health care — whether they are in 
the twilight of their life, whether they’ve been given a difficult 
diagnosis — it is up to everybody. Some people may have a 
lifelong faith and they want to be comforted in that faith, 
perhaps in the twilight of their life. For other people, maybe had 
a faith as a younger person in their life and maybe walked away 
from that, and as they approach the twilight of their life, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, may want to return to that. And for some 
people it may not even be a part of their life, Mr. Speaker, but 
certainly I can imagine that in the final hours of a person’s life, 
there may be a lot of questions going through their mind. 
 
So I believe that this is very important. In fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe it is a core service. But I don’t believe it’s a 
core service of the government, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a core 
service of the faith community that you see in every other 
community across the province, Mr. Speaker. And so I would 
say this is a challenge, Mr. Speaker, for the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would say 
that this is, you know, I would say that this is a bit of a 
challenge. For sure it is, Mr. Speaker. But in the city of Regina 
alone, in just the Christian faith — not talking about the Muslim 
faith, I’m not talking about the Jewish faith — I just look at the 
Christian faith, there are, I believe, 146 Christian churches in 
this city alone, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think attaching somebody 
to a spiritual advisor, whether it’s at the twilight of their life or 
whether it’s during a difficult medical diagnosis, I don’t think 
that that is the role of the government. I think that is the role of 
the faith community in this province. 
 
You would almost think by listening to the members opposite 
that spiritual care would not be available without the 
government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the spiritual, the faith 
community has been providing this long before there ever were 
governments in this province or in anywhere else, and I think it 
will continue going forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the needy and the handicapped, 
as referenced by the member from Riversdale, a $1.125 billion 
social services budget, the largest budget ever: 13.4 million 
child and family budget increase, a $2.3 million increase in 
disability, a 13 per cent increase in income assistance, a $15.9 
million increase in the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] program, Mr. Speaker. And that is at a time, a very 

difficult budget for this province and for this government, Mr. 
Speaker, a time that people are talking about austerity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2000 and 2001, at a time of record revenue, I 
look back, the budget of 2000-2001 was the highest ever up to 
that point. So the members opposite like to talk about record 
revenue, well 2000-2001 was a time of record revenues for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and yet the social services 
budget was cut by the members opposite. 
 
In 2003-2004, another year of record revenue for the 
government, and what happened to the social services budget? 
Mr. Speaker, it was cut. And one other, in terms of the member 
from Riversdale talks about those in the shadows of life. Mr. 
Speaker, well I’ll get to that. I’ll get to that. Just wait a second. 
Grab a coffee. I’ll be at that in about 5 minutes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, $155 million to continue construction on 
the mental health hospital of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Where was the NDP on this? To those in the shadows 
of life, Mr. Speaker, and I would challenge members, I don’t 
know if the member from Riversdale has ever been to the 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. I’ve been there a 
couple of times. I don’t think there’s many hospitals in this 
province that had to wait till they were nearly 100 years old to 
be replaced, except for the mental hospital in this province. 
 
And I think that’s a shame on the record of this entire, the 
history of this province, Mr. Speaker, regardless of political 
stripe, regardless of party. It should not have taken 100 years. 
But at a time of difficult budget choices, $155 million, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
Now there was time of record revenue in 2004-2005, $6.59 
billion was the budget, and it jumped to nearly $7 billion in 
revenue, Mr. Speaker, record revenue for a number of years in a 
row from the members opposite. And yet there was no money 
for the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, for those 
truly in the shadows of life, to use the member from Riversdale 
for her moral test on a budget, Mr. Speaker. No money for that 
project from the members opposite. 
 
But I’ll tell you what. So in 2004-2005 we did have record 
revenue of 6.59, the members opposite had record revenue of 
$6.59 billion. They had no money for the mental health hospital 
in North Battleford. At that time it was like 95 years old, Mr. 
Speaker. No money for it. But they did, as a strategic priority, 
have $50 million per year for something called Investment 
Saskatchewan. Now I know the member from Prince Albert 
across the way gave a speech a couple of weeks ago that said 
we need more Crown corporations, so she’ll love this. The 
members opposite had no money in a year of record revenue, no 
money for the mental health hospital in North Battleford, but 
they had $50 million per year for Investment Saskatchewan for, 
“. . . commercial . . . opportunities with significant wealth and 
employment growth potential.” Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
House, we call that the private sector. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for the member from Riversdale on her moral 
test, the largest social services budget, the largest health budget, 
the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford project 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

continuing, she would have to agree on that moral test that she 
brought up, the NDP would have failed in the past where this 
budget does pass that test. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’m running a little short on . . . I’m really 
running short on time. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go quickly to 
another area, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll find what area that is, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’ll talk about two of the three. I won’t be able to 
touch on all of them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those, Mr. Speaker, in the shadows of life and 
those at the dawn of life, which for me is the most important — 
$15.5 million in capital to continue the children’s hospital of 
Saskatchewan, 8 million just in the IT [information technology] 
of the building alone and 4 million in operating capital. And 
each and every year in the last number of years, we’ve put 
additional dollars in operating for when the day comes, not for 
to set aside for when the facility opens, but to staff up in terms 
of the specialists, pediatric specialists that will be able to serve 
that facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again in years of record revenue from 2004 all the way to 
2007-08, each and every year the members opposite had record 
revenues. And in fact prior to 2000 they sold, sorry, privatized 
$365 million in Cameco shares that were owned by the people 
of Saskatchewan. And yet they didn’t have any dollars for 
something like a children’s hospital in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
$119 million for K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] schools, 
including 48 million for 18 new elementary schools, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m very pleased to say $2.1 million in planning 
for Rosthern and a new school in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker; in fact 
$3.7 billion in capital in this budget alone. 
 
And I went back and looked and here’s a line from March 23rd, 
2005 from the Finance minister of the day, “And with a 
significant capital budget of almost $327 million, we’re literally 
building for future generations, for the next 100 years.” Mr. 
Speaker, a $3.7 billion capital budget on this side; $327 million 
that was what they considered building for the next 100 years. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s building on this side of the House for the 
next six weeks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in a very difficult budget year: new schools; 
the children’s hospital; more money in the pockets of parents in 
all income brackets compared to when the members opposite, 
when the social democrats, Mr. Speaker, were the government 
of the day. And yet people paid more taxes, even under the 
changes that we’ve made, people paid more taxes, 
lower-income people paid more taxes. For whatever reason they 
thought they knew better what to do with people’s money. We 
believe the families know what to do better with their money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On that, I believe the members opposite, the member from 
Riversdale would have to conclude that they failed on that 
moral test; that this government, this budget, passes on that 
moral test compared to the previous government’s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the member opposite from Cumberland, I think he talked 
about debt. Mr. Speaker. Well this is what I have to say about 

that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, in fact 
most of it is in capital assets so there is something that is going 
to be left behind in terms of a capital asset for a long term, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to have the second-lowest debt-to-GDP 
ratio in the country even after the next number of years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and still a 15 per cent reduction in the overall 
debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It just leaves me with one question. I found it interesting that in 
a comparison of provincial budgets a premier in another 
province that they might know well, said in terms of this budget 
what would she do differently? And she said, “Well I’d do 
everything differently.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the budget of the province of 
Alberta, if they can’t vote for this budget and if debt is a 
concern like the member from Cumberland brought up, Mr. 
Speaker, one question I have: would they be able to vote for the 
Alberta budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker? If they can’t vote for this 
one, would they be able to stand and vote in favour of that 
budget? I’m not so sure. I’m not so sure. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, using the frame in which the member 
from Riversdale brought to this budget debate — and that was 
Hubert Humphrey, Hubert Humphrey’s moral test — in 
challenging times, I believe that this government has certainly 
passed that test for those at the dawn of life, for those in the 
twilight of life, and those in the shadows, and in light, 
especially in light of how NDP governments approach these 
very same questions, including in times of record revenues. 
Yes, it is a difficult budget but I believe on that account, it is a 
passing budget. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing I will be . . . Mr. Speaker, 
before I get to that, Mr. Speaker, I am glad the member from 
Riversdale did raise Hubert Humphrey and quoted him to begin 
her speech because it actually reminded me of another Hubert 
Humphrey quote when he said, “The right to be heard does not 
automatically include the right to be taken seriously.” I’ll be 
voting against the amendment and for the budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — [Inaudible] . . . comments about the budget. 
And you know, I want to start out with thanking of course my 
family, the people back home who give support to me. To my 
CA [constituency assistant], I just want to say thank you for the 
great work you do, especially these days with what’s coming 
out by this government turning their back on the most 
vulnerable and many northern people. Many people in this 
province throughout the North, the South, the rural, urban will 
be suffering by this budget. But I want to thank my CA for the 
good work he does and those that help out in the office to do 
casework and try to help people. Because I’ll tell you, the story 
for some of these families who come in are truly heartbreaking, 
the challenges that people are facing. 
 
So we have a government here who wants to talk about the bad 
days. They want to go back to the NDP, the bad old days, and 
use all the . . . and that’s fine. However they want to present it, 
they can do that. But in today’s reality, what people and 
families are facing, seniors are facing in this province, this 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

government should be ashamed of themselves what they’ve 
done. They raised tax after tax on the most vulnerable, the 
poorest people who are trying to do their part. 
 
But you know, they’ll deny it. They’ll deny it. They’re raising a 
billion dollars, a billion dollars more when we’ve had record 
revenue year after year. And you know, then they make out like, 
all of a sudden, news flash, it just started this year that our 
resources have gone down, that the dollars coming in are going 
down. Well you know what? That’s been going on for quite a 
while. But you know what? They didn’t say a word. There was 
an election. There was a by-election. Not a word until after the 
budget. Not a word about how bad things were going to be. Not 
a word about it. They went door knocking, saying it’s all great. 
Saskatchewan’s strong. This is what they went out and sold to 
the people of this province, the good people, and the people 
believed them. 
 
I’ve had many people tell me they’re angry. They’re upset. And 
whether it’s municipal leaders, libraries, the list goes on. My 
colleagues have talked about the list of people that are being 
impacted that are speaking out. And you know, they’re not 
scared. And you can be the bullies that you are because you’ve 
done that. People speak out and say they’re not happy. Instead 
of consulting them, what do you do? You attack them. And you 
say you don’t; well that’s fine. You have it your way. At the 
end of the day, we see the letters coming in. We see the 
frustration. 
 
I know my colleagues have talked about the backbenchers. Get 
up and speak for the people that you’re supposed to be 
representing. Don’t be blind to what’s going on. Call those 
ministers in that cabinet to task on what they’re doing. You 
know, it’s our grandkids, it’s the children that will pay the 
price, will pay the price in the end. They will pay a price, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’re going to pay a price. You could say it 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well then get it right. 
 
You know, they talk about you guys want more spending, more 
spending. Well let’s be clear. Let’s be clear to those members. 
You had the priority. You had the choices, your choices — 11 
million on a land deal. You know, who made money there? 
Those were not priorities. We said use those dollars to help the 
most vulnerable. Use the dollars in the Regina bypass. You 
know, you look at the cost of it. 
 
Everything we talk about in here that you question this 
government about in this budget, these are the things that have 
impacted Saskatchewan, and will. We look at the debt. We look 
at the choices they made. They sat around the table. Some of 
them maybe had said something, but I don’t think many of the 
backbenchers said anything. They allowed this to happen. They 
allowed our province . . . 
 
You know, you look at our Crowns. You look at those 
individuals and families that are going to lose their jobs, 
good-paying jobs, good-paying jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Why? Nobody could solve it. They don’t talk to anybody. They 
go out, make their plan, and then later look about the 
consequences, then maybe change their mind. I’m hoping that 
this government will do the right thing when it comes to STC. I 
hope you will do the right thing. Do the right thing and correct 
your mistake. It’s nothing wrong to say you’ve made a mistake. 

We’ve erred. 
 
This is a public service. We need to keep it in the province. We 
look at, you know, all the different areas. Governments support 
other public services, and we know that they don’t have to 
make money. STC doesn’t have to make money. The people are 
saying that. We’re seeing rallies everywhere, petitions, letters. 
It’s from everywhere, whether it’s municipal leaders calling out 
on this, it’s other leaders. They’re coming out; they’re saying, 
no, this is wrong. It’s wrong. It doesn’t have to . . . It’s a public 
service. The people are willing . . . Go to a referendum. Ask the 
people, are you prepared to pay a little bit to keep this public 
service for everyone, to go to their medical appointments, to 
visit families, for an education? Many people rely on that. 
 
We’ve heard the stories. We’ve had individuals come here 
today asking the government, do the right thing. You have so 
much money, so much money that you can. You can find 
different ways. There are ways to do it. 
 
And you know, they talk about the revenue down. Well in the 
days when you had record revenue, you could have put some 
away. You could have saved a little bit. As my grandfather 
would have said, you don’t spend everything; the hard times 
will come. You have to put a little bit away for the hard times. 
And they could have done that. But instead they spent the way 
they want to spend — on their priorities. Did they consult? No. 
 
And they heckle about, oh, what, you guys want more spending, 
more spending, more spending. Well your priorities, you spent 
the way you wanted; now you’re going to have to suffer the 
consequences. But unfortunately you’re making Saskatchewan 
families, the most vulnerable, pay a price, and you should be 
ashamed of yourselves. You should be ashamed of yourselves. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking to some of the families and people 
that will be impacted, as you’re meeting those individuals 
they’re saying, we can’t make ends meet. Our power bills . . . 
affordability, if you look at the cost of power, utilities going up. 
Well why are the cost of utilities going up? They keep saying, 
oh, it’s Saskatchewan strong, and that was their motto in the 
election. People are struggling. Families are struggling. Show 
some compassion. Try to reach out to people. Do the right 
thing. 
 
Yes, it’s about government. They’ve given you the power. I 
respect that. This Chamber, we all do. Is it easy sometimes? No. 
We go back and forth with the banter and I understand that, the 
heckling. And I know that it’s frustration sometimes, and 
sometimes it’s because you have compassion about what you 
believe in and what your constituents are telling you. And 
you’re seeing people having issues and struggles with those, so 
you share them here on this floor, and that’s what we’re 
supposed to do. 
 
But I’m telling you, there’s so many people are going to 
struggle, and they haven’t seen yet the fallout. We haven’t seen 
what’s going to happen as this budget rolls out, the impact, 
CBOs [community-based organization] and all the different 
agencies that will be impacted, and families. There’s so many 
of them are going to be impacted. Tough times are coming, and 
they say, well you’ve got to share in . . . But you made your 
choices. You had such opportunity. As a government you could 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

have put some money away for the tough times. But you know, 
you spent everything on your priorities, that you thought were 
your priorities. Who did you consult with? You know, who did 
you consult? 
 
And they talk about schools. Well let’s see, you know, I just 
think about the schools, and I want to talk a little bit about that. 
You see what they’re doing with the school divisions. I think 
about some of the school divisions. I think about Creighton in 
my constituency. They’re faced with some serious challenges 
with the budget. Is it something they asked for? They didn’t 
have any part in it. All they’ve tried to do is educate the kids 
back home, make sure that the kids got a good education, those 
maybe, you know, that struggle with disabilities, those that have 
other challenges. They’ve tried to do their part to make sure that 
young men and women graduate, become good citizens, and do 
their part in this province. That’s what they’re trying to do. 
 
They didn’t spend the money with you. They didn’t have a 
choice. They took what you gave them and they tried to do their 
best. And you know, whether I look at Northern Lights School, 
I look at some of these . . . You know, 1.284 million that’ll be 
cut this year on their budget. So who do you think’s going to 
pay for that? It’s in the classrooms. It’s going to be the teachers. 
And you think about the cuts that you’ve asked. You want 
everyone to take a cut. Well you know what — and you want 
everyone to face the hard times — I’m hoping at the end of the 
day, at the end of the day, this government and the good people 
I hope will see the government for what it is. When it comes 
time for the election they will not forget. They will not forget 
what this government did to many programs, whether it’s the 
library services, whether STC, whether families, the most 
vulnerable on social services that are feeling the cuts. 
 
And they’ll say, oh, no, no, it’s been a record; we’ve spent so 
much money. They keep bragging about it, bragging about it, 
bragging about it, and that’s fine. They can say all they want 
about it, but Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be so many people 
impacted with this budget, with the government’s lack . . . And 
it isn’t because those individuals out there that will be impacted 
got to have a say in how the years of the record revenue would 
help them or not help them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s going 
to happen? They’re going to feel the crunch now, and the pain. 
And everyone’s made that very clear. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The wealthy and some of their good friends, and the wealthy 
people, you know, the ones that are making good money, will 
be okay. I think there’s about 38, $36 million that they’re going 
to have tax cuts. So they’re going to be okay, but the most 
vulnerable, you know, those that need the help the most . . . 
And I think about the North has been impacted by so many 
suicides. I think a government who sits there . . . And I’m 
hoping, and I heard leaders, and I’ve heard us from this side of 
the House, many, talk about the challenges. You’ve got to do 
something. You’ve got to help. Here’s a government that could 
have done that. 
 
You want to talk about spending some money? Use some of the 
11 million that so-called good supporters, they made profits. 
And why didn’t you use that to help some of our northern 
communities with mental health and with the suicides and the 

challenges that we’re facing? It could have been done. 
 
So there are some choices and priorities the government made, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They made those choices. There’s many 
things that we’ve talked about where government . . . We don’t 
agree on how they’ve spent the money and where they’ve spent. 
And there’s many areas over the last 10 years that they have not 
spent the dollars the way they should have. And we’ve heckled; 
we’ve commented to them. 
 
But at the end of the day, at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I know that as this budget rolls out to impact so many 
Saskatchewan people, I hope that the letters, and I hope that 
they contact their MLAs. Whether you’re backbenchers or 
whatever, I hope your constituents contact you to tell you 
exactly what . . . You know, we mentioned to them about it and 
they say, oh, nobody’s contacting us. Nobody tells us. It’s all 
good. Well you know, I know in my office and I know in my 
colleagues’, it’s not good. And the places I go, people are 
serious concerned. They’re worried, and they should be 
worried. The challenges that are facing them isn’t because of 
their doing. It’s because of the government who has taken such 
an opportunity. 
 
I think about NORTEP and the mean . . . You know, and I think 
about that, what was done to NORTEP-NORPAC [northern 
teacher education program-Northern Professional Access 
College]. And the government made a little plan. I don’t know 
who made the plan. I have my ideas who made the plan. Maybe 
it was a minister before. And they came up with that and 
unfortunately another minister had to carry out that terrible 
plan. 
 
But it’s pretty sad, you know, if you’re looking for savings on 
the back of NORTEP, a program that for 40 years has done 
nothing but good for northern people. You talk about role 
models in their community. When we were having mental 
health challenges and we had the suicides, young people rely on 
those. Those community members are mentors; they come 
back. So NORTEP has done amazing things and this 
government, looking for savings, go after it. You know, they’ll 
have to answer for that, and I know there’s many people 
frustrated. 
 
There’s so much, like I said, in this budget that will impact 
people. And you know, I could go on. I know I’ve been told 
that in light of the day, I know others have comments. But I just 
want to end with this. At the end of the day, you know, 
governments can say what they want, pat themselves on the 
back, and say what a great job they’re doing, and just . . . You 
can keep doing that. But at the end of the day, it’s the 
Saskatchewan people who will pay the price, whether you’ve 
done the right thing or not. It doesn’t matter about what goes on 
here. 
 
It’s going to matter what goes on back home, what goes back in 
Saskatchewan families, our seniors. So many of the most 
vulnerable, so many will be impacted. Those that are losing 
their jobs, their families will lose their benefits. But people have 
said it. They cannot believe how heartless and mean spirited 
this government’s budget has been to them. And that is so sad. 
 
So I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting . . . And the 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

reason why I’m supporting the amendment and I won’t be 
supporting the budget is for the simple reason, so many people 
will be impacted in the later days. And it will come and you 
will get the messages from the people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ve long believed that whether we are on a municipal 
council or whether we’re in the legislature here, or even in the 
House of Commons in Ottawa, we have to keep our eye on 
today. But we have to have a vision for three years, for five 
years, for 10 years, even for 30 years from now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The decisions we make in this Assembly today, and especially 
with this budget, will affect our children, our grandchildren, and 
many generations to come. Our decisions will affect the job 
opportunities, the quality of life, and almost every aspect of the 
future generations. It is for those reasons that I am pleased and 
proud to stand up in support of the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s 2017-18 budget. 
 
I do want to begin today by thanking many people, people who 
have a great influence on making me who and what I am today. 
Some people would say they would blame those people, but so 
be it. 
 
I do want to particularly thank my wife, April, who for me 
makes all things possible. April is far more than my rock or my 
support. She is in so many ways my inspiration. She’s a 
beautiful, intelligent lady. She is employed at Arctic Cat in 
Melfort. Plus she is a city councillor, and she is on the Wapati 
Regional Library board. Believe me, this past weekend when I 
arrived home, it was a far different discussion than the usual 
honey-I’m-home discussion. And my new room’s very nice. 
Thank you very much. And I just made that up. But I do 
though, that April makes me a better person and a better MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] because of that. And I 
hope I do the same for her. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Probably not. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Probably not. 
 
Two other important ladies that help me in my MLA duties are 
Peggy Gordon and Debbie Perkins, my constituency assistants. 
They are dedicated, but not only dedicated to the office, but 
dedicated to the people who come in looking for help and that’s 
very important. They are kind. They are efficient, and they 
allow me to do my job both in Regina and around the 
constituency, knowing that the office in Melfort is in good 
hands. 
 
I’m very proud to represent the people of the Melfort 
constituency. And I want to thank them for their graciousness 
and the hospitality as I travel around the constituency. It means 
a lot to me when I go into LeRoy and Quill Lake and all the 
communities, and now after five years, and actually after one 
year, visit with friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I like to think that the Melfort constituency is a 

model constituency, one that believes in the new Saskatchewan, 
and we’re strong enough to develop in spite of 16 years of 
oppressive and non-business policies in the former government. 
 
The Melfort constituency has some of the very best farm land in 
the world in there and the very best farmers to farm it. We have 
ranchers. We have local-grown, farm-to-retail producers. We 
have an orchard. We have thriving communities filled with 
friendly, caring people. We have two First Nation reserves 
whose chiefs are working hard to better the lives of their 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we have industry, industries that Saskatchewan people 
have built from the ground up, not with government handouts or 
massive programs, but with their own ingenuity, their own 
skills, and the help of hard-working Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these industries were started by local people who 
have risked everything to start their business, and in most cases 
have risked everything again to grow those businesses. Large 
and small, from one or two people to world leaders in Bourgault 
Industries and BHP Billiton, all in the Melfort constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, the Melfort constituency to me is very special. 
However in so many ways, it’s a microcosm of what’s 
happening right across this wonderful province. 
 
And I do want to tell a story because I like telling stories. I 
wanted to talk about Failure Prevention Services, FPS, and I 
wanted to talk . . . It’s a company based out of Watson, and it 
has about 25 employees. It varies depending on workload. But 
it’s a world-class stainless steel filtration products that are sold 
right around the world, about 2 per cent of them sold in 
Saskatchewan, the rest sold in nuclear plants, industrial 
equipment, right around the world. They work hard on making 
their plant right. They’re ISO-9001 [International Organization 
for Standardization] approved, 2015 level, the latest. 
Environmentally, they’re ISO-14001.  
 
But I wanted to talk about their Christmas party. That’s strange, 
isn’t it? I wanted to talk about their Christmas party because it 
was unique and yet so typical of Saskatchewan. They heard that 
the Salvation Army in Saskatoon, and about an hour and a half 
away, were having trouble filling all their baskets. They needed 
800 food hampers and they were having trouble getting it done. 
 
So what FPS did in their Christmas party, they took the staff, 
about 20 people total staff and some employees, some people 
who could make it. They took a bus into Saskatoon. And 
instead of walking in and just saying, here we are, we’re going 
to help out, they walked in and they said, okay, let’s have a look 
and decide how we can do this. So they had a look and, within 
about three and a half, four hours, they packed 400 hampers. 
The average day was about 40 that they had packed before that 
— 400 hampers on their Christmas party. Then they went for 
supper, had a drive through the Enchanted Forest. 
 
Before I leave that, I do want to talk about Caitlin who was nine 
months pregnant. They kept saying, Caitlin, go sit down, relax. 
She said no, I’m not going to do that, and she stayed working 
the full time. Had her baby a week later. That’s pretty much 
Saskatchewan tough. 
 
I also believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should learn from 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

our mistakes. And hard to believe I know, but I may have made 
a few myself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Really? No. Say it ain’t so. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you very much. One of the ones I had 
early in life as a young adult was I got a credit card. I wasn’t 
making a whole lot of money at that time and I got my very 
own credit card. And it had a credit limit I believe of $1,200. 
And that was free money. You know, I’d spend $50, and I’d 
send in $6. And then I’d spend $50 and I would send in $6, and 
life was good. And then I hit the limit. So I was not really 
money wise, but I was pretty good at figuring, and I figured 
what my problem was, was I needed a higher limit. So I went 
out and got a higher limit. And this went on a couple or three 
times until I finally figured out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have 
to pay this back. And then I had to do without things that I 
thought at that time I needed to pay it back. 
 
And I see this happening right across the country. I see people 
running deficits in government. And what do they do? They get 
a higher limit. They add another 10 billion on; they add another 
28.5 billion on to my debt to make it happen. We can’t do that. 
We have to lay a solid foundation to help our people in the 
future. 
 
So I said to my son, I bought you an elephant and I put it in the 
room, your room. He said, thank you. I said, don’t mention it. 
That is funny, that is. I like that. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 
going to mention it. I am going to talk about the elephant in the 
room. 
 
Saskatchewan has a future that is so bright when we look ahead 
3, 5, 10 years. We have food. We have fuel. We have fertilizer. 
And you have those three. You look at what the world needs — 
food, fuel, and fertilizer. And maybe across . . . All they have is 
fertilizer. We have manufacturing. We have other things. But 
look what has happened in the last three years: in our fertilizer 
prices, our potash is down; in our fuel prices, uranium is down; 
and in our oil and gas, it’s down across the world, not in 
Saskatchewan, but across the world it’s down. 
 
So we have food. Last year we had the second highest crop, 
largest crop in the history of Saskatchewan. We had one 
snowfall on October 3rd. It cost us $300 million. So that’s an 
example of government versus economy. We have a good 
economy but the government revenues get hit by food, fuel, and 
fertilizer. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now I want to take a couple of minutes and . . . What is a 
couple of minutes? I wanted to take a couple of minutes to talk 
a little bit about the government in 2000 and how they handled 
the deficit, the government before us. And they went into office 
and they were loaded with debt, and that is the truth. They were 
loaded with debt. It’s how you react to that. You react to 
building the tax base up by increasing taxes 21 times in 16 
years. You may have harmed the education system by closing 
176 schools. That probably wasn’t good for the education. 
Fifty-two hospitals closed but they protected . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a plan. 

Mr. Phillips: — Yes, that’s . . . You know, but I think the 
biggest thing was — and they say hindsight is 20/20 — I think 
the biggest thing was, was they never built an economy. You 
know, in spite of that, they had revenue or expenses and they 
drove down expenses by closing or not maintaining everything. 
They had revenue that . . . they put it up. That should work. But 
there’s so much more to revenue. There’s so many more places 
like the economy that you can get revenue from, and they forgot 
about that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wrote this a couple days ago, and I want to 
apologize for maybe my last comment that they didn’t build an 
economy, because they did. They did build an economy. They 
built an economy in Vienna where they lost $2 million. They 
built one in Chicago where they lost $16 million. And it goes 
on: Newfoundland, Atlanta, Nashville. And then they had this 
wonderful idea that, we will go out and we will pay farmers to 
grow potatoes. You grow potatoes. Bring it in. We will pay you 
money for your potatoes. We’re going to take the potatoes, put 
them in the warehouse, and let them rot. And that’s building an 
economy. 
 
We do have trouble on this side looking back. I just want to 
make one more comment and then I think I’ll wrap up. Oh, I’ve 
got lots. I want to make a comment about corporations. And we 
talk about the corporate income tax, and the look on their face 
when they’re talking. And they think corporations are the Royal 
Bank and the Potash Corp and these ones. They don’t know . . . 
And I hope the people of Saskatchewan do know at home. But 
they don’t know that almost every business in every small town 
is incorporated, because you incorporate in order that you don’t 
lose all your money. You don’t lose your house. You don’t lose 
everything else. Are any of you incorporated? Anybody over 
. . . Yes, most of us are probably over here. But that’s it. When 
we’re talking a corporate income tax, we’re talking about 
almost every business in Saskatchewan. 
 
And they get wide-eyed and it doesn’t . . . but okay, if we talk 
. . . [inaudible] . . . but if we talk about where the money goes in 
a corporation, so you have a corporation and you get taxed a 
little lower, but you cannot take the money out of that 
corporation without doing something with it. You can build 
your business. You can hire more people. You can do that type 
of thing, but you can’t just take that money out because when 
you take the money out you’ve got to pay income tax like 
everybody else does. So the biggest reason why people 
incorporate is so that they don’t lose everything that they have 
personally and risk it into their business. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They wouldn’t understand that, Kevin. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — I know. There’s just no understanding of that, 
and unfortunately it’s going to take more time. But I want you 
to know that I will be supporting this budget motion and I will 
not be supporting the opposition’s amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise today to give my response to the budget. And I 
want to preface my comments by saying I’ve really struggled 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

with this response and I’ve tried to put a lot of thought into it. 
And it’s been difficult, because I’ve had a lot of people phoning 
wanting to talk, wanting to tell me how this budget is going to 
impact them. And I really did try to prioritize the time between 
budget day and now, with listening to some of those concerns 
and really hearing from people and just how this budget is 
going to impact them. 
 
So I’m going to speak, some from my notes and hopefully a lot 
from my heart, Mr. Speaker, and just talk about some of my 
thoughts and the thoughts of my constituents and people that I 
represent, over the last week. 
 
Following suit from colleagues on both sides, I’m going to talk 
a little bit about those who brought me here. I wouldn’t want 
my family to feel left out, and I do think it’s important. And I 
want to talk about, first and foremost, my husband, Guy. Of 
course as I’ve mentioned before, we’ve got three children. And 
doing this, you know, when we’re sitting late and we’re out 
having meetings and going around the province, there’s a lot 
that could get let slip by if you didn’t have someone at home 
who was supportive and who was making sure, you know, that 
the heritage fair projects were getting done and kids were 
getting fed and sometimes laundry was getting done. So he’s a 
pretty good guy. 
 
We’ve been together for almost, gosh, over 25 years I think. I 
know I don’t look that old, Mr. Speaker. And he has been a 
rock all of that time, someone who is passionate about his 
beliefs and unwavering, and is a pretty good guy to go home to 
and to chew over things political. So I want to say, although I 
don’t always say it perhaps the way that I should, that I do 
appreciate him and his work and his passion for the work that 
he does. 
 
And my kids, you know, I’ve been able to introduce them in 
here, but I’m pretty proud of them. And they put up with a lot 
too. I’m not always in the best of moods when I get home. And 
gosh, I just . . . All I want to say is, I’m proud of them. They 
motivate me. And I hope some day they understand. 
 
And my constituency assistant, Chris, I mean we’re just almost 
a year into this new adventure together. We’ve learned a lot of 
things. And she keeps me organized. If you can imagine, I have 
coffee spilled all over my papers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Too bad 
she can’t organize me here, but she’s someone that I’ve come to 
rely on and I certainly respect the work that she does, and I 
want to thank her for it. 
 
And I’ll take some advice from the member from Estevan, and 
just this once perhaps, but she noted that you’re never too old to 
thank your parents, and I agree. I think I want to spend a little 
bit of time thanking my parents. They too have had the 
opportunity to come into this Assembly. I don’t know if they’re 
watching right now. I know that they often do, particularly my 
mom. But my parents, Ray and Judy, who taught me to have a 
love, a deep love really of this place that we all call home, to 
appreciate the land, to appreciate the water, the wildlife, and 
that which grows here, both that which is cultivated and that 
which is native to our province, Mr. Speaker. This was deeply 
instilled. I remember hours in the truck going spotting with my 
dad, and he could spot a deer 20 miles away. We lived about in 
the flattest part of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and really 

taught a love of place. 
 
But moreover, Mr. Speaker, they instilled a great love and 
respect for the people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
regardless of where they lived, city or country, north or south, 
regardless of skin colour, regardless of religion, regardless of 
their means — a deep respect for all people that live here. And 
they also taught us that there’s nothing more important than 
looking out for each other and giving back. And they didn’t 
only teach us this, myself and my brothers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they lived it. And they live it every day. They taught 
that respect doesn’t only extend to you and those who think just 
like you or who look just you. And that is a lesson that has 
informed my whole life — my choice of partner, how I parent 
my kids. It informs my career and it informs my politics, both 
big and small P, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will follow the lead from the member from Martensville 
just this once, and thank the public servants who prepared this 
budget, the people who work hard in the ministries, and I know 
there’s a lot of pressure there. And I just want to say how much 
I respect the work that is done there, that work that is done 
every day behind the scenes often not appreciated, perhaps not 
always listened to, Mr. Speaker. But it is very important work 
and I want to thank them. 
 
And of course that all leads me to the budget. And as I noted, 
I’ve had about a week to absorb what was in that budget and to 
hear feedback from my constituents. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the decisions made by ministers in this budget 
were short sighted at best, and in too many cases downright 
mean spirited, and will hurt people — many, to be sure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and some very much more than others. 
 
And I want to say that I’ve really struggled with the tone on this 
response because I cannot express how frustrated and angry I 
am on behalf of people that have been impacted by this budget. 
And I want to stand up and reflect that anger and that concern 
that I’m hearing from my constituents. But I’ve also listened to 
the responses here by members opposite who have in many 
cases failed to hold cabinet to account for their choices and who 
have pointed the finger at governments from years ago, even 
decades ago, who’ve let their own anger so consume them, their 
bitterness so erode their judgment that they can’t see what is 
plainly before them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Cabinet ministers made decisions that will hurt people today 
and in the long run. And I don’t want to be sitting here in 10 
years or in 20 years holding on to that kind of bitterness and 
anger because I don’t think we get good decision making and 
good public policy out of that, Mr. Speaker. We come here to 
govern for the whole of this province, to make decisions that 
impact all people. And of course there are going to be people 
that are going to have to, you know, share. We do have a 
downturn in resource prices. I won’t disagree with that. But to 
let your bitterness and your anger so cloud your judgment that 
we have this budget before us, Mr. Speaker, I simply choose not 
to live my life that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are actions here in this budget that our kids 
will pay for. When this government came to power, they were 
about $10 billion overall in debt. And at the end of this 
three-year magical plan, we’ll be looking at $22.8 billion. 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

That’s more than double, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that 
all of our kids, be they from rural Saskatchewan or urban 
Saskatchewan, will have to deal with. 
 
And it will also fall to our children to deal with the impacts of 
climate change: increased drought, increased flooding, and 
unpredictability of weather. That will be left to our children as 
well. And this government has taken little interest in meeting 
any of these challenges in any meaningful or responsible way. I 
understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that some policies and some 
governance, some grown-up decisions don’t get you Twitter 
likes. They don’t perhaps get you followers or, you know, trolls 
from Alberta on your page. But they have to be done. It is the 
grown-up and responsible thing to do. 
 
When my kids were little and they would say to me, but she did 
it first, but he did it first, I didn’t put up with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think that is a morally irresponsible argument. We 
are here today with some very real challenges in this province. 
We have challenges for today and challenges for tomorrow. 
And we can’t act like we didn’t just come through a decade of 
record revenue — billions, tens of billions of additional dollars 
to the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, and we have racked 
up debt that our kids will pay for. We have failed to make 
decisions and our kids will pay for those decisions . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I hear infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that brought me to this space was being 
around those tables, around the decisions that were made for the 
P3 [public-private partnership] schools. And, Mr. Speaker, 
those were decisions made, and of course people want schools 
— I’m not disagreeing with that — but these are schools that 
we will pay for, for the next 30 years, schools that, upon 
opening, we will owe $9 million in interest and maintenance 
charges for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was no problem with 
the traditional build. They were built on time and on budget. 
 
[16:30] 
 
What we have introduced here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a profit 
motive into the infrastructure building in this province. We 
have introduced schools — a failed model everywhere else in 
this country, Mr. Deputy Speaker — schools that cost more 
money, that erode local autonomy. But we doubled down on 
them and our kids will pay for the next 30 years. 
 
So we brag about the number of schools that we have opened, 
but we don’t have the staff. We don’t have the funding in 
education to be able to staff the schools properly. Mr. Speaker, I 
can barely keep up with all of the news in education. We saw in 
this budget a $54 million cut in the next school year for funding 
to education, for K to 12 education. Despite the fact that 21 new 
schools are opening, we have cut funding to education by $54 
million. And if that weren’t enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have also increased property taxes to education by $67 million. 
 
I don’t even know what to say, so I’ll let Saskatoon Public 
Schools do a little bit of talking. In a news release dated today, 
“This represents an $11 million shortfall for Saskatoon Public 
Schools alone.” They have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
the members want to chirp, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but these are 
not my words. This is Saskatoon Public Schools’ words. This is 
in the Minister of Education’s, the old school board that he used 

to be Chair of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What this budget represents is a $460 decrease in funding per 
student. It also does not compensate at all for the $1 million 
increase in funding costs to Saskatoon Public Schools and the 
additional new schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had daycare workers, directors in here today, 
and they were talking about the inclusion funding, which is very 
troubling to them, represents potentially a huge decrease. But 
they were also talking about the larger picture in child care 
funding in this province. We’ve actually seen a decrease per 
space in this budget. We’ve heard a lot about the 889 additional 
spaces, but the budget actually represents a decrease per space. 
They’re telling me that it’s going to be very difficult to staff 
these child care centres because there is no long-term plan. The 
funding has been stalled, subsidy funding has been stalled since 
1984, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had an opportunity, and I think that’s what makes me most 
frustrated, is we had an opportunity. We had an opportunity to 
invest in early learning in this province, an investment that the 
government’s own numbers show investment in quality early 
learning will return between 4 and $9 for every dollar invested. 
 
We talked about a universal kindergarten and pre-K program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that, when invested properly, 
returns $2 for every invested within eight years. We could have 
already been there, and guess what? Our kids would have been 
receiving better early learning and child care supports. 
 
So I try not to despair about the opportunities that have left us 
by, Mr. Speaker, but they are very real. And all of the anger 
about what the NDP did in 1993 or 1944 doesn’t change that 
fact. We blew an opportunity here. 
 
And now I’ve lost my notes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 
some of this . . . Like, I don’t doubt that members opposite care 
about their kids and their grandkids. We all do. That is a human 
. . . That is universal. We all care about them. I think we have to 
not care just about our own families but all children in this 
province. And this, frankly, is a budget that is going to hurt 
children disproportionately, Mr. Speaker, be it in child care, be 
it in education. 
 
Some of the things that brought me to this place: I mentioned 
education; domestic violence, that was work that I’ve done for 
most of my life. Some unintended consequences, and I am sure, 
I am sure that they are unintended, but they are real. And this is 
what happens when you don’t get out and talk to people about 
how decisions in their budget are going to impact. 
 
I think of the STC cut and I think of all of the women that we 
brought to our shelter by STC bus. That’s how they got out of 
relationships where they were in danger and they were being 
abused. We could anonymously make sure that they got a ticket 
at their local depot, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s something 
that I’m not sure how that is going to work now. And I know 
that there’s no plan for how that’s going to work over there. 
 
I think of the pastoral care, the spiritual care departments at 
hospitals. I was lucky enough when I worked as a medical 
social worker to be part of the perinatal loss team. And, Mr. 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

Speaker, this is not a team that most people know about and 
those who do, though, hold it quite dearly. And what was 
essential to that was the spiritual care team. So along with my 
colleagues we were part of that committee. We won a 
Saskatchewan Health Excellence Award for our work there. But 
really, you know, I want to think of Mary at RQHR [Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region] within spiritual care and Dorian 
who worked in the office there. The work that they did, 
comforting families when they were losing babies before or 
shortly after birth, was so impactful for those families. It was so 
impactful to go to the memorial service every year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s the kind of thing that I don’t know what the plan is 
for in this budget. And I’m not sure that there is one but I want 
to talk a little bit about that. Saskatchewan will become the only 
province in Canada that does not pay for spiritual care in health 
facilities. And without addressing those needs . . . and these are 
not my words. These are Philip Weaver, the Canadian 
Association for Spiritual Care: “Without addressing those kinds 
of spiritual needs around connection and meaning, the physical 
body may heal but the spirit remains damaged.” 
 
I know my colleague from Prince Albert has mentioned this 
frequently, but the need when trauma, when something 
traumatic like losing a child happens, the care that you receive 
around that trauma is not only comforting and essential at the 
time, it has long-term impacts for both your mental and physical 
health. This is something that is the right thing to do at the right 
time, and guess what? Like many, many good, well-thought-out 
social policies and services, it actually saves money in the long 
run, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I bet that that was not known and was 
not intended in this budget. I will give the benefit of the doubt, 
but that doesn’t make the impact any less real. 
 
There’s so much I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Other 
ways, women leaving violence, public libraries, that was 
another way that women were able to connect with services in 
the community, to get in touch from remote communities. Often 
their abusers would be checking their computer or they 
wouldn’t have access to the computer, so they would attend a 
local library and be able to access websites to make 
arrangements to leave their abusive situation. Again not an 
intended consequence, I am sure, of those cuts to libraries, but it 
doesn’t make it any more real. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read a couple of quotes because I 
have been talking a lot with my constituents, and they are very 
wise and they’re very informed and they have big hearts. 
 
And it was one person in particular this morning that cautioned 
me about my tone, who said, you know, I know you’re angry. I 
know there’s lots to be angry about, but don’t fall into that trap. 
Don’t fall into that trap of letting your bitterness and your anger 
cloud your judgment. People don’t want to hear that. People 
don’t want . . . This was the quote: I want a Premier who looks 
to evidence when faced with budget crises, not like this, not one 
who gets into spitting matches with Premiers from other 
provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They want ideas. They want to know that we are going to be 
grown-ups and look at what’s in front of us and make choices 
with all of the evidence before us, govern for the whole 

province, not to pit neighbour against neighbour. That weakens 
all of us in the long run, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to read this: if we are kind, if we value diversity, if 
we welcome different thinking, we stand up for the guy who 
isn’t being represented fairly. It is our responsibility to give our 
children every advantage and every opportunity to make it, to 
thrive, but it is also our responsibility to teach our children to 
use their position in life, whatever it may be, to advocate for 
those who have not been afforded the same opportunities now, 
tomorrow, and forever, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those are wise 
words. 
 
That’s the vision of this province that I was taught to believe in. 
That’s what we could be here if we would stop with this 
pettiness and this short-sightedness and actually invest in the 
people of this province — all people — and understand the 
consequences of our actions. 
 
I think my time is up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will be voting in 
favour of the amendment and not in favour of this budget. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to rise in the House to make comments regarding the 
budget. I will of course be supporting this budget. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to start off by thanking some of the people that are very 
important to me: the great office staff that I have here; my 
constituency staff in Saskatoon; my 95-year-old mother who 
may be watching TV right now and, mom, I promise I’m not 
going to say anything unpleasant. And I’ve got a great 
mother-in-law who is 92, still bakes butter tarts and sends them 
in. And I want to thank everybody that supports all of their 
MLAs, both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, for our government, has been a difficult 
budget. Our resource revenue is down well over a billion 
dollars. We made difficult and challenging decisions and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve looked to our partners in the education system 
and elsewhere to help them find economies. And we’re not 
going to make apologies for wanting to look for efficiencies and 
save the taxpayers of this province money, and to try and do 
things to make sure resources and services are delivered where 
they should be, to the front-line people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to our Education budget we are 
opening 21 schools this year. Eighteen joint-use schools, six in 
Regina: Harbour Landing, Greens on Gardiner, and Rosewood 
Park. Two in Warman, two in Martensville, and eight in 
Saskatoon: Stonebridge, Hampton Village, Evergreen, and 
Rosewood. $650 million investment in education infrastructure, 
the largest ever in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a lot of challenges with space that was 
available from the legacy that was left by the people opposite 
that I hope never ever get back into government because we 
never want to go back to that kind of a deficiency. 
 
These are P3 schools, Mr. Speaker. They will be guaranteed so 
that they will be in as good, or new condition 30 years from 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

now. Mr. Speaker, we want to thank the joint-use partners 
because those schools are on target, on time, and on budget so 
that the students will be running around those schools, getting 
an education, come September of this year. Mr. Speaker, those 
P3 contracts saved $100 million on time and they will be 
finished in less than 100 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also spent $21 million to finish the other three 
schools that are opening this year, all of which are in Regina. 
Sacred Heart, which for the MLA for Regina Elphinstone stood 
in this House day after day talking about the need for a new 
gym in that school. We responded, not just with a new gym, but 
with an entire new school. 
 
Second, Scott Collegiate . . . Well the members opposite are 
chirping on it. Mr. Speaker. They had a chance to do it before. 
They never did it. From them, nothing; from us, delivery. We 
will have kids in a school this fall. Mr. Speaker, Scott 
Collegiate, second high school built in Regina in 1924 after 
Central Collegiate. We made it the oldest surviving high school 
in the city. Replacement began in 2003, but what happened in 
2003? Nothing but talk. When we formed government we took 
action and now that school is going to be done. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the biggest challenge for the critic on 
this is Connaught. The MLA for Lakeview opposed it; it’s still 
on her website that she is opposing Connaught School. Mr. 
Speaker, come September she’s going to have to go to the 
opening of Connaught School and she’s going to have to stand 
up and say to her constituents that she opposed the building of 
that school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s she going to say to those people? I’m here 
for the opening, but I don’t like this? No, Mr. Speaker, she 
should stand up and say, I’m sorry I opposed it. I’m taking it 
down off my website. I support this school. It’s a great school 
for the community of Regina and my constituency, and I’m 
behind it. That’s what she should be doing, Mr. Speaker. She 
should be apologizing for the position that she took because, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we do on this side of the House. We 
deliver things. What they do is they complain. They want to go 
backwards. That’s not what’s happening on this side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget has got planning money for new 
facilities in Weyburn and Rosthern. We’re going ahead because 
that’s where the needs are in this province. We’ve spoken to the 
divisions out there; we’ve spoken to the MLAs. Those are good 
things that are happening for those communities, and we’re not 
taking any advice from the members on the other side of the 
House because they have nothing to offer on this. They 
complain. They give misinformation, Mr. Speaker. What they 
ought to do is stand up and say these are good things. They may 
think it’s a joke. It’s not a joke, Mr. Speaker. These are the 
students of our province. We have an obligation to give them an 
education and, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we are going to 
do. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the NDP budgeted $18 million for capital, 
no emergent funding, no preventive maintenance. That was 
their entire budget for capital. This year we are spending $119 

million. Last year we spent $390 million — more in one year 
than they spent in their entire last 10 years of government. Mr. 
Speaker, we are committed to students. We are committed to 
education, and we are going to go forward with that. 
 
And we are going to take that record back to the electors and 
voters in the city of Regina and the rest of the province. And 
we’re going to tell them what their record is and what was 
happening as they went through this process in the last while, 
Mr. Speaker, because these are things that are important to the 
citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a bad legacy left by the people on that 
side of the House, and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work hard 
to fix it and to finish it. And when they’re wrong, Mr. Speaker, 
I would encourage them to stand in their place and say, we were 
wrong. We want to move forward with you on those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have one more member on this side of the 
House that wants to speak to the budget today, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to yield the floor to that member now. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to start 
my response to the budget probably in a little bit more . . . a 
different note than my colleague. But I did so enjoy what my 
colleague had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago as I was looking at my 
response to the budget, I searched for a much deeper meaning to 
getting up and supporting this budget, by the way. And of 
course I will reject the amendment and, just in case I run out of 
time, I just want to make sure that’s on the record. 
 
My dad passed away on January 3rd of this year. My intention 
here today and my comments will be in response to the life I 
had with my dad. I am honoured to be here today. I’m honoured 
to represent the constituents of Regina Wascana Plains. And I 
am honoured to be his daughter. I am honoured to have learned 
what values are and to stay true to those very values. 
 
To give a little history, Mr. Speaker, my dad took over a 
company a very long time ago. His grandfather and his father 
started a company that was really very much entrepreneurial. 
They took the cinders from the railway. My great-grandfather 
took the cinders from the railway and figured out a way to use 
these cinders that were sort of tossed aside by the railway at that 
particular point in time, over a hundred years ago, and used 
them to build what we now know today as cinder blocks or 
Cindercrete Products. 
 
I watched, and as I grew up, I saw the hard work. There was no 
substitute for my grandfather. I didn’t know my 
great-grandfather, but my grandfather and my dad. There was 
no substitute for that, and he truly instilled in me that in order to 
get anything done, you must work for it. There was nobody ever 
going to give you anything. And I’ve never expected anything, 
and I’ve worked according to those values that my dad and my 
mom instilled in me. Do the hard work, Christine, don’t 
complain. Stick with something and be true to it. Not unlike 



March 29, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

what we’re doing here today and what we’ve done over the past 
week. 
 
The budget that we have presented is tough. And it’s tough for a 
reason, because we were not going to kick our deficit down the 
road to leave it for somebody else to do it. We’re going to deal 
with it. 
 
And I know my dad. My dad would have said, right on, because 
that’s how he dealt with the trials and tribulations of running a 
company for a very, very long time. There were times that I 
knew, when I was growing up, that this company was on the 
brink of going under. I knew that. And I’ve been through those 
times with my family. And so the answer my dad did deploy in 
that particular point in time is: you deal with the issue. You 
don’t spend money you don’t have. You deal with it so that it 
will be better tomorrow. 
 
That’s exactly what’s happening today. And if he were here, he 
would agree with how this government has handled this deficit, 
because he didn’t spend money he didn’t have. If he wasn’t 
selling concrete, if he wasn’t selling bricks, he would not have 
spent the money. And he did not. And I knew that. 
 
I did not have everything handed to me because of that 
long-held belief that you don’t just get everything just because. 
You’re not entitled to anything. You work hard for it. And if 
you happen, because of your hard work and your ingenuity and 
your honesty and integrity, if you knew those things would 
carry you, and they did. 
 
I had people come in before my dad passed away. He suffered 
for 12 long years with dementia, Alzheimer’s. And what would 
happen and how my dad looked after other people, and not that 
he had a lot of money at the time, he would help people that 
were struggling, with a handshake, with a handshake. And those 
people, their sons, come to me now and say, did you know what 
your dad did? He helped keep my dad’s company afloat. 
 
That’s what we’re doing here with this budget, is that we’re 
helping keep this economy afloat. I know exactly what he 
would have said to me in response to what we had to do. He 
would have been proud of Saskatchewan. He would have been 
proud of this government. And I know he was proud of me. 
 
The greatest gifts my dad helped with, I suppose, in my life are 
of course my sister and my mom. And dad often told me that — 
and I was young then — that my very best friend in my life 
would be my mom. And guess what, everyone? She is. And for 
that, I am so eternally grateful. 
 
But I’m also eternally grateful for those values that he instilled 
in me and that hopefully I have, in part, passed along to my 
children. And you know, his life is a celebration. And in 
celebrating his life, the only things I can do is be honest, be 
truthful, and to look at the challenges and deal with them. Pick 
up the rock and look underneath and see what you’re having to 
deal with and not be afraid of it — much like our budget. 
 
Sure we could have been afraid and said, oh no, there’s too 
much backlash here. There’s too much . . . No, no, no, we don’t 
want to deal with it from a political standpoint. We did not 
because we have the guts and the integrity and the honesty to 

deal perfectly clear with the people of Saskatchewan. We are 
being honest with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’re being honest with how we’re going to deal with it. 
And none of us, none of us prefer to be in this place, in the 
place of a deficit that we had because of the low revenues from 
our resources. No one wanted to be here. But that doesn’t mean 
we close our eyes and put our hands over our ears and say, 
we’re not going to do anything. We’re just going to continue 
on, try and pull the wool over Saskatchewan people’s eyes. We 
weren’t going to do that because we know that Saskatchewan 
people are smarter than that. And Saskatchewan people know 
what it takes to take a bad situation, deal with it, because 
tomorrow will be better, but not if we don’t deal with it. 
 
And so today my life, my legacy . . . my dad’s legacy is through 
me, my mom, my brother and sister, and I’m proud of that 
legacy. 
 
I would not have stood here today and said the things I’ve said 
if I didn’t believe with all my heart and soul that this 
government is doing exactly what they needed to do. And we 
need to stand strong, and we are. We are standing strong, and 
we must. We must stand strong because we need to do the best 
for the people that put us all here. 
 
I’m going to move away a little bit from this, and I’m going to 
quickly talk about something that is imperative. And I just want 
to say, my dad’s businesses over the years have always been in 
southeast Regina. They used to be on the outskirts of Regina, 
but you know, they kept getting kicked out because the city of 
Regina kept growing. And that’s a good problem. But anyway, 
they moved out east. That was the last move they made. 
 
And so you know, and I’m watching the land that moves around 
the city of Regina from the east and the bypass, and I recall my 
father saying to me about this bypass that was, you know, being 
designed or put together by the members opposite. And I 
thought, oh okay, Dad. He says, yes, I think that will be, you 
know, a really good idea. My dad never criticized, but I always 
knew where he stood. This is a good idea. This is good for 
Regina. That is good for east of Regina. And but . . . waiting. 
He said, you know, Christine, they’re saying they’re going to 
put this bypass. Waiting. It never happened. The inaction of the 
members opposite, the government before us, we suffered many 
years of that inaction, compromising ease of traffic, but more 
importantly the safety of travellers, the safety of commercial 
vehicles. 
 
This year’s budget is of course the second highest in highways 
history. We’re building the bypass. This is not just one 
roadway. This is a system, system interchanges. And we should 
as a province be proud of that. I know if my dad were here 
today, he’d celebrate what’s happening with the Regina bypass 
and he would say, it’s about time. And not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, what the bypass is doing is employing Saskatchewan 
companies. And I’m sure if he had been here today, perhaps he 
would have been involved in it. I don’t know. He’s not here 
anymore. But I know he would have been proud. He was a 
proud Saskatchewanian — as we all are — and was proud of 
the values and the ethics and the honesty and integrity of 
Saskatchewan people. And I am indeed proud of that also, Mr. 
Speaker. 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2017 

I support the budget. I’m not going to get into anything else that 
I had . . . I have lots of paper. But I know that in tribute to my 
father, in tribute to my dad, that I agree and support the budget, 
the very difficult budget that this government made. And I will 
not support the amendment. Thank you, Dad. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2001 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2002 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2002 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2003 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 20th Annual Breaking the Silence Conference 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 
 Habitat for Humanity Gala in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2004 
 Hindu Society of Saskatchewan’s Annual Vegetarian Dinner 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 
 Kenaston Kodiaks Win Hoopla Championship 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 
 Onion Lake Woman Attends Daughters of the Vote Summit 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 
 New School Planned for Rosthern 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 
 Opposition’s Position on Federal Carbon Tax 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Investigation of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 
 Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2008 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2008 
 Changes to Provincial Sales Tax Collection Procedures 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2008 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2008 
 Labour Code Provisions and Saskatchewan Transportation Company Employees  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2009 
 Transporting Patients to Medical Appointments 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 
 Funding for Special Needs Children 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 
 Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 
 Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2011 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2011 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2013 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2015 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2019 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2022 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2025 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2026 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




