






















































Hansard: May 02, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 81A  TUESDAY, MAY 2, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2361 
 May 2, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two introductions. The first, it gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
a delegation from the Government of Ukraine who are visiting 
Canada to learn best practices as they develop and launch their 
export development program. 
 
In the Speaker’s gallery are six officials from the Ukraine 
Ministry of Economic Development and Trade. The purpose of 
their working visit is to learn about trade promotion and export 
programs from Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. 
They are Khrystyna Popovych, Olesya Zaluska, Alexei 
Mikhailitchenko, Iryna Datsyuk, Dmytro Nosov, Tetyana 
Miskova. And they’re here today with STEP’s [Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership] VPs [vice-president], Angela 
Krauss and Brad Michnik. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to STEP, the Ukraine delegation will 
be meeting with officials from the Ministry of the Economy, 
Agriculture, and Intergovernmental Affairs. And STEP will 
follow up this week’s visit with a mission to the Ukraine later 
this year. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to acknowledge 
and welcome these visitors to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, members of the Mechanical Contractors Association 
of Saskatchewan. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, they are 
— and I’d ask if they could maybe give a wave as 
acknowledged — Ken Swann, Luc Kadziolka, Scott Kerr, 
Glenn Harbaruk, Kim Skjonsby, Mike Berkes, Justin Yawney, 
Carolyn Bagnell. 
 
These MCAS [Mechanical Contractors Association of 
Saskatchewan] members, who represent an important sector in 
our economy, have met with several ministers, myself included, 
a caucus policy committee and members throughout the day and 
will be hosting a reception for all members this evening. I trust 
the meetings were productive; I know definitely my discussion 
with representatives very much was. And I would ask all 
members to welcome these individuals to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the government here today, the minister 
opposite, in welcoming the delegation that’s here from the 
Ukraine. Thank you for your presence in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you for your presence in Canada. Thank you for the presence in 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 

Moreover, thank you for the partnership, the relationship that 
Saskatchewan and Canada enjoys with the Ukraine. Our ties are 
on many fronts: economic, educational, but also strong allies in 
ensuring an independent, a democratic Ukraine. And those are 
strong ties that bind and relationships that are lasting. 
 
And it’s also fair to say that Ukraine and that Ukrainian 
Canadians have left their mark on our province, have been 
builders of Saskatchewan and continue to build Saskatchewan 
and Canada. And so thank you for that relationship. 
 
It’s also a pleasure to welcome Angela and the representation 
from STEP here today. It’s very important work that STEP 
engages in, supporting our exporters, supporting our province, 
representing us around the world, and introducing new business 
ties, new relationships that strengthen our province. So I ask all 
members to join with me in recognizing STEP, but very 
importantly, this delegation from the Ukraine here today. 
 
While on my feet, it’s my pleasure to also welcome the 
delegation from the Saskatchewan mechanical contractors 
construction association. To this association and to these 
builders of Saskatchewan, I say thank you. You’re literally, 
quite literally, the builders of Saskatchewan. You’re on the 
front lines of ensuring that we have the infrastructure that we 
require, on the front lines of supporting economic growth 
within our province. 
 
We value your contributions and, on behalf of the official 
opposition, we say thank you. And we look forward to our 
meeting a little bit later here today with you along with your 
representative, a friend to this Assembly as well, Joel Peterson 
here today. So I ask all members to welcome this association 
and Mr. Peterson to his Assembly, their Assembly. 
 
Who’s left up there, Mr. Speaker? I see Brett Estey I’d like to 
welcome, Mr. Speaker, an insurance broker with Knight Archer 
Insurance here in Regina, someone who’s been highly involved 
in the cancer society, someone who’s an avid Rider fan, season 
ticket holder, a Habs fan — I hate to say that though, Mr. 
Speaker. A big Pats fan; of course we’re on a good run here 
right now. And someone who of course was also our candidate 
in Regina Rochdale in this last election, and someone who 
continues to just be an exceptional leader within our 
community, and somebody I’m proud to count as a friend. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming Mr. Brett 
Estey to his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the Government of Saskatchewan along with the Minister of 
the Economy and on behalf of the minister . . . Being the 
minister of Ukraine relations for the province, I want to join 
with the Minister of the Economy and the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming the delegation from the Ukraine. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I also want to welcome a friend and 
local businessman from Yorkton, Mr. Justin Yawney. He’s — I 
think he lives out at the lake right now — but he’s got a very 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

successful business in Yorkton. He’s a great driver of the 
economy, employer in the province. And I just want to thank 
him for his investment in Yorkton and area and the province, 
and welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you. Great, Mr. Speaker. It brings a great 
pleasure to introduce the grade 6 to 9 class from the Cabri High 
School in the west gallery. Give them a big wave. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cabri. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Cabri. Cabri, yes. Accompanied by their 
teachers, Ms. Debbie Thomas, Ms. Kayla Klassen; and their 
chaperones, Cheryle Moffat, Denise Block, Julie Pederson, and 
Alisha Lloyd-Lussier. Welcome to your legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to recognize and 
welcome Ms. Kelsey Morrison to her legislature today. She’s in 
the east gallery and she is a student in human justice. She also 
works three jobs to get through school — lots of challenges 
affording education in the province these days. And she’s part 
of the leadership of the SMAC group, Students Mobilizing 
Against Cuts, who have a series of positive actions this week 
bringing . . . highlighting some of the challenges for students 
that are faced in the current budget. So I’d like to thank Ms. 
Morrison for her leadership and welcome her to her legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Arcola, Bienfait, Benson, Midale, and Macoun. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, it was interesting, yesterday in 
committee we had a brief conversation about spiritual care. The 
minister told me that it wasn’t something offered across the 
province, so they cut it, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t fair that not all 
regions had this very important service, so instead of expanding 
it, Mr. Speaker, they cut it. 
 

The petitioners point out that with this last budget the Sask 
Party has eliminated funding for spiritual care services within 
Saskatchewan’s health facilities. They point out that we will be 
the only province, Mr. Speaker, the only province within 
Canada to not fund this support for patients, residents, and their 
families seeking wellness. They point out that the Sask Party 
hid their plan to scrap funding for spiritual care services in the 
last election. Not a single word, Mr. Speaker, about this cut. 
 
They point out that spiritual care responds to the spiritual and 
emotional needs of patients and residents and provides a 
compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. The 
petitioners point out that spiritual care supports families, 
patients, and residents in making difficult decisions, and that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents in obtaining comfort and support, regardless of their 
faith or belief, Mr. Speaker. It’s not about religion; it’s about 
spiritual support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Humboldt. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition today to help support the people advocating 
for passing lanes on Highway 7 west of Rosetown to the 
Alberta border: 
 

Whereas Highway 7 from the Alberta border to Rosetown 
serves as a major industrial and commercial corridor 
between Calgary and Saskatoon and also serves as a major 
connecting highway between communities for education 
and medical purposes, as well as serving families who live 
and travel rurally; 
 
And whereas, as a result, traffic volumes on this section of 
highway continue to grow. 2015 Ministry of Highways 
stats show average annual daily traffic counts are reaching 
as much as 4,090 on portions of this highway; 
 
And whereas the communities, industries, and farms along 
this corridor have contributed financially through taxes to 
the province; 
 
And [Mr. Speaker] whereas the current single-lane 
highway is a traffic safety hazard, as the SGI stats show 
that between 2011 and 2015, along Highway 7 from Alsask 
to Rosetown, there were a total of 403 collisions resulting 
in 100 injuries and 14 deaths, not to mention the thousands 
of dollars in insurance claims. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, people in their area that have had enough, they 
want the government to: 
 

Take immediate action to add passing lanes along Highway 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

7 west of Rosetown to the Alberta border. 
 
And the people that have signed this petition are all from 
Kindersley, and I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 
today in support of my colleague from Prince Albert Northcote 
who has another important petition to present. But this is a very 
important petition as well, and so I’m answering her call for 
presentation here in the Assembly. 
 
This is a petition, Mr. Speaker, for a second bridge for the city 
of Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, this is not just for the city of 
Prince Albert, obviously. It’s for all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. The reasons they are bringing the petition are as 
follows: the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary 
link that connects the southern part of the province to the North. 
With no other crossing, heavy-truck traffic must be rerouted, 
adding a significant amount of cost for the businesses in and 
around Prince Albert in terms of losses or added expenses. 
Current residents, businesses, and tourists in Prince Albert and 
northern communities require safe and efficient transportation 
infrastructure. That includes adequate bridges. 
 
Sask Party government has refused to stand up for Prince Albert 
and this critical infrastructure issue. And local municipal 
governments, as you know, Mr. Speaker, have limited resources 
and require the second bridge to be funded through federal and 
provincial governments. Support of the people and the 
municipalities of Prince Albert and the neighbouring 
communities for a second bridge is overwhelming and has been 
joined by support from industry groups, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, and many others across the 
province. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never 
been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north 
of Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric 
and refusing to listen to the people calling for action, and 
begin immediately to plan and then quickly commence the 
construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today from citizens from 
Prince Albert and Big River. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 

undersigned residents of this province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy that’s powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on 
average 63 cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in 
Regina women earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that 
a man makes. According to the most recent StatsCan data, the 
national gender wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for 
every dollar a man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today come 
from the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition to increase the funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has 
had to close its door during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of 
resource to people in distress. They needed to make these tough 
decisions because they had a cut in funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know that having a 24-hour crisis service is very 
needed in Prince Albert. And because it’s Mental Health Week, 
I want to talk a little bit about how mobile crisis plays an 
important role with addressing mental health concerns in our 
community. The workers that work for mobile crisis are trained 
to identify individuals struggling with mental health issues, and 
they’re aware of all the services in the community for 
individuals who are needing to access mental health services. 
But a very important part of the training that they receive, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that they are trained to use the suicide risk 
assessment tool, and that tool will help them assess the level of 
risk for suicide for clients and make sure that they get the 
services that are needed pertaining to that level of risk. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile 
has put stress on Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria 
Hospital, and other agencies who are not trained and/or 
qualified to provide this type of counselling and intervention 
services to clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase the funding to 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reversal of cuts to the Lighthouse 
program in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
immediately reverse their cuts to funding that allows 
extremely vulnerable people to access services of the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit in Saskatoon; and revisit their 
imposition of a strict and narrow definition of 
homelessness in November of 2015 which forced the 
Lighthouse to cut back its hours of essential service in 
February of 2016; and to take immediate steps to ensure 
that homeless people in Saskatchewan have emergency 
shelter, clothing, and food available to them before more 
lives are lost. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction of 
having the highest rates of domestic violence by intimate 
partners amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three Canadian 
workers have been impacted by domestic violence, and for 
many of them the violence will follow them to their workplace. 
Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation 
very similar to our private member’s bill that we’ve tabled a 
few weeks ago, and Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation 
that ensures job security for victims of domestic violence. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Swift Current, Rosetown, and Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 

institutions. We’ve seen the Students Mobilizing Against Cuts 
group with their actions this week. They join many in the 
province who are very concerned about the increased costs the 
students will be facing, as we see this budget cutting $36.8 
million from post-secondary education, 6.4 million from 
technical institutions. 
 
We’ve already seen job losses among the colleges in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also seen deep cuts to student aid 
funds and scholarships — $8.2 million removed from that 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve also seen the breaking of a 
2016 election promise with the cancellation of the first home 
plan. Mr. Speaker, all of these present serious difficulties to 
post-secondary education already posing difficulties for 
affordability for residents of Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The individuals signing today’s petition are from Regina. I do 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province, and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with its parcel service that serves farms 
and other businesses. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

It is signed by thousands of people and supported. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Mechanical Contractors Association of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand in the House today and recognize the Mechanical 
Contractors Association of Saskatchewan. I, along with some of 
my colleagues, had a productive meeting this morning with 
some of the representatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1919, MCAS has been representing the 
interests of our province’s mechanical contractors, their 
suppliers, and professional partners. MCAS is a provincial 
non-profit trade association affiliated with the Mechanical 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

Contractors Association of Canada and represents plumbing and 
heating contractors in their relationship with the construction 
industry, legislative departments of provincial and municipal 
government, and other industry-related bodies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, MCAS and its members have a long history of 
helping build our province in the fields of plumbing, heating, 
ventilation, air conditioning, control systems, and refrigeration. 
Mr. Speaker, they are here talking today with various ministers 
and MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] about the 
industry and to discuss the challenges and opportunities they 
see as a sector. 
 
The MCAS will also be hosting a reception for members this 
evening. I have no doubt this will be an excellent opportunity 
for further dialogue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
people and businesses represented through the Mechanical 
Contractors Association of Saskatchewan here today and the 
work that this sector has done to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks the Canadian 
Mental Health Association’s Mental Health Week, an annual 
event that encourages all to reflect on issues related to mental 
health. But reflecting is simply not enough. That’s why the 
theme for this year’s mental health week is Get Loud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people facing mental health issues from across 
Canada have been waiting far too long for adequate mental 
health care. Psychotherapy, counselling, community-based 
mental health programs, and affordable housing options are 
lacking in many Canadian communities, along with basic 
acknowledgement and respect for those who are suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is no exception. Saskatchewan is 
amongst the lowest of provinces in funding mental health 
services. We have the lowest number of psychiatrists per capita 
in Western Canada, and our lack of access to proper mental 
health care in our rural and remote communities has led to a 
tragic and preventable epidemic of suicides in the North. 
 
This is why, Mr. Speaker, the CMHA [Canadian Mental Health 
Association] is encouraging Canadians to get loud by writing to 
their government representatives, speaking out on social media, 
and donating their time or money to mental health services. By 
using our voices, we can help create change and build mental 
health support for people across Canada and here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognition of 
national Mental Health Week, and in getting loud, raising 
awareness, and creating change for those suffering with mental 
health issues here in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
 

Regina Real Canadian Superstore Grand Opening 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the great pleasure 
of bringing greetings to the real Canadian store grand opening. 
Mr. Speaker, shoppers have been waiting patiently for the store 
to open as it was the first Superstore to open in the south end of 
the city of Regina. More than 200 excited shoppers were lined 
up outside of the doors of the new grocery store on the morning 
of the grand opening. 
 
The southwest area of Regina and Harbour Landing area has 
increased in population by 350 per cent, Mr. Speaker. New 
housing, new businesses, and new employment opportunities 
are becoming more and more available every day to serve our 
growing communities. Especially here in Regina, there is a new 
community or family growing every day. This store is a true 
reflection of growth being seen in this city as Regina is one of 
the fastest growing cities in all of Canada. 
 
This government investment and support of innovators and 
around the world will continue to grow population, economies, 
and communities. I ask all the members, please join me in 
congratulating the grand opening of Real Canadian Superstore 
as well as encourage all, enjoy the new location and services it 
provides to the people of Regina. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

World Press Freedom Award Winners 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in the House today to 
congratulate the winners of the 19th annual press freedom 
award. The co-winners of the award included Patrick Lagacé of 
La Presse and the Saskatchewan iTeam, Geoff Leo and Paul 
Dornstauder, with an honorary mention to Paula Simons of the 
Edmonton Journal. 
 
Each year the Canadian Committee for World Press Freedom 
gives this award to Canadian journalists who have made an 
outstanding contribution to the cause. It recognizes those people 
in the journalistic community who work through adversity to 
find the information, the truth, that Canadian people deserve to 
know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Geoff Leo and Paul Dornstauder were awarded 
this honour for their months-long investigation into this 
government’s controversial GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land deal where two well-connected businessmen made millions 
of dollars at the expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
These journalists have had to work against this government’s 
consistent opposition, lawsuits, and delayed responses to access 
to information requests, yet they continue to publish stories on 
this land scandal so that the people of Saskatchewan can learn 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with threats to freedom of the press occurring 
around the world and as recently as Sunday from the Trump 
administration, we need to celebrate this recognition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members of the House to join 
me today in congratulating this year’s winner of the Press 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

Freedom Award and to recognize the importance of our Charter 
of Rights here in Canada — rights like freedom of expression 
— and the need to protect them. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

4-H Club Leader Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 4-H is something 
that a number of members sitting here today, including myself 
as a former member of the Churchbridge Beef Club, have been 
in 4-H clubs of various kinds. It should be noted that 4-H 
Saskatchewan is celebrating 100 years in 2017. I think one or 
two of our members may even have been on the original 
founding committee. 
 
Often when you hear about the 4-H Club, you automatically 
think about the young people involved today. However I’d like 
to highlight a local 4-H leader who was recently recognized for 
his contribution to 4-H across the generations. On March 25th 
Wes Van Caeseele was one of three individuals inducted into 
the Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame. This Langenburg 
cattleman has been sharing his knowledge of the beef industry 
with 4-H members for many years. 
 
Wes was a part of 4-H during his youth, from age 10 to 21 with 
the Marchwell Beef Club. After graduating, he volunteered as a 
leader and eventually started teaching. He then became the 
general leader of the Gerald Multiple Club where he’d been 
involved throughout the years. 
 
Wes also served in various capacities in the 4-H district council. 
Although Wes wasn’t able to attend the official induction 
ceremony because he was calving on his ranch, friends and club 
members got together at the beginning of April to celebrate his 
induction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that represents Saskatchewan 
better than our amazing volunteers, and Wes Van Caeseele is 
one of them. I would ask that all members join me in thanking 
Wes for his contributions and congratulating him for his 
induction into the Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

New Sacred Heart School Opens in Regina 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand in this House and announce that the new 
Sacred Heart School opened its doors this past week. The total 
cost of the project was $27.5 million, coming in under budget. 
 
The brand new building does not disappoint. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve heard students all week talk about how amazing the 
school is, one even saying that it’s like walking into a dream 
every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new school was designed to meet current and future 
classroom needs, with a variety of new moveable furniture such 

as chairs, stools, ottomans, beanbag chairs, and desks that can 
be reconfigured. Wide hallways, multi-purpose rooms, and 
doors linking the early years classrooms also offer flexibility for 
teaching. The open concept design also includes a chapel, a 
community hub, an industrial kitchen that serves breakfast and 
lunch, an auditorium, and gender-neutral bathrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud of this investment. Many 
of us remember when the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre stood on his feet and presented over 50 
petitions calling for the gymnasium to be replaced, yet voted 
against the budgets that included funding for the new school. 
The members opposite had the chance to replace the almost 
90-year-old school but did nothing. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members of this Assembly to join me in celebrating the opening 
of the brand new Sacred Heart School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Evraz Regina to Supply Pipe for Trans Mountain 
Pipeline System 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, Trans Mountain announced this 
morning that Evraz Regina will be supplying 75 per cent of the 
pipe for the Kinder Morgan project. That’s 800 kilometres, Mr. 
Speaker. This is great news for the thousand workers at Evraz 
and their families. It’s a Canadian project moving Canadian 
resources creating Canadian jobs, including hundreds of 
Saskatchewan jobs here at Evraz. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote 
Stephen Hunt, United Steelworkers union director: “With 
decades of experience making high quality steel and pipe, we 
will make this the safest and most environmentally sound 
pipeline possible.” 
 
We want to congratulate Trans Mountain and Evraz on this 
agreement. Now we need to ensure the pipeline gets built, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that BC [British Columbia] is in the middle 
of an election campaign and the BC NDP [New Democratic 
Party] have campaigned on stopping this project. Premier 
Notley has stopped Alberta NDP MLAs and staff from 
campaigning in BC because she recognizes what the BC NDP 
would do to Canada’s energy sector. We’ve seen the 
Saskatchewan NDP debate actions against pipelines at their 
conventions until they’re forced to disappear, Mr. Speaker. 
They can’t bring themselves to support pipelines, but they know 
Saskatchewan people want pipelines to go forward. 
 
So my question is to the interim leader of the NDP. Has he 
banned his party members from supporting the BC NDP’s work 
against Saskatchewan families? Will he put Saskatchewan’s 
interest ahead of the NDP’s ideology? 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course we’ve always 
fought for pipelines and will continue to for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

But it’s getting harder and harder for Saskatchewan people to 
take the Sask Party at their word. During the election they said 
the finances were fine, but they knew the reality. They knew the 
mess, the mismanagement that they had created. They said they 
weren’t going to sell off our Crowns, but they’re already selling 
them off and already letting, it would appear, big corporations 
come in and measure the drapes.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, their GTH scandal just keeps getting uglier. 
Nuns, landowners, and Saskatchewan people got ripped off. 
Two wealthy and well-connected Sask Party donors made off 
with $11 million of profit. And while the deals get pushed 
through in the dark and behind closed doors, Saskatchewan 
people lose out and the wealthy and well connected seem to 
win, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To show some willingness to finally clear up the record and to 
be straight, will the Deputy Premier at least acknowledge that 
the CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail land giveaway happened a full 
two years after the Sask Party formed government, and so this 
scandal is theirs to answer for, and pretending that any piece of 
paper says anything else is simply not true? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course the Leader of the 
Opposition well knows that the relocation of CP to the GTH 
was pivotal and essential for the success of the GTH. It was 
something that was recognized by the members opposite when 
they were in government in fact, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy 
Leader of the NDP put forward this plan. We canvassed this in 
the House, and he well knows that he put forward this plan to 
his cabinet. That cabinet approved that plan, a $33 million 
expenditure for the relocation of CP, amongst other expenses 
associated with the starting up of the GTH. 
 
We put documents on the table to that effect and the member 
himself knows that that’s the case. He should turn to his interim 
leader of his party, explain that that’s the case, and settle the 
matter once and for all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Status of SaskTel 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad. We 
have the Deputy Premier ducking that question as the Premier 
of Saskatchewan ducks day after day after day. Yesterday I 
asked the Premier when he learned that the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel sat in this Chamber and gave an 
unequivocal answer that was equally unequivocally wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister who is responsible for overseeing 
SaskTel said, no, no, no, there was no work being done to 
prepare the sell-off of SaskTel. Mr. Speaker, he was as wrong 
as he could be. What he actually meant to say was, yes, work is 
being done to prepare for selling off SaskTel, a complete 
betrayal of what they said to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I have two questions for the Deputy Premier. First, when did 
he learn about, or when did cabinet call for work being done to 
prepare for selling off part of SaskTel? Second, when did he 

learn about what the minister said in committee? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And in the absence of the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel, I will be taking that question on behalf of the 
government. And the members opposite well know — they 
were here in the Chamber yesterday — the minister was very 
clear in terms of his responses. He responded in detail and he 
responded repeatedly to the members opposite with respect to 
the particulars of the matter raised.  
 
What I can reiterate, Mr. Speaker, is that there have been no 
formal discussions as to what a transaction may or may not look 
like, and there have been no formal offers. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another refusal to answer. 
Saskatchewan people deserve to be able to trust what they’re 
hearing on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Sask Party needs to be straight about their plans to sell off 
SaskTel and our Crowns with Saskatchewan people. Yesterday 
the Premier defended the minister by saying, “And immediately 
upon revisiting the situation and information that had been 
provided to the minister’s office, he sent out a note to the critic 
clarifying the matter, correcting the matter . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, moments later the minister admitted that simply 
wasn’t the case. He learned that he was wrong the same very 
night, before continuing on in committee that very night. So to 
the Deputy Premier: when did the minister, when did the 
Deputy Premier and cabinet . . . or why did the Deputy Premier 
and cabinet wait until the next day after question period, after 
Royal Assent, and after business ended in this House for the 
weekend to finally tell the truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
premise of the question is nonsense. The minister clarified his 
comments in the House yesterday. He responded to the 
questions put to him in detail and repeatedly. And I will 
reiterate what the minister said, that there have been no formal 
discussions as to what a transaction may or may not look like, 
and no formal offers. And you know, as I said, I responded in 
the absence of the minister. 
 
There’s a very exciting announcement being made today, Mr. 
Speaker, with regard to the formal grand opening of the first 
new potash mine in this province in 40 years — an investment 
worth billions of dollars; an investment that will create 400 
permanent jobs in this province, 2,500 jobs during the 
construction phase, Mr. Speaker. And do you know what’s 
ironic about this, Mr. Speaker? This was the very company, 
K+S, that was chased out of Saskatchewan by the members 
opposite. They came back to Saskatchewan under this 
government, and they are investing billions of dollars in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, these are the most 
basic questions. Let’s be clear. The minister knew Wednesday 
night that he was wrong. He certainly knew at 10 in the 
morning the next day. He could have done the right thing. He 
could have stood in his place and corrected the record. He could 
have admitted to a gallery full of concerned Saskatchewan 
people, the Saskatchewan Party’s already looking to carve up 
SaskTel. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the culture over there. 
From finances to the GTH scandal, it’s politics before people, 
and covering up before fessing up.  
 
Will the minister buck the trend? Will he take the opportunity 
as soon as he can to come clean and admit that he was wrong, 
and will he correct the record? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely 
what the minister did. The minister corrected the record 
immediately. The minister sent a letter, and I’m holding it here, 
dated April 27th, 2017, addressed to the Opposition House 
Leader, correcting the record, Mr. Speaker. He did that 
immediately. He explained in detail the circumstances in this 
House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, which the members opposite 
very well know.  
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 
be focused on the economy. We’ve had great news again today, 
which the member for Walsh Acres talked about in a member’s 
statement. More good news, opening up K+S in a formal way 
today, Kinder Morgan announcing that Evraz will be producing 
75 per cent of the pipe for the Trans Mountain pipeline. This is 
a $7.4 billion project, Mr. Speaker, 37,000 jobs that are going to 
be created over the course of the project. 
 
Great support from this side of the House. I have to say support 
in Alberta as well. But we know that there’s one party, there’s 
one party opposed to this project, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
New Democratic Party. If the NDP are elected in BC, we know 
that this project is not going to go forward. I encourage the 
member . . . He said even earlier today that they support 
projects, pipeline projects. He needs to get on the phone. He 
needs to call Horgan, the leader of the BC NDP, and he needs to 
tell him that they need to support this project. It’s going to 
create thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan and BC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Reporting of Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mistakes happen. We 
can all accept that but, Mr. Speaker, minister after minister has 
refused to be straight about the plans for selling off our Crowns. 
The Minister of Justice uses words like “not to my knowledge.” 
And the Minister for SaskTel says a meeting with a 
telecommunications company in his office is not really a 
meeting because the real meeting was with his chief of staff, 
and in the Sask Party’s world that doesn’t count. The minister 

says it was a chat about golf. Mr. Speaker, that dog don’t hunt. 
 
When will the Sask Party finally come clean? When will they 
show they want to put these questions about backroom deals 
behind them? When will they support our bill to get big money 
out of politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
as the member knows, we have a significant piece of lobbying 
legislation in Saskatchewan so that people in this province 
know who’s lobbying their elected officials, Mr. Speaker. All 
registered parties, Mr. Speaker, are required to report donations 
and expenses and that’s very transparent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have no problem with the way that the legislation is drafted 
right now, Mr. Speaker. It shows transparency and it shows 
openness, Mr. Speaker. And that openness and that 
transparency was shown by the fact that this government, Mr. 
Speaker, through the course of the negotiations and discussions 
with respect to the lobbying legislation, agreed with generally 
all the points that were brought forward by the all-party 
committee in drafting that legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Community-Based Organizations 
 
Ms. Chartier: — How about getting big money out of politics, 
Mr. Speaker? That was the question. 
 
The Sask Party doesn’t want to put Saskatchewan people first. 
Just look at their heartless cuts. The Minister of Health 
demanded a 10 per cent cut to community-based organizations. 
When asked to explain this cut, the minister blurted out, and I 
quote: 
 

That doesn’t mean a 10 per cent across-the-board CBO cut. 
There might be some areas where there’s no cut to a 
CBO’s funding and other areas where there’s a larger cut 
than that or . . . even an elimination of funding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we know CBOs were on the chopping block, but a 
total elimination of funding takes things to the next level. So to 
the Minister of Health: which health organizations does he plan 
to cut deeply and which ones does he plan to eliminate entirely? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the member’s question, as I’ve said all along, there’s a 10 per 
cent funding reduction target for CBOs across the province to 
all the health regions. What’s happening right now is the health 
regions will be consulting with the CBOs. The health regions 
are working on their budgets right now. They will be making 
some recommendations. Those recommendations will go to the 
Ministry of Health. The budgets aren’t due until June, Mr. 
Speaker. At that time the ministry will look through, they’ll 
make some recommendations as well, and final decisions will 
be made. 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize the good work that CBOs do across 
the province. We’re in a situation right now because of a 
shortage of resource revenues, Mr. Speaker, that health is the 
largest expenditure in the province. So, Mr. Speaker, obviously 
there’s going to be some impacts on the health system. We’re 
going to be very cautious how we proceed. But, Mr. Speaker, 
there are difficult decisions to be made. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, this minister 
chooses to duck and cover. It’s not the health regions making 
these cuts. These are Sask Party cuts. Make no mistake about 
that. The minister knows cuts are coming, so whose funding are 
they eliminating? Is it Planned Parenthood? Do they intend to 
cut funding to women’s health? Is it the Canadian Mental 
Health Association? Is it the Autism Resource Centre and the 
supports they provide to children with exceptionalities? Or is it 
the All Nations’ Healing Hospital and indigenous health care? 
 
This government’s moral compass is broken, so it’s hard to tell 
what direction they’ll take and who they will go after next. So I 
ask again: who is being eliminated, and when will the minister 
provide some clarity to his cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — Before we hear from the Minister of Health, I 
just want to caution the member on the characterization of the 
hon. members in this Chamber. I will now call upon the 
Minister of Health for his reply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I’ve said, none of those decisions have been made. We’ve asked 
the health regions to look at that and make recommendations. 
We’re going to follow through with the process, the proper 
process, before any of those difficult decisions are made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to speculate that, 
well, maybe it’s this organization that will be cut in its entirety 
and maybe this one won’t be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the answer, but it’s 
the answer. It’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. It’s scare tactics that the 
members opposite use. It’s no different than the critic, who 
again doesn’t like to listen to the answer. She likes to heckle 
nonstop.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s like a few weeks ago on the hearing aid 
plan. She portrayed it as cochlear implants wouldn’t be covered. 
Mr. Speaker, not the case. It’s the same case here. She’s 
speculating on where the cuts will be. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
difficult decisions to be made. We’ll make those decisions in 
due course, and we’ll be very transparent about it. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Funeral Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party announced 
plans to cut funeral services for people on social assistance and 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability], they 

claimed these changes would bring Saskatchewan in line with 
other provinces. Well, Mr. Speaker, it turns out that’s not 
remotely the case. In committee, the minister admitted that 
other provinces don’t have a flat rate, and there’s not a single 
province that doesn’t cover funeral services. 
 
In a budget of this size, these cuts save almost nothing but they 
cost families their chances to say goodbye to their loved ones. It 
damages them and it damages the reputation of the entire 
province. Will the minister admit that these unnecessary cuts 
are beneath us? Will she reverse these heartless cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member opposite for the question. There’s been some very hard 
choices to be made in this budget, and we decided to focus our 
resources on keeping the lights on, food on the table, and roofs 
over people’s heads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are going to provide for basic disposition for funerals or 
cremation at a rate in line with the rest of the country for that 
same service, Mr. Speaker. Over and above that, Mr. Speaker, 
this flat rate, we will also support embalming services when 
legislatively required, Mr. Speaker, extended travel, and grave 
liners or hermetically sealed caskets where required by 
municipal bylaw, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to fail to 
justify these cuts because they simply can’t be justified. As 
well, and now we’re hearing, just now that perhaps she’s 
starting to do her homework, but up until now we’ve heard 
nothing of being able to meet the legal implications of these 
moves. Industry stakeholders say that these cuts undermine the 
government’s own legislation. There’s a legal requirement for 
the body to be viewed before it’s cremated, to say nothing of 
the requirements that many face to have the final goodbye the 
last several days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister stand by these cuts when it’s 
so clear she didn’t do her homework on the context or on the 
consequences? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
again I thank the member opposite for the question. Mr. 
Speaker, under section 93 of The Funeral and Cremation 
Services Act, it requires for bodies to be ID’d [identified] prior 
to cremation. Where embalming, as I’ve already indicated, is 
legally required we’ll continue to pay the actual cost for that 
service. I understand it is also required in cases where there’s 
been a communicable disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the difficult choices that was facing the 
government in this budget was to really look at the benefits we 
offer in addition and beyond providing basic needs like food 
and shelter. With this reduction to a flat fee of $2,100, Mr. 
Speaker, we can continue to support 67 individuals with 
disability on the SAID program, Mr. Speaker. That’s food, 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

clothing, and shelter for one year for 67 individuals who are in 
the SAID program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe our choice was a balance, Mr. Speaker, and continuing 
to provide for basic dispositions for individuals and also 
continuing to provide for people who are vulnerable. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, minister after minister refuses 
to admit that they just don’t know or don’t care about the 
consequences of their cuts. The Minister of Government 
Relations wants us to believe municipalities are fine with her 
plan to cut grants-in-lieu. Well SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] said, “Our members are outraged 
and so are we.” I’ll take their word over hers any day of the 
week.  
 
Will the Minister of Government Relations finally admit that 
she needs to quit contradicting the leaders in our cities, towns, 
and villages, needs to scrap Bill 64 and stop the cuts to our 
municipalities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as always there is 
absolutely nothing new in that member’s question. I have said 
time again that difficult decisions had to be made in this budget, 
and that we required a number of sectors to help with getting 
our books back to balance in three years, Mr. Speaker. I have 
said time and time again these are difficult decisions, and we 
had looked for our municipal partners for 2.5 per cent of the 
deficit that we are facing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to stand and say that we 
have done this to municipalities and no one else is simply false. 
She has stood up and said that we have tore up 109 contracts; 
that is simply false as well. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
work with our municipal partners, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
these are difficult decisions, but we have, year over year over 
year over year, increased funding to our municipalities until this 
year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Lots of talk, Mr. Speaker, but no answers for 
municipalities who are being forced to pay for their decade-long 
run of mismanagement, scandal, and waste. Yesterday the 
minister tried to downplay the importance of the agreements 
with our towns and cities, and we saw her do that just again 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a contract or a letter of agreement, 
they’ve got the government’s signature at the bottom. And the 
fact is, Mr. Speaker, she doesn’t like these agreements, so she 
scrapped them. Will the minister admit that if she really thought 
she was on good ground, she wouldn’t be tying the hands of 

municipal leaders with Bill 64 and the immunity clause that 
stops our cities, towns, and villages from defending themselves 
and Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite looking 
forward to when we go to committee on this bill because the 
member opposite obviously does not know this file. Mr. 
Speaker, there are 19 contracts. There are 9 contracts with 
SaskEnergy, all of them have termination language within the 
contract. There are 10 contracts with SaskPower. There’s one 
letter, and in the letter it states that SaskPower is not obliged to 
make that payment, right in the letter. For the other hundred 
communities, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing. There is . . . 
[inaudible] . . . in paper. There is no letter. There is no contract. 
There is no deal that was made, Mr. Speaker, and the member 
opposite needs to recognize that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the member can deflect all she 
wants, but she should be listening to the mayors and councillors 
who aren’t buying what she’s selling. The Saskatoon tax hikes, 
that’s Sask Party tax hikes. The service cuts in Regina, those are 
Sask Party service cuts. In Yorkton and North Battleford where 
taxes are going up and badly needed upgrades are being put on 
hold, that’s on the Sask Party. And, Mr. Speaker, in Prince 
Albert, where after 10 years in government, the Sask Party still 
hasn’t built a second bridge. 
 
Well it’s clear how little the Sask Party cares about 
communities and the economy and Prince Albert and the North. 
After a decade of Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste, how can the Sask Party justify forcing our hometowns to 
pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in the city of Saskatoon, 
two and a half times the revenue-sharing money that they 
received under the previous NDP government, that’s Sask Party 
increases. Mr. Speaker, in this budget alone, $15 million to 
Saskatoon for a bridge. That’s Sask Party’s money that’s 
funding, that’s going into Saskatoon’s bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased revenue sharing overall across 
the province by over 100 per cent. That’s over double, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s even higher for all of our urban communities. Mr. 
Speaker, we have spent a record number of dollars on 
infrastructure in this province because it was totally neglected 
by the NDP government previous. Mr. Speaker, we have given 
tax breaks within this province. There used to be tax breaks 
around the entire province, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP. We 
have changed that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is how she thinks we misspend money, really? 
It went to municipalities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

Northcote. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The minister keeps saying that these 
agreements are, in her words, unfair. She keeps using that word. 
I do not think it means what she thinks it means. Mr. Speaker, 
here’s an easy question for the minister. What is unfair about 
municipalities being fairly compensated for giving up their 
utility networks because that’s what the payments are for? And, 
Mr. Speaker, what does the minister think is fair about her 
rewriting the rules, ripping up agreements, and forcing 
municipalities to pick up the tab? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, when she talks about the 
payments that were made to the small urban centres, it was for 
gas. They didn’t have gas distribution companies, Mr. Speaker. 
There was none in the province. And when I talk about it being 
unfair, how is it fair that Lanigan received a payment? You go 
down the highway, Viscount does not. And you go a little 
further down the highway, Colonsay does. You go a little 
further down the highway, Clavet does not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is fair about that? None of them had a gas 
distribution company. They had nothing to sell. So there is no 
agreements. There is no letters. There is nothing on the 
grants-in-lieu from SaskEnergy that she’s referring to, Mr. 
Speaker. She needs to get to know her file. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, throughout question period 
we saw members of the opposition standing up for 
Saskatchewan people. What we see the Sask Party doing day in, 
day out is standing up for the wealthy and well connected. And 
that’s a choice they made in this budget with a cut, if you can 
imagine, to the tax rate for the biggest corporations in 
Saskatchewan, at the same time as they put at risk and attack 
the most vulnerable in this province, at the same time as they 
pound families with tax hike after tax hike, ripping up 
agreements. Yes, agreements with our municipalities all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To pretend otherwise is a load of nonsense, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
sat with mayors all across this province. I’ve sat with the mayor 
of Yorkton who handed to me a contract, a contract and 
agreement that that government signed. They ripped it up. How 
does the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan defend ripping up 
these contracts, pounding families, attacking the most 
vulnerable, all while giving big giveaways to the wealthiest and 
the most well connected? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Here we see again the blarney and the 
bluster of the Leader of the Opposition, the interim Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who last week, that party over 
there could not take a position on the school system in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We had the Education critic go out there 
in front of the media and say one thing, and then the Leader of 
the Opposition hauled her out yesterday and said, no this is our 
position; well we think this is our position on the school system 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He will not confirm what the NDP position is on the school 
system in this province, Mr. Speaker, expecting parents to pay 
10 to $12,000 if they are a non-Catholic student attending a 
Catholic school in this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s a problem 
for that interim Leader of the Opposition, which is why he will 
not be running for the full-time job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the province’s financial situation, on the province’s 
financial situation, Mr. Speaker, this party over here, this 
government has a three-year plan to get back to balance, Mr. 
Speaker. Just today, just today the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service, DBRS, put out their news release evaluating our fiscal 
position in the province. They said . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, DBRS said today: 
 

The Province’s fiscal position and economy have been 
challenged by weaker commodity prices in recent years. 
However, DBRS believes that the Province’s plan to 
restore balance over the medium term is credible and will 
limit the further accumulation of debt. Saskatchewan’s 
ratings remain well supported by the relatively low debt 
burden, responsive fiscal policy and underlying potential of 
the province’s economy. 

 
DBRS believes that the three-year plan to return to balance is 
credible and coherent. I look forward to the Alberta report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize a member of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and this bill will now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 52 and 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this bill now be read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 52 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:36 until 14:38.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 44] 
 
Moe Wyant Reiter 
Morgan Harpauer Doherty 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Weekes Hart Kirsch 
Bradshaw Steinley Makowsky 
Phillips Lawrence Wilson 
Campeau Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis McMorris Bonk 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt McCall Sarauer 
Meili   
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

44; those opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 360 through 362. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 360 to 362. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 363 and 364. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has ordered responses to questions 
363 and 364. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to 365 through 370. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the answers 
to questions 365 to 370. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017. This legislation implements various 
provincial sales tax changes that were announced on March 
22nd, 2017 as part of the 2017-18 provincial budget. These PST 
[provincial sales tax] measures create a broader sustainable 
revenue base and reduce government’s reliance on resource 
revenues. The PST rate has been increased from 5 per cent to 6 
per cent effective March 23rd, 2017. Effective April 1, 2017, 
PST will now apply to real property services, restaurant meals 
and snack food, children’s clothing, and the full price of new 
and used light vehicles on which the PST has not previously 
been paid. Effective July 1, 2017, PST will also apply to 
insurance premiums. Mr. Speaker, this legislation includes a 
new section which adds offences and penalties for persons 
failing to become licensed to collect and remit the PST. 
 
Some housekeeping items are included in the amendments 
which strengthen and modernize the Act to sustain the 
province’s revenue base in today’s ever-changing business 
environment. These housekeeping amendments include: 
repealing the definition of “computer services,” which will be 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

added to the regulations to enable a more proactive approach to 
the ever-changing digital environment; defining the term 
“lease” to help identify, distinguish, and clarify a rental of 
tangible personal property; amending the definition of “tangible 
personal property” to include gasses, which aligns with 
definitions used in other jurisdictions; limiting refunds on 
construction contracts to the tax amounts paid in error; and 
enhancing the definition of “vendor” to include e-commerce 
businesses selling and shipping goods into the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
reading on Bill No. 70. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. From 
the official opposition perspective, I want to offer our initial 
comments around Bill 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment 
Act. And as the minister alluded, there isn’t a tax that the 
conservatives across the way will not find and increase for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want all the people in the province to 
know this: this budget, this budget, Mr. Speaker, and all the 
sales tax identified in this particular bill is an attack on the 
middle class people of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
everywhere you look, whether it’s insurance premiums, 
children’s clothing, construction labour, restaurant meals, Mr. 
Speaker, there isn’t a tax that the Saskatchewan Party cannot 
find and raise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
About the only thing that the Saskatchewan Party’s done that 
was proper in terms of royalty, Mr. Speaker, is they’ve followed 
the formula developed by Lorne Calvert and the New 
Democrats when they wanted to attract the oil and gas sector 
and also attract the potash industry here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we told them at that time, do not mess with that formula; it 
works. We’re seeing a lot of investment in the oil and gas 
sector. We’re also seeing a lot of investment in the potash 
sector, Mr. Speaker, so do not mess with that formula. It was 
designed by the people of Saskatchewan under an NDP 
government and, Mr. Speaker, that’s about the only advice that 
we see them taking on this side of the Assembly. And we also 
said, protect the most vulnerable people in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and they have not done either. 
 
Now I stood, I listened with great interest as the Finance 
minister was talking about his three-year plan during question 
period. And all I can see, Mr. Speaker, in all the projections, in 
all the plans that they have done, is that at very least they have 
consistently provided Saskatchewan with deficit after deficit 
after deficit, year after year after year. So for the next three 
years, Mr. Speaker, the next three years it’s going to be more 
debt, more cuts, and more waste, compliments of the Sask Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. And you notice how they try and 
deflect. And I tell people across the province very clearly, a 
very clear message is, how is it that as a party, how is it as a 
party that you come into power in 2007, you find two and a half 

billion dollars in the bank left you by the people of 
Saskatchewan under the NDP government, and then you inherit 
a booming economy, a growing population, and a short nine 
years later we’re now facing debt of $23 billion in three years? 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also finding we’re growing deficit after 
deficit. There is cuts happening left, right, and centre, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So to the fiscal conservative out there, I tell them this: the 
Saskatchewan Party not only have provided the people of 
Saskatchewan with deficit after deficit after deficit. They have 
increased our debt to 23 billion, which is the projection for 
2022. We are now going through the P3 [public-private 
partnership] phase in which they’re going to continue to punt 
some of that debt on some of the P3 projects in our province, 
including the bypass and some of the other projects that we 
made reference to, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to punt that debt 
further down the road. 
 
So what is happening here? I’ll make it very crystal clear. As a 
result of their mismanagement, as a result of the simple fact, 
from my perspective, they don’t know what they’re doing, the 
Saskatchewan people will pay and pay and pay and pay. Now 
here is the worst part, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to be paying 
more on insurance premiums. They’re going to be paying more 
on children’s clothing. Now the construction labour is being 
taxed in the province. Now you’re going to have restaurant 
meals that are going to be taxed, Mr. Speaker. But the worst 
part of this all, Mr. Speaker, is all of us in Saskatchewan 
continue to pay more. And again I’ll say this in the Assembly, 
that there isn’t a tax that the Sask Party does not like. They will 
find anything that they can possibly tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan; they will search for that. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re finding evidence that Bill 70, that now they’ve expanded 
the tax, increased the tax and, Mr. Speaker, the worst part is the 
fiscal conservatives out in Saskatchewanland, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not what they view the Saskatchewan Party as the party 
that should be doing that. Quite frankly, they’re very angry. 
They are very angry. 
 
Now I want to also point out, Mr. Speaker, on the municipal 
front as well, the minister responsible for the cities and towns 
and villages sits in her place and talks about her file, Mr. 
Speaker. She took money from the towns, the villages, and the 
cities, Mr. Speaker. She reduced their operating grants through 
grants-in-lieu. So what’s going to happen in the cities like 
Saskatoon, Regina, and a number of other communities is that 
they’re going to have to do two things. The cities have two 
choices. They can either cut services or increase property tax. 
And based on the amount of money the Sask Party is clawing 
back from our municipalities, now they’re forced to do both, 
Mr. Speaker. They are forced to do both. 
 
So now to the people of Saskatchewan I will say that all the tax 
hikes, whether it’s municipal, children’s clothing, whether it’s 
restaurant meals, are Sask Party tax hikes. They’re trying to use 
the cities and they’re trying to use the villages and towns as a 
scapegoat, and this is where SUMA is standing up and telling 
them, no way. This is a Sask Party tax hike. The people in our 
cities and our towns are going to be paying more for their 
property tax. 
 
And let us be very crystal clear. This government has been in 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2017 

charge for 10 years. All the tax hikes are theirs. All the 
reductions in services are their responsibility. And they try and 
deflect, they try and deny, and they try and add doubt through 
the process but, Mr. Speaker, the buck stops here. The 
Saskatchewan Party are responsible for these cuts. They’re 
responsible for every price increase and every tax that we pay. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re also hitting you in the pocketbook 
when it comes to property tax that the cities are now forced to 
hike. 
 
So let us, from the opposition perspective, say this very clearly, 
Mr. Speaker. Year after year, year after year we’ve had deficit 
after deficit after deficit from the Saskatchewan Party 
government. Now this year we see a billion-dollar increase, $1 
billion increase in a tax grab by that minister and by that party. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, don’t forget where this particular party 
started off with. They started off with money in the bank, a 
record amount of revenue over the last 10 years. They had a 
growing population and they had a booming economy. And 
now, 10 years later, our debt is at that level. So I say this to the 
fiscal conservatives out there, that the Saskatchewan Party has 
failed miserably on that front. They have not been very fiscally 
sound in some of their strategies and approaches. They have 
destroyed and they have quite frankly ham-handed or they have 
quite frankly compromised our future and this is exactly what 
my message is today, as a result of Bill 70. 
 
Now I would also point out to the people of Saskatchewan this 
very compelling argument. If we all understand, we all 
understand that everybody has to do their part to build a strong 
province. We appreciate that. We appreciate the work ethic of 
the farm community. We appreciate the contributions of the 
corporate world. We appreciate the businesses, the small and 
large, that do a lot to employ people and stimulate the economy. 
We all see those folks doing a tremendous job, really 
strengthening and building our economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also see the families that are struggling. 
They are struggling to make ends meet. If it’s not one thing, it’s 
another thing at the end of the month. And now they have this 
whole notion of more taxes being placed on them by the 
Saskatchewan Party. So every tax hike from March 31st this 
year is a direct result of the Sask Party tax hike. Remember that, 
folks. Remember that as they come knocking on your door 
pretending to be, that this is somebody else’s fault. It is their 
own scandal, their own mismanagement and waste that created 
this problem. And that’s where, Mr. Speaker, that all the blame 
should lie. 
 
Now the very . . . I was mentioning that very critical argument 
and the point that I’d like to raise. It’s that as everybody does 
their part, Mr. Speaker, and including the middle class, people 
that are struggling each month to try and maintain their standard 
of living, that want to continue paying their mortgage . . . and 
certainly people that, also struggling in some of the lower 
income bracket. Mr. Speaker, we’re all doing our part. 
 
We, as we go to restaurant meals, we pay more now. As we 
insure our homes, we pay more. As we live in our communities, 
we pay more. And as we buy things like children’s clothing, we 
pay more. All those payments, all that extra payment, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all it’s compliments of the Saskatchewan Party. 

That’s the first point I want to make. 
 
The second point is, Mr. Speaker, it would not be so bad, it 
would not be so bad I think if people out there understood that 
there was an end to all the taxes that they’re putting in place and 
that this end would come sooner. But the problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that all that money taken out to taxation from the 
middle class and those of lower income earning brackets is 
actually going to the wealthy and well connected. It’s not going 
to the deficit. It’s not going to the debt, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
problem that we have. 
 
And I for one am absolutely shocked that people in 
Saskatchewan still don’t realize that the Saskatchewan Party’s 
tax hikes is not going, is not going to reduce the debt overall, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s not going to reduce the deficit. It’s going to 
the wealthy and well connected. And we’ll continue suffering 
through debt and we will continue suffering through deficit 
unless and until we get rid of the Sask Party because, as I 
mentioned before, they couldn’t manage their way out of a wet 
paper bag. 
 
And Bill 70 is another example of how the Saskatchewan Party 
hasn’t been able to find a tax that they won’t hike. And it’s a 
shame. It’s a shame because they had record revenue and they 
inherited a booming economy. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a lot more people 
that have a lot more comment on this particular bill from our 
side of the Assembly and to point out that this bill also, Mr. 
Speaker, is giving $60 million in corporate tax giveaways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So once again, as you pay more in restaurant meals, as you pay 
more in insurance premiums, as you pay more for taxes, 
remember that is compliments of the Sask Party government. 
 
And it wouldn’t be so bad, Mr. Speaker, that you had a finite 
time and a finite amount that we can all do our part to 
contribute. But it’s not going to that cause. It’s going to 
continue to finance the wealthy and well-connected patrons of 
the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the NDP tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, it is time to get rid of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 70. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 
the work of committees this afternoon and this evening, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



May 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:56.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2361 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2362 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2363 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2363 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2363 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2364 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mechanical Contractors Association of Saskatchewan 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2364 
 Mental Health Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2365 
 Regina Real Canadian Superstore Grand Opening 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2365 
 World Press Freedom Award Winners 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2365 
 4-H Club Leader Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2366 
 New Sacred Heart School Opens in Regina 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2366 
 Evraz Regina to Supply Pipe for Trans Mountain Pipeline System 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2366 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2366 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 
 Status of SaskTel 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 
 Reporting of Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 
 Funding for Community-Based Organizations 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2368 
 Provision of Funeral Services 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2369 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2369 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2370 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2370 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2017 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2372 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2372 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2372 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2372 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2373 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


