


















































November 1, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2739 
 November 1, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
coming Monday marks the beginning of Family Doctor Week 
in Saskatchewan, and so I have an honoured and special guest 
sitting in your gallery: Dr. Rizqi Ibrahim of Swift Current. Mr. 
Speaker, he’s my doctor. He’s my GP [general practitioner] and 
has attended to our family as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s a good opportunity, I think, to highlight the importance 
of family doctors in the province. He’s just given us a wave. 
We were going to also be accompanied by an official from the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, but the highways prevented 
the individual from being here today. But we want to 
acknowledge the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] 
and their work to highlight the importance of general 
practitioners and family doctors in the province. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Ibrahim has been a leader in Swift 
Current, been a leader province-wide in the health care field. He 
has amazing stories. He started practising medicine in Swift 
Current in 1972 and he is still practising today. I had a visit 
with him just last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s got some amazing stories, including one he 
shared with me today that is from 1978, when he was called to 
the home of someone in Neville, some 28 miles or so south of 
Swift Current, who was about to deliver. And he made it out 
there. It took three hours to go those 28 miles through a 
snowstorm. He got out there and there wasn’t quite time to get 
back to Swift Current, so he delivered the baby right there in 
Neville. And the daughter’s name was Kelly; the little baby’s 
name was Kelly. He still attends to people in the family today. 
And this is an even better part of the story, Mr. Speaker — it 
turns out that the woman who delivered Kelly had time to make 
sure there was a roast in the oven, peas, homemade sour cream, 
and baked potatoes. And apparently they sat down to eat first, 
and then the baby was delivered, and everything turned out 
okay. 
 
He has been a great help to me as well, Mr. Speaker. He’s been 
my doctor since I was in grade school. I got hit in the head with 
a baseball bat and he stitched me up. Insert your own joke there, 
Mr. Speaker. My brother squished my finger putting up a 
Ping-Pong table after we were done playing, and he stitched 

that up. And any number of issues he’s helped with. I remember 
one, in particular, consultation he did with one of our kids who 
was just having some ailments and I remember him just sitting 
down with her and using a whiteboard, not very long ago, and 
explaining everything so perfectly, as well as providing the 
counsel and the help that in the end helped her immensely. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, we all value our family doctors in the 
province, and I just wanted to use this occasion to thank all of 
them for the great work that they do. 
 
And I do want to in particular want to acknowledge Dr. Ibrahim 
who has been the team doctor for the Swift Current Broncos for 
30 years; a team physician for Canada’s under-18 world junior 
hockey team, winning a gold and a silver medal in the process; 
a clinical lecturer to the department of family medicine, 
University of Saskatchewan; and an active member of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in acknowledging 
the work of family doctors across this province, to thank them 
for that work, and in particular, to welcome to his Legislative 
Assembly, Dr. Rizqi Ibrahim. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Premier in welcoming the Premier’s own doctor to 
this legislature, Dr. Ibrahim, and recognizing Family Doctor 
Week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I suspect that the doctor has many of those kinds of stories that 
the Premier just relayed. I know, thinking about the mother of 
Kelly, I can actually relate, Mr. Speaker. The morning my 
daughter was born, my water broke; I made muffins, and then 
had a baby a few hours later, Mr. Speaker. But I’m sure the 
doctor has many, many of those stories. 
 
And I actually appreciate the fact that he was the doctor for the 
under-18 junior hockey team. My nephew Rourke Chartier was 
on that team, so I don’t know when he was in fact in that role, 
but I can tell you as the auntie and the godmother of a nephew 
who has been a few times concussed that that doctor role is 
really important. 
 
As we all know, our family doctors are huge in helping us stay 
well and are really a critical part of the primary health care 
team. So I just want to join with the Premier in welcoming Dr. 
Ibrahim to his legislature and to thank family doctors for all the 
work that they do in keeping people of Saskatchewan well. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all the members of the Assembly, this 
afternoon it’s my pleasure to introduce some special guests in 
the Speaker’s gallery that we have here today. We have 
stakeholders who have participated in consultations with the 
ministry — my ministry, Parks, Culture and Sport — on the 
proposed new provincial park in the Porcupine Hills area. With 
us today are members from the Key First Nation who I’m very 
proud that they came down here today. Some drove in today on 
some tough highways. We have Chief Rodney Brass, councillor 
Glen O’Soup, councillor Angie Desjarlais, councillor Sydney 
Keshane, lands manager Vernon Friday, and project coordinator 
Randy Friday, and of course members of the ministry. 
 
They’re here to witness first reading of the new Parks bill. 
Consultations were undertaken, extensive consultations, and so 
we thank the members of the First Nation and Métis 
representatives and local community stakeholders whose input 
has shaped and will continue to influence the park vision and 
future management of this park. And of course we thank them 
for their service to their communities. 
 
Also in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Les and Terri Bergan from 
the hamlet of Little Swan. Les is a board member from the 
hamlet which is a resort community directly adjacent to the 
proposed park and participated in the same consultation 
process. They support the new park as a means of protecting the 
area so their children and grandchildren and future generations 
can enjoy it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our provincial parks are important for tourism 
and quality of life and our economy. They’re places where 
families visit to spend quality time together and where our 
natural environment is protected. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
all the members to help me welcome these local stakeholders 
from the Porcupine Hills area and thank them for coming down 
today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery is a 
school group from F.W. Johnson here in Regina Gardiner Park 
constituency, 35 grade 10 students, and they are accompanied 
by their teacher Scott McKillop, and chaperones Samantha 
Kelly and Sarah Hewson. So, members, please help me 
welcome this group of fine young students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these very 
important guests to their Legislative Assembly. I just want to 
say ahneen sikwa to Chief Rodney Brass and to the folks from 
Key First Nation. It comes from a very beautiful part of the 
world, and Key is always . . . it’s one of those First Nations that 
really has a lot going on for it. 
 
So it’s good to see that consultations are taking place on the 
new provincial park. We expect that those are going 
satisfactorily. It’s always great to see something in this regard, 
making sure that we’re protecting mother nature. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, this particular part of the world is especially 
beautiful. So it’s good to see Chief Rodney Brass and the folks 

from Key First Nation here at their Legislative Assembly here 
on Treaty 4 territory. It’s also good to see the Bergans coming 
forward to make their opinions clear on this new provincial 
park. 
 
So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members, on behalf 
of myself and on behalf of the official opposition, to welcome 
these very important people to their Legislative Assembly. 
Gichi-miigwech. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce an individual seated in the east gallery. 
Tara Jijian is here. She’s the provincial leader of the provincial 
Liberal Party. From one female leader to another, welcome. I’m 
sure you’ll find it’s an honour to be chosen to fill the role. And 
although I’m sure you’ll find it challenging, you’ll also find it 
extremely rewarding. So thank you for being here. Please, I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Tara to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a saying, who’s on 
first. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members opposite in 
welcoming members of the Liberal Party. We’re always glad to 
welcome people to the legislature and encourage them to 
participate in the parliamentary process. We’re pleased that 
they’re doing it from the gallery rather than on the floor, but 
want to wish them all the best and thank them for coming today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
introduce someone special seated in your gallery, someone who 
I had the honour of providing a member’s statement about 
yesterday, and that is Mr. Trevor Herriot. My member’s 
statement yesterday acknowledged Trevor’s award, the Cheryl 
and Henry Kloppenburg Award for Literary Excellence in this 
province. 
 
Trevor is here today to give a reading as part of the 
Saskatchewan Book Awards. And unfortunately, as we all 
know, the highways out there have prevented a number of 
people from making that trek today. We were also expecting 
readings from Bill Waiser and Louise Halfe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the important voice 
that Trevor has in this province. I want to paraphrase, the 
scientist’s mind and the poet’s heart, and I thank him for his 
very important voice, literary voice, but also his voice on CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio and in so many 
other forums around this province. He and his wife, Karen, do 
reside in Regina Lakeview, and it’s always a great day when I 
get to knock on their door and have conversation. I always learn 
a lot. 
 
And I also more broadly want to just thank the Legislative 
Library and thank the Saskatchewan Book Awards for 
highlighting the Sask Book Awards and the really exceptional 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

literary talent that we are really blessed with in this province. It 
is such an important part of our culture in Saskatchewan, these 
great authors. And I welcome Trevor to his Legislative 
Assembly and invite all members to thank Trevor and the Sask 
Book Awards and all of the authors in this province for their 
important contributions. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to welcome some guests to 
our Assembly today. I was scooped by the member from 
Lakeview in welcoming our guests that were here today for the 
awards, but I do want to thank them for the work that they do 
and the sharing of stories, and thank you so much for taking 
time out of your day to make it here as well. 
 
Also seated in the Speaker’s gallery is two individuals. First off 
Cherrise, if you would give us a wave. Cherrise has been 
working as a summer student in the Speaker’s office under the 
former Speaker, and I was lucky enough to have her serve in 
that role last summer. And she’s continuing her studies at the U 
of R [University of Regina] and still working part-time in our 
office, but we will be losing her after Christmas. And I just 
wanted to thank Cherrise for all the hard work and would ask 
everyone to give her a round of applause. 
 
As much as my name’s on the door and as other members have 
their names on the door of offices in this building, it’s really the 
staff that make things possible and do the heavy work. I’m 
lucky to have Sheila Sterling, who has worked with past 
Speakers and continues in that role in my office. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And to help her out, we have found a very capable individual. If 
you would, please welcome a native of Moncton, someone that 
was born on the East Coast, raised in Coal Lake, and now 
resides in our province. Hayley Lucas — if you would please 
rise and give a wave for all the members — has agreed to join 
our office. She is now no longer cheering for the evil empire 
and we’re going to be getting her some Rider gear here shortly. 
So please welcome Hayley Lucas to the Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Biggar and 
Landis. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes 
for Saskatchewan families and businesses, Mr. Speaker. The 
petitioners point out the Sask Party has hiked taxes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses by $1 billion a year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party increased the PST [provincial sales tax] to 6 per 
cent and applied it to everything, from groceries and children’s 
clothes to a case of beer and even insurance premiums, Mr. 
Speaker. Because of the Sask Party’s PST increases, we’re the 
only province in the country where people are charged PST on 
life and health insurance premiums. 
 
I know in my office this summer . . . And I’m sure members 
opposite heard loud and clear from many people that PST on 
things like health and life insurance is unacceptable. I know 
many seniors came to speak to me about their huge concerns. 
They didn’t know it right when the budget happened, but when 
they started renewing their insurance, Mr. Speaker, and saw the 
6 per cent, they wanted to make sure that I was conveying this 
message to this government that that is not the right approach, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Regina. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present yet another petition as it 
pertains to closing the main street to Highway No. 1 in the town 
of Balgonie. And, Mr. Speaker, the people in the town of 
Balgonie are very, very upset, and they have signed this 
petition. And the prayer, it reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and 
Balgonie’s Main Street. 
 
They also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Balgonie are fighting back. 
They have got signatures from all throughout the province, 
from all throughout our land. And the people that have signed 
these two pages of petitions that I am presenting today are from 
Regina. They’re from Pilot Butte. They’re from White City, and 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

they’re also from Balgonie. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge in 
Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this 
petition would like me to draw attention to the following facts: 
the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today.  
 
Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources especially now and require a second bridge to 
be funded through federal and provincial governments and not a 
P3 [public-private partnership] model; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert and its critical infrastructure issue. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask the 
Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding behind 
rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling for 
action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial funding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition are 
from the city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition to 
reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. The citizens 
of Buffalo Narrows wish to bring to your attention that the 
closure of Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre left 15 persons 
out of work and had a financial impact on their families and all 
local business; that the closure hurt elders in our community 
and hurt the families of inmates; that the closure of Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre took inmates away from their 
families, making visitation difficult or non-existent; and that the 
closure took away from inmates their opportunity to get 
treatment and to obtain training tickets. 
 
I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that follows, respectfully request that the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan do immediately 
reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre to better 
our community for future generations to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Buffalo 
Narrows. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Honouring Attack Victims 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to recognize the victims of yesterday’s violent attacks in 
New York City. Those injured, the families of the victims, and 
all people of New York City are in our thoughts and our prayers 
during this difficult time. 
 
Our thoughts turn to Edmonton, where a similar attack recently 
shocked us all. That reminder that attacks and tragic events of 
this nature are no longer isolated incidents leaves us both 
shocked and angry. This troubling trend worldwide shows us 
the darker side of the world we share together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hatred has no place in our province, our country, 
or our world. But it is in times of tragedy and despair that our 
communities can show our true strength and resilience by 
coming together and by standing together as one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to observe a 
moment of silence in honour of yesterday’s victims. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Movember and Prostate Cancer Awareness 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
moustache you a question. What would you do to prevent men 
from dying too young? Being Movember, men all around the 
world are attempting to grow a moustache. Whether they rock 
the handlebar, Dali, Fu Manchu, or painter’s brush, these 
moustaches undoubtedly spark important discussion about 
men’s health. All the while, moustache growers raise funds for 
the Movember Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again members of our caucus will be 
growing mos in an effort to help change the face of men’s 
health. Our team will be led by the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health, who has so far completed treatment in his battle 
against colorectal cancer. He will be joined by the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Minister of Advanced Ed, the Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure, and myself. 
 
This year in response to increasing numbers of men who take 
their own lives around the world, the Movember Foundation is 
expanding its focus on mental health and suicide prevention. 
The foundation has set a goal of reducing male suicides by 25 
per cent by 2030 through education, providing service, and 
fighting against the stigmas of talking about mental health. 
With everyone’s help we can achieve this goal. 
 
And so I ask all members to join me in supporting this 
important fundraising movement to encourage the men in their 
lives to take steps towards better health. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is Prostate 
Cancer Awareness Month. In recent years it’s probably been 
better known as Movember, and I for one will be participating 
in growing out a moustache to raise money and awareness for 
men’s health issues. 
 
There is certainly more that we need to do to improve access 
and availability of mental health services in all parts of the 
province, but we also need to make sure the stigma associated 
with mental illness goes away and that men everywhere know 
that they can come forward and get the help they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been nine and a half years since my own 
prostate cancer diagnosis. We all know that cancer knows no 
political affiliation. I think all members in this House can speak 
to the impact that a cancer diagnosis can have on friends and 
family. That’s why it’s so important to stay optimistic and never 
lose hope. I know my colleague, the member from 
Lumsden-Morse, is a survivor and an advocate for prostate 
cancer awareness. And I’d also like to offer my support to the 
member from Yorkton as he continues his battle with cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the physical battle is tough, but I must say the 
mental challenge of dealing with cancer and treatment can be 
just as difficult. That’s why we must support each other. We 
must treat each other better, no matter what divides us. We are 
all in this together. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing the month of Movember and in thanking all those 
involved with organizing and promoting this very important 
event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Project in Nipawin 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past month I 
attended the celebration of the opening of the latest Habitat for 
Humanity project in Nipawin. This was a very special day for 
Laura Lofstrom and her children Dante, Mattea, and Madison, 
as well as all others involved in this important project. 
 
Laura and her children played a significant role in the building 
of their brand new home. In order to have the opportunity to 
own their own home, they had to provide 500 hours of 
volunteer hands-on labour. I have no doubt that they are very 
proud of their efforts for their new home and are looking 
forward to creating new memories together. 
 
The Habitat for Humanity is proof of what can be accomplished 
when a community comes together, realizing a dream and 
making that vision a reality. Not only will a family benefit from 
this build, but also the hard-working organizers and volunteers, 
as this is a life-changing project to be part of. Mr. Speaker, 
since 2009 Habitat for Humanity, along with a $9.85 million 
investment from our province, has completed or has under 
construction 172 units in 13 communities across Saskatchewan. 
The town of Nipawin has received funding of $165,000 for 
three homes.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the town of Nipawin for 

providing the land for this new home for Laura and her family. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
volunteers, town of Nipawin, and Laura Lofstrom on a 
successful build. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 

2017 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on October 21st, I, along with the members from 
Saskatoon University, Saskatoon Westview, Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood, and Regina University were pleased to be 
able to attend this year’s ABEX [Achievement in Business 
Excellence] Awards, presented by Conexus Credit Union and 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
 
This year’s winners were: IntraGrain Technologies for 
Innovation; CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 
Saskatchewan for Service; Vendasta for Export; S & E Trusted 
Online Directories for Community Involvement, Sarah 
Wheelwright; North Ridge Development Corporation for 
Priority Focus; Wally Mah, Dustin Nehring, and Taylor Lang, 
N.L. Construction Inc. for Young Entrepreneur of the Year 
Award; the Deveraux Group of Companies for Growth and 
Expansion, Denis Jones; Diamonds of Detroit for Marketing; 
and 9 Mile Legacy Brewing Company Ltd. for New Venture. 
 
Saskatchewan’s northern businesses were the big winners of the 
evening, with Areva Resources Canada inducted into the 
Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame. Business Leader of the 
Year awarded to Geoff Gay; Community Leader of the Year 
awarded to Chief Tammy Cook-Searson. The CAA was the 
recipient of the Business of the Year Award, and the former 
CEO [chief executive officer] of the Greater Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce, my good friend of mine, Kent 
Smith-Windsor, was the recipient of the Roger Phillips Builder 
Award. Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the 
outstanding nominees, finalists, and winners on their success at 
the 2017 ABEX Awards. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Couple Saves Two Lives in Rescue 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
recognize a brave couple who this past Sunday night helped 
save two lives. While travelling just west of Melfort, Dale Peet 
and his wife, Leslie, noticed a truck in the ditch with its lights 
still on, upside down in water. They quickly learned that the 
driver, along with the passenger, was trapped in the truck. 
Leslie called 911 while Dale waded through the water and was 
able to break them free from the truck by smashing the window. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the driver of the truck had to hold the passenger’s 
head out of the water because the passenger was unable to do 
so, and the driver kept the passenger alive. They were able to 
make it safely out of the truck and onto the dry bank where the 
Melfort EMS [emergency medical services] were waiting. 
 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, Dale works as operations manager at the SaskTel 
office in Prince Albert. He says he’s very glad to have had his 
survival kit with him in his vehicle, and after the events of 
Sunday night, he has purchased a seat belt cutter which he now 
carries on his key chain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in thanking 
Dale Peet and his wife, Leslie, for their incredible act of 
bravery. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

New Schools in Saskatoon Southeast 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand today and say that the new joint-use school in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast has opened for this school 
year. Saskatoon Public École Colette Bourgonje School and 
Saskatoon Catholic’s École St. Thérèse of Lisieux are the two 
new schools in the Rosewood neighbourhood. This build was 
made possible through hard work and collaboration that 
included input from students, teachers, parents, school 
divisions, and community members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce that this P3 build finished 
on time and on budget, and using this P3 model will save 
Saskatchewan taxpayers $100 million. The model has been so 
successful that another province has copied it. Manitoba is 
using the Saskatchewan P3 model to build new schools across 
their province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t so long ago that instead of celebrating 
the opening of new schools, Saskatchewan was losing people. 
School enrolment was declining and the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] was closing schools — 176 schools throughout the 
province. Today our population is growing. School enrolment is 
growing, and our Saskatchewan Party government is opening 
new schools. Our record speaks for itself. We have opened a 
total of 40 new schools, 21 of which are opening this year, 
along with 25 major renovations to existing schools. For our 
government, these new schools are about making students, staff, 
and education our top priority in meeting the demands of 
growth in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Responses to Sexual Harassment Allegations 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, if anyone here didn’t know 
before, they’ve surely seen the Me Too campaign. Sexual 
harassment affects all of us and exists in all kinds of 
institutions. In politics, our party is not immune, but we are not 
alone. This is an issue that we take seriously. Everyone should. 
And I had hoped that the Premier agreed. 
 
But yesterday, instead of answering a simple question, the 
Premier dragged this place to the level of online comment 
sections. The Premier used survivor stories and compared their 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal to our serious, 
direct, and open approach to addressing sexual harassment 

allegations, and making our party a safer place for everyone. To 
say the least, it was offensive. 
 
If he wants to keep hiding from accountability, that’s his choice 
and it’s something we’ll keep calling him out for. But 
comparing those two issues, it’s offensive and should be 
beneath any of us. So I would like to give the Premier the 
opportunity to stand and retract his comments. New Democrats 
will keep working to make all spaces, including our own party, 
safer and more inclusive. Will the Premier, at the very least, 
retract his offensive statement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I indicated that 
the NDP had questions to answer as a result of some of the 
events she’s just canvassed. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out 
that when a young woman came forward and alleged to have 
been raped by a former NDP candidate, the Leader of the 
Opposition, I think quite rightly, said she believed survivors. 
She said that on several occasions; I give her credit for that. The 
individual though that was alleged to have perpetrated the rape, 
I believe is still a member of the party. The Leader of the 
Opposition, when she had the chance to say unequivocally the 
person shouldn’t be a member of her party, deferred to some 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re wanting to send powerful signals about 
this issue and how unacceptable it is, we need leaders on both 
sides of the aisle and throughout the province to say the person 
that we believe, because the member said she believed the 
individual was raped . . . The person that perpetrated has no 
business being a member of any organization we lead. That 
would have been leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well they’re saying we should be ashamed. We also have an 
occasion where the same person, the same person that she said 
she believes as someone who is a survivor, tweeted that another 
individual had been harassed within the NDP and that that 
person went to the then leader of the NDP who said that that 
person should go to the police. But the individual who was 
accused of the harassment — and that member said she 
believed the survivors, the leader does — the person who was 
alleged to have done the harassment is still working in an NDP 
office. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, maybe these are allegations, but I think that 
it’s important, given the discussion around the world today that 
are centred on allegations, that questions are answered 
transparently and these questions remain for members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be involved in 
silencing a survivor, but I will also not be involved in outing a 
survivor as well. Shame on this Premier for using these words 
for cheap political points. And I have complete confidence in 
every single member of my caucus. 
 
What I do not have confidence in is this Sask Party government 
and that Premier. If he wants to spend his final days in this 
place stooping this low, that’s on him. And if that caucus wants 
to keep supporting that, that’s on them as well. We’re going to 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

keep doing our jobs over here. We’re going to keep working 
with genuine resolve to address issues in our party and make it 
— this place and our province — more safe and more inclusive. 
And we’re going to keep holding that Sask Party to account for 
their scandals that wasted millions and fell short of the trust 
Saskatchewan people have offered them. 
 
With that, let me ask: when he was interviewed by the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police], did the Premier stick with 
what he said, that he knew what was going on at the GTH all 
along, or did he back up his office’s official statement that he 
had nothing to do with any negotiations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these aren’t speculations on 
my part. These are the words of a survivor that has come 
forward, that the Leader of the Opposition has said she believes, 
she believes, Mr. Speaker. So, so, Mr. Speaker, especially when 
we face over there a party that had women coming forward, 
when it was in office, that had women coming forward alleging 
sexual harassment of an individual with connections to 
members of that party over there, and were not prepared to act 
until it was exposed, in part by the opposition — it was the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal — and in fact were prepared to pay 
him off. That’s the history of this party. These are questions for 
this House. They’re questions that should be asked around the 
province. 
 
The individual, Mr. Speaker, the individual who brought 
forward the complaints in the first place tweeted this. The same 
young woman tweeted that her friend had been sexually 
assaulted by another former NDP candidate at the last year’s 
NDP provincial convention. I think she might be referring to 
someone working in the offices. Here’s what she tweeted. This 
is her tweeting, not me. Here’s what she tweeted: 
 

Three months after convention my friend met with Trent 
Wotherspoon [and I’m quoting] and filed a report. He told 
her to go to police. Three months later with no evidence 
and nothing really happening, so a report was filed with 
caucus [This is her tweet, not mine.] and now almost a 
year later they decided to look past all of that and hire him 
as a CA. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if any of the allegations are true, but 
given how serious they are, you bet I believe that party over 
there, that person that wants to be the premier of the province 
and lead his party, should be answering questions, 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, that survivor has specifically 
asked for her story not to be used for political gain, and this 
Premier is completely ignoring what the survivor has requested. 
I’m going to give the Premier one more chance to retract his 
offensive statements. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m going to give that leader of the NDP 
one more chance to explain to the members of this House, and 
more importantly the people of the province, and more 

importantly survivors, how someone who she believes raped 
somebody within the construct of their party, how that person is 
allowed to be a member of their party. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Review of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s about as disgusting 
and about as low as it can get in this Assembly, well beneath 
any one of us in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Those aren’t his 
stories to tell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been on the floor of this Assembly since 
June 30th, 2016, every day during every session, fighting for 
accountability on that Premier and that Sask Party’s GTH 
scandal. You know, now the Premier wants to suggest, as he did 
yesterday, “I think the government’s track record in this 
particular instance has been to fully answer all the questions.” 
Mr. Speaker, honestly, how can the Premier of Saskatchewan 
say that with a straight face? I don’t think the Premier’s given a 
fulsome answer to a single question in this Assembly, let alone 
answering to this scandal. 
 
And, of course, you have the member from Meadow Lake. Well 
I don’t even have to get started, Mr. Speaker. But now we 
know, of course, what the member from Meadow Lake really 
thinks about the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. So my question to 
the Premier: does he agree now with the member from Meadow 
Lake? Why didn’t he fire Bill Boyd, the minister that was 
plagued with scandals a long time ago, or that Sask Party 
operator that’s working for government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Environment, GTH and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to this question around the Global 
Transportation Hub, the government, in terms of being 
accountable, in terms of co-operating fully with the Provincial 
Auditor, in terms of co-operating fully with all authorities, have 
done the right thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been canvassed, has provided 
cabinet documents to all authorities that are looking into this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way that this government 
operates on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We are 
working and cooperating with everybody to be fully transparent 
and fully accountable, Mr. Speaker, and we will stand on our 
record on this side of the House, as opposed to the members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I expect better from that 
member. I don’t expect any better from the Premier anymore, 
though. You know, of course we know this went to the auditor. 
And of course we know as well that the RCMP are investigating 
this and that the RCMP have questioned that very Premier — 
the sitting Premier of Saskatchewan — on this matter. We know 
that it’s over at the prosecutor’s here right now. 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

Yesterday of course we have the Premier suggesting that 
somehow there was some level of accountability at the Public 
Accounts Committee. Well, Mr. Speaker, every single MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] with the Sask Party 
voted against having witnesses like Laurie Pushor before that 
Public Accounts Committee. Every single member within that 
committee — Sask Party member — voted against allowing 
more questions despite the fact that there were many more. 
 
So my question is to the Premier, not to the new minister that’s 
there to block and deflect: if he thinks so highly of Bill Boyd, 
the former minister that was plagued by scandal, if he trusts so 
much in Laurie Pushor, why won’t he insist that they come 
before committee as soon as possible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Global Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would suggest that we not take very highly who that member is 
going to point out in terms of who we should be . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . yes, questioning the conduct on, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of whose judgment we should be trusting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has indicated that the 
government is not closing doors in terms of a further review and 
further transparency and accountability on this measure, Mr. 
Speaker, we have co-operated fully. We have worked closely 
with an independent officer of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and 
so again, as the Premier has indicated, we will not be closing 
doors to further ways to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan 
have full knowledge of the Global Transportation Hub. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t like our 
questions. I get that. But even the Sask Party leadership 
candidates have raised questions and undermined the Premier’s 
position. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Willowgrove has said 
that he would “immediately begin action to sell the GTH to the 
private sector.” He goes on, Mr. Speaker: “The revenue to the 
government can be used for more critical areas such as health 
care, education, and social services.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been our point all along. The Sask Party 
have been losing millions through waste caused by 
mismanagement and scandal at the GTH and they’ve been 
making the people of Saskatchewan pay the price with cuts to 
education, health care, and the services we all rely on every day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with the member from 
Saskatoon Willowgrove, possible future premier of this 
province? Should the GTH be sold so that we can reverse the 
Sask Party’s heartless cuts, unfair tax hikes, and desperate 
sell-offs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Global Transportation Hub. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly can say that the government, working in 
conjunction with the board of directors, the management and 
staff of the Global Transportation Hub, are doing everything 
that we can to ensure that this is a successful generational 
project for the people of Saskatchewan. I would quote Peter 
Wallis, the past president of the Van Horne Institute, who says, 
“The development of the GTH opens up Saskatchewan 
companies to benefits of an efficient connection to world trade, 
particularly with the Asia-Pacific region.” 
 
I would go on to quote another individual, who said . . . And 
this is actually the member from Athabasca, March 4, 2013: 
 

. . . this opportunity that the NDP envisioned in 2006 
[interesting], that it would be absolutely phenomenal for 
the city to work in concert with these companies to 
encourage job creation [862 full-time employees and 1,804 
construction jobs], to encourage investment [$485 million 
in private investment], and to encourage profit for these 
companies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work hard to see that 
this project is a success on an ongoing basis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how they spin it, their 
mismanagement, their scandal, and their waste is costing 
Saskatchewan people. Today for instance, it’s not just the first 
day of Movember, but because of the PST hike, it’s also the 
first day of the newly raised rates for SaskEnergy customers. 
Saskatchewan people, ratepayers, and their homes and 
businesses will be paying 3.6 per cent more, and that’s even 
higher than the 2.95 per cent hike recommended by the experts 
at the Saskatchewan rate review panel on October 4th. 
 
That 3.6 per cent hike means $9 million more out of the pockets 
of Saskatchewan people. Now in committee the minister 
admitted that their PST hike would mean higher rates, but he 
never said anything about the new PST pushing the rates even 
higher than recommended by that expert panel. Now why did 
that minister support and vote for a PST hike that costs our 
Crowns and ultimately all Saskatchewan people so much? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 
SaskTel, and SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, the 3.6 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, 
by SaskEnergy provides additional revenue in the amount of $9 
million. The member opposite was right. And this is to support 
capital spending on our system for safety and system expansion, 
Mr. Speaker, as due to the growing demand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This amounts, Mr. Speaker, to approximately $20 annually. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the difference between 2.95 and the 3.6 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker, equates to 23 cents per month, Mr. 
Speaker. And this will go into safety features at SaskEnergy. 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Access to Bus Service for Northerners 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister 
to stop laughing off real concerns and the needs of northern 
people in Saskatchewan. He said he wasn’t laughing, and then 
he told a joke. Mr. Speaker, I say joke, but no one was laughing 
but him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister expect people to trust that he 
has considered their needs when he’s willing to joke about 
people who die hitchhiking after they closed STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my deepest sympathies go out to the family of the person 
involved in that incident, Mr. Speaker. I do take these matters 
very, very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and I do sincerely apologize 
for the comment that I made in the House yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since we made the difficult decision to close STC, 
many private companies have taken over routes to provide 
transportation to the people of our province. These companies 
are providing options to the people of this province and will 
continue to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Delivery Services Within Health Care System 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier 
keep spinning lines about STC, but the minister knows very 
well that there’s much more to STC than those lines. STC was a 
vital service for Saskatchewan people who were passengers and 
for businesses and workers who relied on it for freight, but it 
was also essential to the delivery of vital government programs, 
vital programs like health care, Mr. Speaker. But the Minister of 
Health sat there and clapped along and did nothing to defend 
Saskatchewan health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister fail in his duties as minister 
so badly, and why didn’t he stand up to ensure the best delivery 
of services? Will the minister provide the House with a full list 
of the health programs and services that were hurt by the 
scrapping of STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the minister had said, we took the issue of STC very seriously. 
Mr. Speaker, we need to put this in context. Let’s remember, 
first of all, as far as the delivery of health care, Mr. Speaker, 
half the communities in the province didn’t have STC in their 
community to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s just a simple matter of the members 

opposite are trying to use scare tactics. They talk about how it 
will be difficult for services to be provided; people can’t get to 
medical appointments. Mr. Speaker, less than 1 per cent of the 
people in the North, for example, used STC to go to medical 
appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other arrangements have been made. Courier 
services are used to provide delivery for necessary items. Mr. 
Speaker, the rest of the country operates their health care 
system without using a government-owned bus line, Mr. 
Speaker. We can do the same. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps the minister should look at his own 
briefing note to see all the things that were impacted in health 
by the cuts to STC, Mr. Speaker. That answer misses so much 
of what Saskatchewan people lost, so I’ll help him out a little 
bit. 
 
Cancer patients relied on STC for travel and shipment of drugs. 
Saskatchewan Disease Control used it for the shipment of 
specimens, chemotherapy, and blood products. Pharmacies 
shipped drugs to rural customers. Immunizations and HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] post-exposure prophylaxis 
kits were also shipped. Oxygen supplies were sent to 
communities across the province, and STC provided access for 
northerners to dental programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC also shipped traps and supplies for the West 
Nile virus program, water samples for public health inspections, 
and even baby books to help support parenting programs in the 
North. And that is just a start, Mr. Speaker. So why did the 
minister not consider any of these vital services before he voted 
to scrap STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member’s 
point, just for an example, I think in that long list she read, I 
believe she mentioned blood services. Mr. Speaker, STC was 
used for less than a year to deliver blood and blood products. 
Mr. Speaker, prior to that, private couriers were used. Private 
couriers are being used now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I mention that half the communities in the 
province weren’t served by STC. Mr. Speaker, it’s just, in my 
view, just a strange line of questioning to go down, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to ensure that services continue to be 
provided, that proper medical supplies are received when 
necessary, Mr. Speaker. That’s been the case and that’ll 
continue to be the case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that minister sits in cabinet 
where these decisions are made, and he voted with his 
colleagues and he endorsed this cut that created these problems 
within his own ministry. Not knowing or understanding what 
the consequences would be is not an excuse. It was his job to 
know, to know how many health services relied on STC, how 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

much extra money it would cost, and how people would get 
these essential health services once they shut down STC. 
 
The Premier claimed, “We’ve looked carefully at this issue.” 
Well obviously not. The information we have shows they were 
scrambling after they scrapped STC. Again, why did the 
minister not do anything to save STC and prevent these 
devastating impacts on health services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, that member’s right. I did sit 
in cabinet when that decision was made and I fully support that 
decision, Mr. Speaker, because the fact of the matter is, in the 
health care budget every dollar is valuable. Mr. Speaker, we 
were subsidizing STC to the tune of over a million dollars a 
month, $15 million a year — money that could far better be 
used on the front lines of health care, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday reporters asked the 
Education minister to simply justify her claim that the Sask 
Party hike in education property tax was somehow for our kids. 
It should have been easy, Mr. Speaker, but she refused to 
answer the question. She refused to answer because she knows 
that education property taxes went up, but funding for education 
went down. 
 
People are paying more, Mr. Speaker, but our kids are getting 
less. This is a fact, and this is why, even though the reporters 
gave her a number of chances to try to answer the question, 
yesterday she failed. Still, I want to give her one more try. Since 
they hiked taxes by $67 million, did education funding also go 
up by $67 million? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
refused to answer nothing. That is new math at work. The 
member opposite is back on this tired old trope of the windfall 
that somehow wasn’t, except that it is and it was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you have $1.9 billion budget and you collect 
750 million in education property tax, of course it goes back 
into education. Every dollar goes back into education — 100 
per cent. In fact we’re actually spending two and a half per cent 
more than we are collecting. Mr. Speaker, arguing that less than 
100 per cent is spent on education is arguing that less than 750 
million is spent on education, which is simply factually wrong. 
There is in excess of 1.8 billion spent on education. 
 
In the dying days of the NDP, there were tax revolts on the 
steps of this building against through-the-roof education 
property tax — this as they were closing schools, 176 of them. 
That is some feat. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a shell game with this minister, 
but the math is simple. People across this province paid an 
additional $67 million in education property tax, and this 
government saw it fit to take $54 million out of educational 
funding from classrooms in every corner of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she’s more than happy to attend the ribbon 
cuttings of new schools and take the credit, but when it comes 
to taking responsibility for funding those schools in those 
classrooms, she goes back to her lines and throws school 
divisions under the bus. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can do math, and even 
if that minister refuses to. It was the Sask Party that raised 
education property taxes, and it was the Sask Party that made 
the decision to cut millions out of our classrooms. 
 
So will the minister finally take some responsibility and admit 
that her government took money from Saskatchewan families 
and took money out of our classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
past budget year we reduced the government grant to 60 per 
cent, which we committed to in ’08-09. The increase in 
property tax collected this year due to the property tax 
reassessment led to an increase from 35 per cent to 40 per cent 
of school divisions’ budgets coming from property tax. Even 
with this small reduction in the government grant, this was the 
first year that we reduced school divisions’ funding on the 
government fiscal year. 
 
In ’07, I will repeat, the NDP provided 700 million for the 
government grant for education funding in the province. This 
year we provided over 1.2 billion in government grant funding 
for school divisions, period. 
 
[14:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 76, 
The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport that Bill No. 76 be now introduced and read 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 
Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 77, 
the miscellaneous status (superannuation plans) amendment 
Act, 2017 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 77 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 78 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 79, 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 79 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 80, 
The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 80 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a privilege to take my opportunity to reply to the Speech 
from the Throne on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. I can indicate at the outset that I indeed will be 
voting in favour of the Speech from the Throne and certainly 
against the amendment put forward by members of the 
opposition. 
 
Saskatoon Willowgrove is an exciting constituency. It’s one 
that has seen a lot of changes over the years and the creation of 
the brand new constituency of Saskatoon Willowgrove. It’s 
indicative of what has been happening across Saskatchewan. 
The growth and the vibrancy of the area has taken place as 
communities have grown. 
 
New schools have appeared, Mr. Speaker, in the communities 
of Willowgrove, two new schools last year and just very 
recently, in the last month or so, two new schools in the brand 
new community of Evergreen. I had the opportunity to 
participate in the opening and the ribbon cutting of one of them. 
And I must say I was very, very proud as the elected member of 
the legislature for that area to be there on behalf of all the 
constituents, but to be there with parents and children and 
students and community leaders to welcome what is an 
important part of our community, a new school. 
 
Willowgrove has been growing and welcoming people from 
across the country and around the world as new residents come 
to Saskatchewan and make their livelihood here. They enjoy 
Saskatchewan. They enjoy Saskatoon. They enjoy the quality of 
life that they’re able to experience here. And I must say many 
of those new residents are very entrepreneurial. They want to 
make their contribution to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
their community as well. And they do so in a very invigorating 
way as they own businesses and work in businesses and make 
so many contributions to people in the communities. 
 
I have a brand new community — again the growth that 
continues to take place — the community of Brighton. It just 
began operation in the last few months, but again, every week 
when I return home on the weekends and see a few more houses 
springing up and new families and the excitement that comes 
with that . . . So that growth continues, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
very proud to see it happening in the constituency that I have 
the honour to represent. 
 
As members do, we always have the opportunity during the 
speech to talk about the many people that help us in so many 
ways to do our job. And I want to begin by thanking those that 
work in my constituency office, Jenny and Barb and Jacquie, 
and those that help in less formal ways as well. The job of an 
MLA is a busy one, and we have the opportunity to serve, and if 
we can have people helping us do that, it makes that job that 
much more efficient. So again I want to thank my constituency 
assistants and those that help me in volunteer capacities as well 
because they certainly do help us, as members of the legislature, 

do our work. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, at this busy time of year of politics 
for members in the House, to thank our families, and I want to 
do that. My wife, Trish, she owns her own business and is very 
busy in her own professional career but certainly I think she’s 
closer to politics now than ever before for things happening in 
my life. And that’s to be said for my son and daughter as well. 
 
Carter, our son, is in third year university at the University of 
Saskatchewan and he’s getting a first-hand look at what a fine, 
quality institution that we have in the University of 
Saskatchewan. He’s in third year, Mr. Speaker, third year 
finance at the Edwards School of Business so he’s a busy, busy 
person as third year finance is a real challenge for students and I 
know he’s working very hard at that. Carter is also a member of 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskies in their track and field 
team and he had the honour this summer of representing 
Saskatchewan at the Canada Summer Games in Winnipeg. And 
that is indeed a real honour for anyone who is able to do that. 
We had among 400 athletes from Saskatchewan that were able 
to do that. 
 
My daughter Paige is in grade 12 at St. Joseph High School in 
Saskatoon, and grade 12 is always a special year. And you 
know, I remember it like it was yesterday but it certainly 
wasn’t. It wasn’t yesterday but I tell her to make sure that she 
takes advantage of that year. And she’s also involved in 
athletics, in the Goldfins and in her swimming career and, you 
know, she’s a person that like . . . Carter wants to stay at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Paige I think is going to venture 
out. She’s looking at McGill or Western or some other 
university. And I’m okay with that as a parent but I certainly 
want to encourage her to come back to Saskatchewan when her 
studies are done. That’s why we work so hard as MLAs to give 
our children and children across the province the opportunity to 
do that. 
 
I want to talk specifically about the Speech from the Throne and 
the special time that it was here in this Chamber. And it was a 
special time for me because my good friend, the Premier, the 
member for Swift Current, you know, it was what he has 
indicated would be his last Speech from the Throne. And it was 
very special. I had his parents sitting right behind me, and 
family members, and an opportunity to just recall his career and 
his contribution to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity to know the Premier for many, many 
years. We actually are the same age and we bug each other 
about that a little bit. And we had the opportunity to go to 
school together . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, he’s a little 
bit younger. He says a little bit younger, a little bit wiser. I 
don’t know. That’s maybe debatable but in fact I welcome him 
to the new club every year as we get older. 
 
But we had the opportunity to be in the very same class in 
university on many occasions and had that opportunity, and 
some of those early discussions that we had together, I’ve been 
reflecting on them. And I know he said it in early time to me, he 
said, wouldn’t it be a wonderful opportunity if we had an 
opportunity to serve our province in an elected capacity, 
whether it’s in municipal or provincial or federal or whatever 
capacity or in a volunteer way, but just to serve? Mr. Speaker, 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

I’m so proud to be able to say that I’ve had the opportunity to 
serve with a friend of mine, the Premier and the member from 
Swift Current who I’ve known since high school age, through 
university, and through our professional careers. 
 
Through my time in this legislature I’ve had a chance to serve 
as an MLA, yes, and also as a cabinet minister in five different 
portfolios and I want to thank the Premier for that confidence in 
me. And certainly I’ve also served as a government House 
leader in that capacity. I’ve learned so much from him and his 
dedication and I want to thank him and his family for all that 
they’ve done for Saskatchewan, for 10 wonderful years of 
growth in our province. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Premier will be looked at by history, will certainly go down in 
history as one of the best premiers ever in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, absolutely. Hear, hear. You know, 
an opportunity to look back in history. And I’m a student of 
history. I’ve studied Saskatchewan politics and I’ve known that 
we’ve had many premiers that have made a difference but, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d submit to you, none more so than the one that sits 
in this Chamber here today. And I’m proud to say that he’s a 
colleague and a friend and a mentor and I wish him very, very 
well into the future, as I know he will do many exciting things 
as he leaves this Chamber as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this Speech from the Throne, it really 
focuses on business as well. And I want to talk about . . . You 
know, Small Business Week just took place here in 
Saskatchewan. I had the opportunity to participate in the North 
Saskatoon Business Association as they had their kickoff to 
Small Business Week in the province. And it was a great 
opportunity to, you know, talk to people, small-business people 
from around Saskatchewan and talk to them about their 
excitement about what lies ahead for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve had 10 years of growth in our province. When we 
became government in 2007, we were teetering around a 
million people. Now we’re almost 1.2 million people in our 
province, so that growth that has taken place is indisputable. 
And I know it’s been led by small business and entrepreneurs 
from across Saskatchewan. As a government we’ve tried to set 
the stage for that growth to happen and I think we’ve been 
successful in listening to those individuals. They’ve said that 
we’ve had 10 great years, and now we’ve got to look forward to 
another 10 years of growth because that’s what they’re seeing 
happening. 
 
I had an opportunity to recently tour some technology firms in 
Saskatchewan. And one of them, Solido Design, it was an 
amazing, amazing tour because half the offices that are located 
in their space are empty right now because they just built them 
because they know that they’re going to be hiring dozens of 
more people. So to me that’s such a sign of confidence in our 
economy and in our future and that certainly excites me when I 
think about the next 10 years and the bright future that we have 
in front of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the 43,000 small businesses that we have in 
Saskatchewan are something to be proud of. And you know, 99 

per cent of them are indeed small businesses — people, mom 
and pops and those that hire a few people or hire a dozen people 
and continue to grow. They’re the basis of the future of the 
province, and that’s certainly why in this Throne Speech the 
government has indicated their support for small business in our 
province. Taking the small-business threshold from 500,000 to 
600,000, the highest threshold in the country, that’s a signal that 
this government has confidence in the small business and 
entrepreneurs of our province, Mr. Speaker. That enables small 
businesses to have more disposable income, and it allows them, 
it allows them to grow and to expand and to reinvest that money 
into their businesses. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, there was such concern when the 
federal government indicated that they were going to tinker 
with the rates of taxation regarding corporations in our 
province, and small businesses and doctors and others. We took 
great exception. Small business took great exception to that 
because indeed, Mr. Speaker, it was not the way to grow an 
economy. People that own businesses, they put all of their 
wealth back into those businesses. It’s their RESP [registered 
education savings plan]. It’s their RRSP [registered retirement 
savings plan]. It’s their savings. It’s their future. It’s their 
family. And that’s why we worked so hard to ensure that the 
federal government heard that that was not indeed the right way 
to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about business and we talk about growth 
and what happens in the province, but you know, we never talk 
enough about the 114,000 low-income people that have been 
taken off the tax rolls by this government, Mr. Speaker. And 
that indeed is an important part of growth and financial success 
that that happens because those that have the lowest incomes, 
that need every cent of that income for their own purposes, are 
able to do that. And I think that speaks very highly of this 
government, of this Throne Speech, and the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that my time is somewhat limited here, 
and I want to talk on various topics and, you know, one area 
that I want to touch on is education. I talked about the new 
schools in my constituency, but it’s more than that. It’s more 
than just in Saskatoon Willowgrove. When I go across 
Saskatoon and across Saskatchewan, 21 new schools opened for 
the first time this year. Eleven thousand students this year 
entering those new schools for the first time, and being very, 
very, very proud of their schools. And we all know that they 
were a P3 model, something to be proud of, that costs were 
justified very carefully as we saved $100 million in education 
by having the designs that were the most efficient.  
 
And I can tell you that each and every student is very, very 
proud of the innovation and ingenuity that has gone into each of 
those schools. Seventeen billion dollars in the last decade given 
to education and to, you know, the areas of construction, but 
also 875 more teachers in our province than when we began, 
6,000 new child care spaces, operational funding up some 31 
per cent. And I’m very proud of our record when it comes to 
education. 
 
Later today I’m going to be meeting with some members of the 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

Saskatoon Teachers’ Association. There’s a lot of teachers in 
my constituency, and I love interacting with them and talking 
about the very good record that this government has when it 
comes to education. Earlier this day I met with some School 
Boards Association people and talked about the Theodore case 
and talked about the rights of parents and students to choose 
what school and education that they go to. And certainly not 
everyone agrees with our position, but I think that we are right 
on the mark when we come to that choice. When I talk to 
constituents in Saskatoon Willowgrove, they believe that we are 
doing the right thing. We continue to listen to people on all 
sides of the issue, but certainly I believe we are moving in the 
right direction. 
 
I want to speak on a couple of other things: carbon tax, for 
example. I think that’s on the minds of people in Saskatchewan, 
and they’re somewhat worried about where we may go in this 
direction and what may be forced upon us as a province.  
 
And I know, I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be more 
against the carbon tax that is being proposed by the federal 
government. But I have always been taught that you can’t be 
just against something. You have to be in favour of something 
that’s better and that replaces it as well, and that’s certainly 
what I want to talk about. And I know members opposite are 
very interested, I know, in what I have to say because there is a 
better alternative, and we are open to it, absolutely. It’s called 
innovation. It’s called food science, and we have the experts 
that deal with it right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I 
know members opposite think that there’s only one way to do it 
— tax, tax, tax — but, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. 
That’s not good enough today, 2017 in Saskatchewan. That’s 
not good enough for this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to talk to food scientists, to people like 
Dr. Maurice Moloney and study his work and the work that he’s 
done, and I’ve talked about it across the province, about food 
science, about the ability to accomplish the same goal as the 
carbon tax is trying to do, but to do it in a way that involves 
food science and innovation. And you now, I’ve talked about 
photosynthesis and the ability to take photosynthesis from 6 per 
cent, as it happens in plants right now, to 8 per cent, and we’d 
have that ability to reduce the carbon footprint in the province 
by the same way. 
 
You know, I’ve done a lot of research as well on the work of 
professional engineer Miles Haukeness. He lives in Estevan, 
and he has quantified and certainly demonstrated on a scientific 
perspective that agriculture is not the problem when it comes to 
carbon in our province. It is indeed the solution, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s the way that we get around the problems of carbon 
emissions that we have in our province, and he’s quantified it. 
 
And you know, we talked about, in this House, that we’ve 
agreed that the emissions in the province are around 75 million 
tonnes of greenhouse gases. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a number 
that is out there and is accepted, but it doesn’t take into account 
what agriculture and forestry does regarding greenhouse gases 
in our province. And Mr. Haukeness has quantified that, and he 
says that 48 million tonnes of greenhouse gases are absorbed 
through agriculture and forestry in Saskatchewan, leaving a net 
amount of 27 million tonnes of greenhouse gases. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a wonderful story. It’s a story that is the 
other side to imposing a carbon tax on our province. It’s a story 
that we as government and industry as well . . . And I’ve talked 
to industry people who say we have to do a better job of 
ensuring that we tell that story — across Saskatchewan, yes, 
Mr. Speaker, but across the country as well — because it is a 
great story to tell. And it is why we are so opposed to a carbon 
tax and why we have a better way of doing things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, as we talk about growth and we talk about 
agriculture and agri-food, we have to be very, very proud of our 
strength in this area — 300 food companies in Saskatchewan, 
$4 billion in revenues, employing 5,000 people. Our goal is $6 
billion by 2020 and, as you know, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is never afraid to put a goal in place and then move 
heaven and earth to try to reach it, especially when it’s 
something as important as that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the ability of our province to 
grow in these exports as well. You know, I mentioned earlier 
the wonderful new people that have moved to our province 
from around the world. And they come from countries, India, 
and you know, across the world, and they come with a special 
knowledge of their home continent and their home country and 
talk about the need. 
 
And you know, we have a great example with Murad Al-Katib 
and the work that he’s done and his Turkish heritage and his 
ability to go back and do that. But the same thing can be done in 
many, many different respects as people talk about the appetites 
of their home country and how we can take food processed in 
Saskatchewan and change it in such a way that it becomes a real 
delicacy in the countries that we export to. So there’s so much 
to do and so much excitement and, you know, as we talk about 
that growth, we have to work on the areas of strength in our 
province, and that’s indeed what we’re able to do. 
 
And food science goes beyond exports though, and I’ve talked 
about it and it’s something that’s personal to me. I think in 
northern Saskatchewan we have such an opportunity to use that 
food and innovation to enhance the lives of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I was up in Pinehouse last week and talking 
about the need for greenhouses and community gardens and the 
ability to have fresh food in those communities, and to try to 
make those communities self-sufficient in a real way that is 
indeed efficient when it comes to all aspects of it. And that’s 
something that I’ve been working on as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I very quickly want to touch on some other areas. 
Autism, to fulfill our commitment for individualized funding to 
children under six with autism spectrum disorder. I’ve had the 
opportunity to meet with families and talk one-on-one with 
them about their special child and about their ability to do that, 
and the unique needs. And nothing was more important to them 
than servicing those unique needs of people. 
 
I know I don’t have time to listen to exactly what the members 
opposite are talking about because this is too important, Mr. 
Speaker. But when I talk about autism and I talk about families 
and I talk about looking in the eyes of the moms and dads and 
talking about their special children and then I see what’s 
delivered in the Throne Speech, that makes me very proud. That 
makes me wanting to go back to those people and say, yes 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

there’s more work to do, but we indeed are moving in the right 
directions. 
 
When I talk to seniors about the ability to stay in their homes, 
and if their income’s under $70,000 to defer the education 
portion of property tax on their home, it provides security for 
them. It provides the knowledge that they will be able to stay in 
their homes and have that quality of life and have a choice. It 
offers them another choice as well. And everyone knows that 
this government has worked very hard to keep property taxes as 
low as possible for all residents of Saskatchewan but, you 
know, it’s very important to seniors who are on fixed incomes 
and now they have another opportunity. 
 
Regarding organ donations, to improve the rate of organ 
donations in the province through a new program led by donor 
physicians, this hits close to home for me, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
cousin that was a recipient of an organ donation, and she had 
had the opportunity to come to many budgets and to speeches 
from the throne and other opportunities to come here and listen 
to us debate. But you know, to me she is an example of exactly 
what the benefits of having the improved organ donations are in 
the province and I’m very proud of her. And I want to be able to 
say that we’re able to help more people like her into the future, 
and that’s specifically what this Speech from the Throne does. 
 
In general, you know, I think what I’ve seen over here and 
when I look through the Speech from the Throne, it was a heavy 
speech. It involved a lot of different areas, a lot of different 
ideas. But what I see here is some good ideas, some passion, 
and some enthusiasm for the future of our province. And I see 
those ideas coming from this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. I 
hear a lot of complaints from the other side, but I don’t hear a 
lot of that innovation and that vision and those ideas for the 
future. 
 
And I hope maybe they’ll surprise us and maybe we’ll see some 
of that this session. But up until now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say 
that the passion and the ideas and the innovation have been 
coming from this side of the House. And that encourages me 
about the future of this party and this government as we 
continue to listen very closely to the people of Saskatchewan 
and listen to what their concerns are, what their priorities are. 
And government doesn’t have all the answers, but we’re trying 
to be innovative whenever we can, and I think we’re having 
some success in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, it’s all about the people we serve. When we come 
to this Legislative Assembly, that’s what we do it for. We look 
at the people that we have the ability to represent here directly 
as MLAs, and then we look at the wider community — in my 
area it’s Saskatoon — and then we go on to look at the entire 
province. And I think that’s indeed what members on this side 
of the House are doing, both rural and urban, looking for ways 
to increase the quality of life for Saskatchewan people and to 
welcome more people into our province from across the country 
and around the world. We’ve had the opportunity to do that. 
 
And Saskatchewan is a special place. And we all know that and 
every once in a while we’re reminded of it time and time again. 
And I had an opportunity to be reminded of it just this last 
Saturday night. I went to an event that’s called Lows in Motion. 
Travis Low is an individual that worked as a CA [constituency 

assistant] of mine years ago. And he has been very dedicated to 
Parkinson’s and the fight against Parkinson’s in Saskatchewan. 
His grandfather has Parkinson’s. His father has Parkinson’s, 
and the likelihood of him receiving it is certainly quite high and 
quite strong, but he’s not worried about that. He’s worried 
about making a difference. 
 
On Saturday night Travis, for the ninth year in a row, the ninth 
year for Lows in Motion, welcomed 750 people into a room for 
a comedy night to talk about . . . to have a little fun, but to talk 
about Parkinson’s in Saskatchewan. So this is one person 
making a wonderful difference in our province. And, you know, 
I’m so proud to have that relationship where he worked in my 
office and now seeing what he’s doing. And indeed he, in his 
way, is trying to make our province a better place. And next 
year he will be celebrating his 10th year of Lows in Motion, and 
I just want to say how proud I am of him because in his way 
he’s making Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
That’s what we’re trying to do, each and every one of us here, 
on the government side and on the opposition side as well, is 
make Saskatchewan a better place. And I have to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, as my time draws to a close, that I’m just very, very 
fortunate and blessed to be able to be in almost my 14th year as 
a member of the Legislative Assembly. I believe it was 
November the 4th, 2003 that the member from Batoche and 
myself and others in the legislature were, had that opportunity 
to come here. 
 
And when you think of our province, only 112 years old, and 
we’ve had the opportunity, and myself, and some longer, some 
shorter than me that have the opportunity, and for me 14 of 
those 112 years I’ve been able to sit in this legislature, to drive 
up to this wonderful building, to look at its majesty, and have 
the opportunity to say that, you know, I come here to go to 
work, to work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, this is an important time of year as 
we have our fall session, as we very, very shortly look forward 
to the Remembrance Day celebrations, and we wear the poppy 
today. It is a special time to look forward to what we have 
coming in the future of Saskatchewan and to look back and to 
say, to celebrate what has happened in our province. 
 
We know politically that many things are happening on both 
sides of the House as individuals such as myself have an 
opportunity to talk about our background and our vision and our 
passion for the future of this province. And that’s a special 
opportunity that indeed I’m going to take advantage of each and 
every day. And it brings me closer to my colleagues. It brings 
me closer to the party that I represent. And it brings me closer 
to the reason why that I’m here in the Saskatchewan legislature 
trying to make Saskatchewan a better place, not only for 
myself, but for my children and for others who move to 
Saskatchewan to call Saskatchewan home. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m humbled and blessed to live in this great 
province. And again I want to say that I will be supporting the 
Speech from the Throne. I will certainly . . . I didn’t see 
anything within the amendment that’s worth voting for, so I will 
be proudly taking my place when that vote is called. 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

But again thank you to you, to legislative staff, to staff that 
enable us to have this opportunity to put democracy in action 
and really, opportunity to put this speech forward. So thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Throne 
Speech sets out an ambitious vision for the upcoming session. 
Its theme, thank goodness where I am is Saskatchewan, 
resonates with us all. Its broad, deep content is driven and 
inspired by our Premier, whose last session this sadly is. 
 
I thought I would go into some of the content and context of the 
Throne Speech as it relates to education, being a bit biased that 
way. For one, invoking the notwithstanding clause, the status 
quo will be protected to ensure that non-Catholic students can 
continue to access Catholic schools and that our funding model 
takes into account the number of students in a division, not their 
religious affiliation, which surely makes sense in 2017. 
 
One can imagine the upheaval if as of June 30 next year, 
students and teachers were forced to upheave their lives by the 
fall. Friends separated, staff reallocated, parents completely 
unsure of their children’s short-term future. 
 
The interim Leader of the Opposition seems perfectly okay with 
that, despite the former interim leader’s gracious support of the 
notwithstanding clause in this case. Last week she said, we need 
to let the appeal happen first, before falling back on that old 
metaphor about using all the tools in the tool box. Why? Why 
court such uncertainty? The problem is that the appeal, which is 
also ongoing, will take 6 to 18 months. So there’s a very good 
chance that any decision delivered beyond June 30 next year, 
when the original decision was set to come into force, would 
result in non-Catholic students being forced out of the Catholic 
system. Full stop. 
 
I suppose we can surmise where the interim leader’s loyalties 
lie. 
 
Meanwhile in the areas of curriculum development, Mr. 
Speaker, in math we know that at least one-quarter of Canadian 
children, which of course includes Saskatchewan children, are 
now relying on private tutors or learning centres outside school 
to get the basics. So parents who can afford it are looking 
outside the system because students aren’t getting the support 
they need in school, and that’s largely of course for math 
reinforcement. 
 
We don’t have cross-provincial numeracy assessment here as 
other provinces do such as Ontario. And it was through such 
assessments that Ontario recently came to terms with the fact 
that only half of its grade 6 students met the provincial standard 
for math, whereupon Premier Wynne quickly announced some 
changes. We, on the other hand, have to rely on national and 
international testing to see where we’re at and our scores in 
recent PISA [programme for international student assessment] 
tests, as we all know, were disappointingly low. 
 
We will begin to set things right. Math reinforcement and 
supports in school will be expanded and we will look first, of 
course, at what is working right here. There are teachers already 

accomplishing very good things, and we can’t wait to talk to 
them. 
 
We also believe that every student having access to a textbook, 
which believe it or not currently varies widely across divisions, 
would be a good practical step. Students could take it home if 
they wanted to study, which would help them and their parents, 
in some cases, get a sense of the overall context of the 
curriculum. Call it an additional resource. 
 
We will also look at what other jurisdictions are doing, best 
practices in other provinces of course, but international models 
as well. The French, for example, are top leaders in math partly 
because elementary and high school students are exposed to 
continual reinforcement and review. The Mastering Maths 
model, which the UK [United Kingdom] has recently adopted, 
is also reinforcement- and workbook-based. 
 
I was interested to read the comments by the president of the 
Mathematics Teachers’ Society last week responding to the 
Throne Speech. She said she rejected common sense models, 
saying the traditional way of teaching is successful for only a 
certain portion of the population, although she failed to 
elaborate on what works for everyone else or even whether the 
current way and for whom . . . [inaudible] . . . the current 
system is really working. 
 
It was interesting too that she admonished parents not to use 
flash cards to drill equations with their kids but instead to treat 
math as a conversation about numbers, values, and counting, 
which is one thing at pre-levels, Mr. Speaker, quite another 
when you get into the vagaries of geo-trig or algebra or, as my 
son is doing right now, long, long lists of dividing fractions 
which the teacher assigns. That’s where the so-called 
conversation gets trickier. And if we’re going to encourage our 
children to go into STEM [science, technology, engineering, 
and math] subjects, which we want to instil in them, we want to 
instil that math of course can be fun but it also requires a lot of 
long lists and a lot of reinforcement. 
 
As a U of S [University of Saskatchewan] physics prof once 
said to me, there has to be some rote in math so you can call up 
numbers and patterns instantly in your head. That’s how it 
works. He also said, you can dream about being, let’s say, an 
astronaut as long as you realize you’ll have to master physics, 
and physics isn’t very abstract or quantum physics — a little 
less conversation, more concrete. 
 
On computer coding, Mr. Speaker, BC [British Columbia], 
Ireland, the UK, Finland are doing it. We too must take our 
place and prepare students for the new tech economy. There 
will be challenges particularly because, as things stand, there 
are only 70 teachers across the province qualified to teach 
computer science 20 and 30. This is partly down to the fact that 
the colleges of education, which haven’t made specialized 
computational methods part of their teacher curriculum until 
now . . . Still, the will and the engagement are there, as it is out 
in the tech field. I understand there’s a committed group of 
teachers and experts who are passionate about this and raring to 
go. So we will get there. 
 
On French, Mr. Speaker, back in the summer I met with 
Quebec’s minister for intergovernmental affairs and la 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

Francophonie, Jean-Marc Fournier. We discussed the challenge 
that school divisions face in non-francophone provinces 
attracting and retaining French teachers from francophone 
provinces. There are no two ways about it; we face a shortage. 
A shortage of high-quality French teachers who know the 
difference from between “tu as simplifié” with an e accent and 
“il faut simplifier” with an -er. Teachers who teach students 
articles because French doesn’t have a “the.” It’s “le” or “la.” 
And grammar, fundamentally communicating in French, 
depends on knowing that. 
 
This year is Canada 150, a great symbol, finally, of bilingualism 
in this country because French has become cool. And across the 
country and here in Saskatchewan, parents are enrolling their 
children in French immersion programs in growing numbers. 
And we think there is more we could do as a province to reduce 
the hoops that new teachers who come here have to go through 
to get right into the classroom to teach our students, and more 
provinces could do to break down administrative barriers, 
whether for young entrepreneurs or teachers, to come closer 
together. Because we, for one, would love it if young Quebecers 
could come here and teach here and fall in love and start a 
family and teach our children, strengthening the francophone 
community right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have arrived at an important crossroads in education. And 
when it comes to a broader discussion about curriculum, and 
that is our intention in the coming months, I would submit that 
there has come to be at once too much wholesale infusion into 
the curriculum, and at the same time, too many attempts to 
mandate material into it both from the inside and by outside 
groups. 
 
The intention is always good to provide resources to teachers, 
websites, professional development, access to material on this 
issue or that issue. But what has ended up happening, to my 
mind, is that the broader curriculum has become watered down. 
Teachers, it seems, are being put upon to infuse certain material 
into every subject area, and students are becoming guinea pigs 
in some cases for whatever is being tried out by the system. 
 
In an October 30 column in The Globe and Mail, Debra Soh, 
who holds a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in neuroscience at 
York University, said: 
 

Most of us would agree that it’s inappropriate to use 
children as pawns in order to fulfill . . . ideas [by adults] of 
what the world should look like, both in the 
implementation of policy and criticism of it. 

 
It might be preferable to go the other way around, to start from 
broad bases of classical education — history, geography, basic 
grammar and writing skills — and then cautiously perhaps 
infuse from there. Because bottom line, you’re not going to be 
able to change the world on any social issue if you can’t write 
properly. If you don’t know how to use a possessive, or can’t 
identify a preposition, or the famous ones — mix up who and 
whom; two, too, and to; effect and affect — someone is going 
to call your bluff. 
 
Or for that matter, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t know what 
happened in 1789 or 1066 or 1917 . . . Because history shows 
us patterns. It shows us context. And if you don’t know that 230 

years ago French revolutionaries called their movement 
Citizenship, or that later Maoists were very partial to school 
children singing indoctrination songs, or that a key tenet of 
cultural Bolshevism was prominently displaying ideological 
slogans in schools, how do you know what rights, 
responsibility, and respect are, which are currently being called 
the new three Rs by the way, especially when they’re 
demanded, being demanded, right here, right now as 
“intentional, explicit mandating.” How can you analyze them in 
their fullest, most critical context? 
 
My grade 8 son brought a homework sheet home the other day 
— they’re always sheets — in which he was asked to outline 
nothing less than his vision of his collective past, his country, 
and his world. As background, however, he’d copied from the 
board the following facts which were presented as fact: that 
European and European settlers were colonialists, pillagers of 
the land who knew only buying and selling and didn’t respect 
mother earth. He asked me if it was okay if he could write that 
he associated with his pioneer great- and 
great-great-grandparents because no one was writing down their 
vision of the world. And I said yes, of course, and that after all, 
they had known poverty in Norway or Ukraine, or war in 
Germany, that they had come here and tilled the land that 
produced food for everybody and loved their families and tried 
to create whole, stable communities in this province, and had 
loved it here. 
 
My two grandmothers went off to school speaking only 
Norwegian and Ukrainian respectively, to one-room 
schoolhouses. The amazing patchwork of supports we know 
today would have been completely unknown to them. And yet 
one of my grannies became a business owner, what’s known 
today as a female entrepreneur. The other was brilliant in math. 
And we all know the studies. In many, seniors perform better in 
math than our young people do. 
 
So where do we go from here, Mr. Speaker? I know what they 
would say about this Throne Speech, its vision, and the vision 
of our Premier. They would say thank goodness where I am is 
Saskatchewan. What our families came for and came here for 
led to a vision like this, which is why I will not be supporting 
the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and will be supporting the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to enter into the Throne Speech again here this year. And I do 
so through the lens of the people I serve, the good people of 
Regina Rosemont, as I look to this Throne Speech that’s put 
before us, and I thank them for the privilege of serving them 
and being their voice in this Assembly. 
 
I also want to recognize, just as many members have, family 
and the role of family in our role and in serving. And in my 
case, I want to say hello and thanks and I love you to Stephanie, 
a grade 6 school teacher here in Regina, who I think might have 
something to say about the speech she just heard from the 
Education minister. I think some of her colleagues might have a 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

few things to say about that one as well. But to Stephanie, I just 
appreciate all the support within our home and within our lives. 
And to my little guy, William, I say hello. We were out last 
night. He was dressed up as a wolf, so he’s William the wolf as 
we went around trick or treating, and that was a pretty big deal. 
He ran from door to door; he got me a pretty good loot. I stayed 
up too late eating a lot of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I enter into this Throne Speech at a time in our province 
where people are worried, where needs are not being met, at a 
time where people need some action. They need a vision and a 
plan that reflects their hopes and their dreams. And we have a 
government that’s grown awfully out of touch with the people 
that they pretend to serve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course we’re, I guess, in the late stages of this Premier’s 
tenure, and in many ways you see a Throne Speech and many of 
the speeches opposite that are there to sort of curry favour with 
the Premier as he goes out the door, to prop up his legacy. It’s 
something that it’s worthy, as we look at these periods of time, 
to realize that this really was a Premier that failed to get the job 
done for Saskatchewan people when times were good, failed to 
put away a dollar, failed to balance a budget, mismanaged 
opportunity, and squandered a tremendous opportunity for the 
people of the province. 
 
And you know we see . . . I need to almost go back and review 
the tape of the speech I just heard from the Minister of 
Education. But it seemed to me to not be resembling the kind of 
Saskatchewan we need to build and understanding our treaties, 
understanding our history, and standing strong to work as active 
partners towards reconciliation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this comes from a government and certainly a minister 
here now that, you know, that are presiding over an attack on 
our classrooms, an attack on our local school boards, and 
placing our students, the next generation, in a very challenged 
position. Failing to recognize that education is the foundation of 
our future. Failing to recognize that we will only be as strong as 
we can be as a province when every last person in 
Saskatchewan is as strong as they can be and recognizing how 
powerful and how transformational education is on that front, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re here at a time within our province where we’ve got, you 
know, the sitting government with their big majority that have 
forgotten who they’re working for, that betrayed Saskatchewan 
people on front after front. Whether it’s the billion dollar tax 
hike, whether it’s the sell-off attempts at our Crown 
corporations, the sell-off of STC, Mr. Speaker, the attack on our 
classrooms, the pulling apart the supports that are important to 
people and the very most vulnerable. Clearly what we’re 
witnessing within our province is an unprecedented betrayal of 
the people that government was supposed to serve, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now heartening in all of this is not that government’s 
recognizing error in their way or changing course because 
they’re not, Mr. Speaker. They seem to be doubling down and 
digging deeper on most of these fronts. But what’s heartening is 
that Saskatchewan people have risen up and have become alive 
at a time where stakes are high in our province, stakes are high 
in their communities, stakes are high in the lives of their 

families. It’s been heartening to see people in rural and urban 
and First Nations Saskatchewan, all of Saskatchewan, rise up 
against this damaging agenda of this government. 
 
And we see a Premier and a cabinet that’s in disarray, Mr. 
Speaker, a Premier that defended scandal like the GTH, trying 
to brush it off as no big deal as millions were wasted, as friends 
of government filled their pockets, Mr. Speaker, only to learn 
now that we aren’t alone in having very serious concern on this 
matter. We’re not alone. The RCMP have serious concern on 
this matter with an investigation that now, I understand, has 
files over at prosecutors. And we’re not alone even in the sense 
of a few of the new . . . those vying to serve as the next premier 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have an Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, a former attorney 
general, Mr. Speaker, who stood beside the Premier day after 
day defending the nonsense that we heard from that Premier, 
the dismissal of the scandal and the wasted dollars, who now 
suggests during his leadership run that he believes that there 
should be a public inquiry into the matter. We have a . . . He 
was at that table. He had every chance to do the right thing day 
after day, month after month, as we grilled government on this 
front and held them to account. But he failed to step up when it 
mattered most, and now we’re supposed to trust that he has the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people in mind. 
 
We see the same with other candidates. I believe the member 
that’s seated in the back corner here is calling for a full judicial 
inquiry. Well yes, people deserve that. I think we’ve been 
saying that for two years, Mr. Speaker. So certainly, without a 
doubt we need actions. We need independence to a commission 
that would get to the bottom of the Sask Party’s scandal, their 
mismanagement, and their waste. And in many ways I think 
that the GTH, as ugly as it is and as much as that’s been wasted, 
it’s really just the tip of the iceberg when you look at the scope 
and the mismanagement of the bypass and what went sideways 
there, or if you look, of course, at the so-called clean coal 
project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have a government that continues to provide no 
accountability to Saskatchewan people and certainly not act on 
the hopes and dreams of Saskatchewan people. We had a 
Throne Speech here and I was awfully surprised. We have a 
government that’s presiding over tough economic conditions for 
which they’ve been a full part of creating, Mr. Speaker, and 
instead of making things better and creating jobs and supporting 
investment and strengthening our economy, we have a 
government taking deliberate actions that are hampering our 
economic recovery, that are hurting job conditions for people 
all across this province in rural, urban, and First Nation 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This would have been a time within a Throne Speech to be 
active on job creation, to lay out an agenda for an economic 
recovery, to create opportunity for people. Instead we just see 
more of the same. The relentless push towards a low-wage, 
precarious and part-time work, privatized, and out-sourced 
economy. That sort of an economy and that push of the Sask 
Party must be stopped, Mr. Speaker. And as New Democrats 
along with Saskatchewan people in every corner of this 
province, we’re going to work to do just that. 
 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

This would have been a time to have been creating jobs and 
acting on our environmental responsibilities by creating 
renewable power and distributing that generation in 
communities and locations all across our province. Creating 
jobs, creating investment, reducing our emissions, but nary a 
mention in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This would be an ideal time to be acting on the environment 
and reducing emissions with energy-efficiency retrofits, an 
ambitious program to reduce emissions, and along the way 
create jobs and opportunity across our province, but we don’t 
see any of that. Instead we see a government going full steam 
ahead when it comes to matters of selling off things like our 
Crown lands, Mr. Speaker, and pretending, pretending that they 
had seen the light on their failed attempt to sell off our Crown 
corporations but leaving the door wide open for the deceitful 
. . . I’ll pull that statement back, Mr. Speaker . . . but the sell-off 
of STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if that government would recognize the error in their way 
and would actually do the right thing right now, what they 
would do is stop the sell-off of their assets of STC. They’d stop 
the sell-off of the buses. They’d stop the sell-off of the depots, 
and they would listen to Saskatchewan people, recognizing at 
the very least that these are assets that are owned by the people 
of Saskatchewan. And that’s why as New Democrats we are 
going to do all we can to stop that sell-off and to stop sell-offs 
into the future. 
 
And Saskatchewan people will not forget, Mr. Speaker, because 
I have great faith in Saskatchewan people. They will not be 
tricked. They will not forget when the next group of 
conservatives show up, Mr. Speaker, maybe with a new name, 
maybe with a new name and claim they’re not going to sell off 
our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And recognizing that, 
we’re going to do all we can in the coming weeks, months, and 
years to fight to save our Crown corporations, but then to 
protect them and strengthen them, Mr. Speaker. To lock them 
down into protection that forces a government — if they’re 
going to play the kind of games that this one has — forces a 
government to take it to Saskatchewan people, to have the 
courage and to have the backbone to give a vote to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the owners of those Crown corporations. 
 
And when we look at those Crown corporations, of course, 
these are built by and for Saskatchewan people. And they’re not 
just important to our past, they’re so relevant into our future. 
They can be utilized in so many ways to help create jobs and 
build a stronger economy. They can help us live up to our 
environmental obligations. And they can help us do things like 
build a thriving tech sector in Saskatchewan, a growing industry 
that allows diversity to this province. 
 
You know, and the minister has referenced that they have some 
new inclusion of technology into the school system, Mr. 
Speaker, into the curriculum here today, as part of the Throne 
Speech here. And this potentially is a positive step. I would be 
supportive of making sure that we have modern classrooms that 
are teaching computational thinking and preparing students for 
the jobs of today and tomorrow and supporting the growth of 
that tech sector. 
 
But you can’t just keep piling on more onto the backs of 

teachers, Mr. Speaker. You can’t keep piling on more that needs 
to be done. You have to thoughtfully go at this, resource it and 
decide how we’re going to support the implementation of a 
curriculum. You just can’t keep adding more and more to those 
that are being asked to do more and more with less, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think if we’re going to look at growing that vibrant, 
strong tech sector, we also need to make sure that we’re 
supporting it with access, which is so critical to a Crown 
corporation like SaskTel, which is an incredible tool for us to be 
able to go out and extend access to an entire province, on the 
high-speed Internet side, on cellular service side, Mr. Speaker, 
making sure that we’re supporting the development of that 
industry and of jobs all across this province. But of course this 
is a government that wants to put all of that at risk. And to truly 
build that tech sector, there’s an important discussion around 
how do you support capital, how do you make sure that the 
dollars are there to be invested for those startups, and certainly 
we don’t see anything innovative or creative on those fronts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on front after front Saskatchewan people deserve 
better than what they’re getting from this government. They do, 
from our perspective, deserve, you know, a province that works 
for everyone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see, you know, we see a government that brings forward a 
measure in this budget here around ride sharing, Mr. Speaker, 
without any consultation with the people who are directly 
involved in this and addressing the lack of safety within this 
industry right now. Not any consultation, Mr. Speaker, with 
those that are dealing with assault, abuse, harassment, racism, 
Mr. Speaker, just going ahead with a plan with no consultation, 
something that we’ve come to see far too often from this 
government. 
 
We see a government that’s even been slow to respond to 
spaces that they should have been on top of right away. We 
have wildfire down the west side of the province and a 
government sitting idle in working with producers who have 
been devastated by way of loss of cattle, a government that’s 
been sitting on their hands. And a government that’s been 
sitting on their hands and sort of green lighting process when it 
comes to matters like the Quill Lakes, something that should 
have been a priority for this government a long period ago, a 
matter where this government showed some leadership and 
brought together experts and communities and RMs [rural 
municipality] and people and businesses and First Nations, 
producers, and found a solution. 
 
Instead they have sat on their hands, Mr. Speaker, and now we 
hear that they’re pushing ahead a process and not even 
subjecting it to an environmental assessment that would divert 
waters through a system with fish-killing salinity levels into a 
world class spawning grounds, into an incredible system, Last 
Mountain Lake, in the Qu’Appelle Valley watershed. We 
should all be expecting a lot more of our government. It’s past 
time that this government stepped up to the plate and worked 
with the people of this province, the good people in through the 
Quills who faced devastation, to find an adequate solution that 
doesn’t include, that doesn’t include compromising an 
incredible fishery, an incredible system, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

[15:30] 
 
We have a time in this province where people are feeling 
betrayed, and for good reason, where jobs are few and hard to 
come by, Mr. Speaker, and because of the precarious nature of 
that work, don’t cover the cost of living. And it is particularly 
intensified by the incredible increases to their taxes, things like 
the education portion of property tax which, you know, took an 
extra $57 million from Saskatchewan people but failed to put 
those dollars, or $67 million, but failed to put those dollars back 
into classrooms — classrooms that are undersupported, 
classrooms with growing class size, classes with incredible 
complexity to the needs of those learners, teachers that are 
under-resourced, educational assistants that are being cut, Mr. 
Speaker. These are not conditions that set this province up to 
thrive or the people within it. 
 
We have a lot of strength in this province when we lean on the 
people of this province. What we’ve seen under this 
government in their late stages of their government is a 
government that’s really wanted to consolidate all power in the 
Premier’s office to serve sort of a political legacy and a partisan 
interest as opposed to the public’s interest or the province’s best 
interests. And you know, my vision is for a province that works 
for everyone, a province that’s filled with hope, opportunity, 
and reconciliation. And we have a government that’s failing to 
meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
There is no reason that we should not be able to be extending 
mental health and addiction services to every last person in this 
province that needs them. How many more young people do we 
have to observe losing their lives? How many more young 
people and families do we have to observe being torn apart? 
The fact is far too many people are suffering in silence. Far too 
many others that indicate they need help have services delayed 
and that window of opportunity to intervene in a meaningful 
way closes. You know, I think we can all think about what that 
means for a child, a 12-year-old that’s in despair or darkness, 
and we can also relate to what that might look like for a parent 
that’s struggling with depression or a parent that’s struggling 
with addiction. The costs of not responding to the needs of 
people with mental health and addictions services they deserve 
and need in a timely, urgent way with wraparound services is 
something that we can’t afford to act on and it’s an area that we 
need vision. It’s an area that we need leadership. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when we look at our classrooms, of 
course we’re going to do all we can, and we see the member, 
our critic, the member for Lakeview, fight back in a spirited 
way day after day as a champion for students, as a champion for 
education. And we’re going to do all we can as New Democrats 
to not just stop that damage, but to build the most enriched and 
engaging classrooms possible, to make sure that this province 
can be as strong as it can be, knowing that that is only 
accomplished when every last young person has all the 
opportunity they deserve and is as strong as they can be, 
making sure that we’re reducing class size and making sure we 
have the supports in place that they deserve, making sure that 
we give control back to our school boards who know best, 
democratically elected and making the decisions within this 
province. Instead we see a government consolidating that 
power, taking control, thinking that they know best. And 
building a culture back in education where we trust in the 

professionals, where we trust in the teachers, where we give 
them the respect, the support, and the autonomy that they 
deserve, Mr. Speaker, where we recognize that they’re the 
experts in their classrooms, in their communities, and in the 
best position to respond to the needs of learners within their 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And quite contrary I believe . . . I will need to review the 
remarks of the Education minister here today, but we have to do 
so much better in supporting students, in supporting teachers 
when it comes to the teachings of the treaties, making sure that 
that education is supported so that it lives up to the spirit and 
intent of those treaties and that we’re also teaching, all through 
the school system, understandings of the residential school 
system and the injustice that exists. 
 
And speaking of injustice, Mr. Speaker, we have a time within 
our province that we preside over an injustice that no one 
should ever tolerate, not one of us should tolerate, no party 
should tolerate, and that’s the injustice of underfunding of 
on-reserve education within our province, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
kind of scenario that I picture 20, 30 years down the road that 
all politicians of all stripes will be offering apologies for 
starving the education of young people in a way that’s based in 
systemic racism and injustice to all. But it’s on us right now to 
be acting, Mr. Speaker, and it’s my belief we need to be acting 
now to make sure that we have equitable funding for every last 
student in Saskatchewan and that includes, very importantly, 
students on reserves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a lot within this province to be thankful for. I have a 
lot to be thankful for. I suspect a lot of members have a lot of 
privilege in this Assembly and a lot to be thankful for. Many 
have a lot of struggles within our province, Mr. Speaker. And 
for us not to recognize the action and supports that we need to 
bring when it comes to mental health and addictions, for us to 
not recognize, Mr. Speaker, the supports that need to be 
extended by way of housing or food security, by way of acting 
on poverty, is really failing those that need us most. 
 
We have a government, Mr. Speaker, a Sask Party government 
that as they’ve tried to push millions of dollars towards the 
wealthiest within our province, that they’ve taken away from 
those with the least, Mr. Speaker. Taken away programs like the 
hearing aid program. Taken away programs for students with 
intensive needs. Attacking and trying to sell off the public 
seniors’ housing across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
housing that’s been built that serves communities today and 
that’s important to the future, Mr. Speaker. Failing to act on the 
areas that have a lot of promise in responding to this, like 
Housing First, Mr. Speaker, as a broad-based initiative across 
our province. 
 
We clearly have a government that’s failing to live up to its 
responsibility to serve every last person in this province. And 
we certainly have a government, a Sask Party government that 
is failing to ensure this province is as strong as it can be, a 
government that’s focused more I think on what sort of legacy it 
wants to leave the outgoing Premier, Mr. Speaker, as opposed 
to what kind of legacy they want to leave the people of this 
province, what kind of action they want to bring to the people 
of this province in the areas that truly, truly count. 
 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

You know, we need to build an economy in this province that’s 
not for the select few, as we see a government that has really 
failed to provide an economy that works for the people of this 
province. We need to build a strong and an inclusive economy, 
and that’s what we’re committed to. 
 
You know, we have a government that doesn’t even give 
attention at a time where they could be acting around making 
sure that we improve the performance of our rail transportation 
system in this province, important to all exporters, important to 
agricultural producers in this province. And they turn an eye on 
matters of things like the illegal foreign acquisition of farm land 
in our province, almost pretend as if they think it’s not 
happening, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to investigating and acting 
on something that’s clearly not in line with the spirit and intent 
of the laws that we have within Saskatchewan, and clearly not 
in line with the best interests of rural Saskatchewan or 
agriculture as we move forward. 
 
And we have opportunities within our province that we need to 
be acting on. We need to build a comprehensive water 
management strategy province wide, including the good people 
of this province and all stakeholders. That needs to include 
water monitoring. It needs to include monitoring of the 
adequacy of supply. It needs to be dealing with matters of 
illegal drainage, Mr. Speaker. It needs to work to re-establish 
and protect wetlands for the people of this province, something 
that’s important to us from a water management perspective, 
but also something that’s important from an environmental 
perspective, sequestering carbon. You know, the wetlands, 
they’re not just great for a duck hunter like me; they’re also 
great to work as part of our water management strategy and to 
sequester carbon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we see is clearly a government that’s 
really fallen out of line with the values of Saskatchewan people: 
compassion and common sense, co-operation and community. 
But what I see in Saskatchewan is I see those values on display 
all across our province. I see the motto of our province, “from 
many peoples, strength,” on display all throughout this 
province. I see it on school boards. I see it in classrooms. I see it 
in cultural communities. I see it with entrepreneurs across this 
province. I see it with workers. I see it with municipal leaders. I 
see it with those that are ready to act on the environment in a 
meaningful way. But I certainly don’t see it within this 
government. 
 
But I’m heartened. As we rally as a province, as we come 
together to address the big challenges and opportunities of 
today and tomorrow, I’m heartened that Saskatchewan people 
are rising to the occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech was, you know, a great 
disappointment to the people of the province. This is a 
government not being accountable to the people of this 
province, a government that has failed from a fiscal perspective 
with incredible financial mismanagement and debt loading 
through good years, Mr. Speaker. A government that’s presided 
over mismanagement of projects, that’s wasted hard-earned 
dollars and stolen them from places like education where they 
are needed, and a government that hasn’t been straight with the 
people of Saskatchewan on front after front. 
 

My message to Saskatchewan people is that we’re in it together. 
We’re stronger together. And as we embark as the official 
opposition, as Saskatchewan New Democrats, we’re going to 
have our sleeves rolled up. We’re going to be reaching out, 
continue to reach out province wide as we have, and to the 
people of this province who are engaging in such a good 
constructive way, I say thank you. We’re going to continue to 
listen and build, and ultimately what we’re aiming to is to build 
a province that works for everyone, a Saskatchewan that’s filled 
with hope, opportunity, and reconciliation, and to lay out a 
vision that connects with the realities and hopes and dreams of 
the good people of this province. 
 
So I certainly won’t be supporting the lack of accountability of 
this government. I won’t be supporting a Throne Speech that’s 
unambitious and tired and more about propping up a partisan 
legacy of an outgoing Premier than what we deserve, which are 
actions, plans, vision that builds a brighter future for all within 
Saskatchewan. So I’ll be supporting the amendment brought 
forward by the member of Nutana and I won’t be supporting 
that Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course I rise to give 
my remarks in response to the Speech from the Throne 2017. 
And as is customary, I’m going to take this opportunity while 
I’m on my feet to thank the Speaker . . . who has requested 
such, and we do. And I thank all members and all staff here 
who make sure that we have this important opportunity to bring 
the hopes and the dreams and the thoughts of our constituents 
here to this place. And it really is an honour still every day to 
serve in this place. 
 
I think I also should thank my husband, Guy. Some will know 
that we celebrated our 20th wedding anniversary very recently, 
and I’ve spent more than half my life with him at this point. 
And it might shock some to know, but I can be really difficult 
to live with sometimes — only occasionally — but he puts up 
with me and he challenges me and he supports me, Mr. 
Speaker, and for that I am very grateful. And I look forward to 
the next 20 years and hopefully beyond, but I don’t take 
anything for granted. 
 
I also want to talk a little bit about my kids. I think I avoid that 
a little bit because I feel rather verklempt when I talk about 
them but, Mr. Speaker, Guy and I have three children, Hannah, 
Nolan, and Maya. 
 
Hannah will be a legal adult this year, at the end of this year, 
and I can’t quite believe that that is the case. She’s in grade 12 
at Campbell. She is quite a good student, a dancer, and has been 
really involved, particularly this year, at the school with clubs 
like the QSA [Queer Straight Alliance] and the truth and 
reconciliation club at school. And I am immensely proud of her. 
I give her probably more of a hard time than I should as a 
first-born daughter, but I hope she understands how proud we 
both are of her. 
 
My son Nolan is in grade 10 at Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. 
He is making the transition from the football field to the 
basketball court and the ice as we speak, and I think he’s having 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

quite a good time there at that school. 
 
And my youngest, as is often referred to, Mr. Speaker, attends 
École Connaught Community School in grade 6. And she is 
delighted with that school and with that school community that 
surrounds her, the teaching staff. And I just am very thankful, 
both in my own life and all the way through my children’s life, 
for the support and mentorship that they have had from adults in 
their lives, certainly including and perhaps especially those 
teachers and support staff in the schools. And I am truly 
thankful for that and for that experience for our children. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Of course I am always thankful for the love and support of my 
parents, and I know that I would not be standing here without 
their guidance. And I’d also just like to take a quick minute to 
say happy birthday to my grandma. It was her birthday 
yesterday, my grandma Olive — we call her Nanny — in 
Moose Jaw. And I know that she does occasionally check in on 
or follow very closely perhaps the proceedings here in this 
Assembly, so I wanted to wish her a very happy birthday. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I should also thank my constituency assistant 
Chris, and I often forget to do so in the way that she ought to be 
thanked. She is hard working. She is organized. I occasionally 
can be . . . lack some organization, and certainly she keeps me 
where I need to be and provides service to those people in our 
constituency and from around the province. And it has been the 
case that our office has been fairly busy over the last year and a 
half, and we’ve both learned together through emails around 
Bill 63 and around libraries for sure. But it’s been a good 
learning experience, and I really do sincerely thank her for all of 
her hard work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that brings me into my remarks specifically about 
the Throne Speech. An overall remark about this Throne 
Speech would be that it is, you know, maybe less, a little less 
about looking forward and a little more about looking back over 
the Premier’s legacy over the last decade or so. And I suppose I 
understand that, Mr. Speaker, that there is a tendency to do that, 
and I certainly acknowledge the hard work of the Premier. I 
know none of us . . . This is not an easy job, and I understand 
that it does not come without sacrifice. So I do thank him for 
his service, and I thank you for that hard work. And I thank his 
family, because we all know that our families experience a great 
deal of sacrifice so that we can stand here in this place and do 
the work that we do. So I am sincere in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wanted to just read into the record a little bit of a quote, and 
I’ll come back to this a few times in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 
but this is . . . We had Trevor Herriot here today, and I want to 
read a quote that’s in his book Towards a Prairie Atonement. 
And this is a quote by Cynthia Chambers and the late Narcisse 
Blood. It’s from their work Love Thy Neighbour: Repatriating 
Precarious Blackfoot Sites. And this is quite a lovely quote, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think it’s very important for all of us here in this 
place, and when we talk about looking forward: 
 

Whether we are indigenous or newcomer, today our 
teepees are held down by the same peg. Neither is going 
anywhere. The knowledge and the will needed to protect 
and save these places no longer belongs to one people or 

one tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a theme throughout my 
remarks, and that is that this province belongs to no one 
tradition or one people. I’ve been very concerned about some of 
the remarks around “real” people in this province by members 
opposite. The suggestion that there are somehow real people, 
and then there are, I guess, not real people. I assume by real 
people we mean — maybe I shouldn’t assume — but supporters 
of one government, and not supporters of the other, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And another theme in my remarks is going to be around 
leadership, because I think leadership . . . There’s one thing to 
be the leader of a political party. To be sure, this Premier has 
presided over a very powerful political brand, enjoyed 
popularity. It’s a powerful political machine, Mr. Speaker. But 
there’s also leadership, and that is around governing, and that is 
governing for all people. And those are people that voted for 
you, and those are people who did not vote for you, Mr. 
Speaker, and all are real people in this province. People who 
were here long before us, people who are newly here, people 
who just arrived yesterday. People who built sod huts on the 
prairie and people who have long and proud traditions — with 
good reason — as settlers in this province. 
 
We are all real people, and this is the type of leader . . . 
Leadership requires that we lead for all people in this province. 
We don’t always agree, Mr. Speaker, but we have to respect 
that these are all people, and real leadership means leading for 
all people, Mr. Speaker. So the type of . . . Part of the reason 
that I’m so hurt, I think, and concerned by those remarks is 
because it dehumanizes people in this province, and it makes 
the “other.” It makes it easy when we dehumanize — we speak 
as if they’re not real people — to do things like make a joke 
about someone dying on the side of the highway, Mr. Speaker. 
And I will acknowledge the member from Prince Albert. It 
showed leadership to apologize for that, and I do thank him for 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to call this out as well in terms of 
leadership, when I saw as a lack of leadership today around the 
actions of the Premier and calling out, calling into question the 
intentions of our interim leader here today, Mr. Speaker. And 
that was very troubling. Our leader is someone who is a 
long-time volunteer at the sexual assault line, who is a noted 
and committed feminist, someone who lives and breathes 
ensuring that women have access to the legal system, and 
ensuring that survivors are believed and supported and that we 
make this, and all spaces in this province, our party, this party, 
the party that was here earlier today, safe places for women. All 
places in this province. 
 
It was a pronounced lack of leadership that would call that into 
question. And I’m here to say that I am so proud of the type of 
leadership that our leader has presented through this. This is a 
hard thing to meet head on, Mr. Speaker, as you can imagine. 
For any leader, this is a hard thing to lead head on. For a young 
woman who is standing here as the first female leader of our 
party, those tiny shoulders are strong and broad, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m very proud of the work that she has done here and we 
will continue. 
 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

We are not there. No one is there, and no one should be 
throwing stones from glass houses around this issue. If we work 
together, that’s when we get our best work done, Mr. Speaker. 
And we can work together to make sure that this is a safe place 
for all people, all women. And I think a real opportunity was 
missed here today with that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have to say there was not a lot in the Throne Speech that I 
think . . . As I said, it was a lot of rear-view mirror. Not a lot of 
windshields, a lot of looking forward. And again, to a certain 
degree I understand that; the Premier is on his way out. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think when you’re looking back you are responsible 
for the good times, you are responsible for the good that has 
happened, but you also have to take responsibility for the things 
for maybe you have missed the mark a little bit. 
 
On the top of that, I’m going to talk about education. I got 
involved in politics in about 2009, when I was first elected to 
the public school board for this reason, because of concerns 
about education. I got involved in provincial politics because of 
very real concerns that I was seeing at that school board table, 
Mr. Speaker. And the fact that the only items that we’re 
addressing in this Throne Speech, the only items that were 
addressed in this Throne Speech were around the math 
curriculum and the notwithstanding clause really, really, really, 
really give me pause, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a lot of challenges in our education system right now. 
There is certainly the fact that we had $67 million in additional 
education property tax that was paid by people across this 
province this year, and $54 million taken out of the front line. 
We heard about French teachers, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is 
that teachers in this province . . . We lose 50 per cent of 
teachers within the first five years of teaching, and that is 
appalling. That is for French teachers, that is for all teachers, 
Mr. Speaker. Last year we lost — I understand there’s some 
dispute about the numbers — we lost almost 200 teachers in 
this province at a time when we have thousands of children 
entering our school system. 
 
We have an education sector plan that has a number of goals, 
and boards across this province, parents, educators are 
expressing significant concerns about our ability to maintain 
any gains that have been made and express concerns that we 
actually might backtrack. In case anyone wanted to know what 
some of those goals are: that 80 per cent of students achieve 
grade level in reading, writing, and math. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were some significant gains. There were 
gains made around the province around reading. There was 
good consultation with teachers. There was money and effort 
put into curriculum development and professional development, 
and that did see some gains. We’ve seen less with reading or 
with writing rather, and now we’re hearing this late in the game 
we’re going to start talking about math scores. 
 
The minister noted, you know, that there is a need to ensure that 
our students are prepared for, well a whole host of the future 
really, including STEM jobs. And I certainly agree with that. I 
have a daughter who intends to be an engineer, Mr. Speaker. 
But I know that I can’t extrapolate my child’s experience to the 
whole province, so I have to make sure that I understand what’s 
going on in other places around this province. And it is really 

concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a huge gap between indigenous and non-indigenous 
students in this province. Certainly that includes the 60 per cent 
funding for those children who attend school on-reserve, but 
that also includes a huge educational attainment gap and 
graduation gap for indigenous and non-indigenous students 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. It is in the education sector 
plan goal, and it is something that we have made very little 
progress towards. Individual school divisions have made some 
progress, and I commend them for it. They have also told us 
that these cuts are going to call into question their ability to 
continue with those gains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a Throne Speech that does not mention the North 
once, that did not mention the shortage of teachers in the North. 
It certainly didn’t mention the fact that NORTEP [northern 
teacher education program] and NORPAC [Northern 
Professional Access College], the withdrawal of funding for 
those programs, will further call into question our ability to 
recruit and retain teachers in the North. And that is the opposite 
direction that we need to be going in, Mr. Speaker. I heard my 
colleague this morning on the radio, the member for Riversdale, 
note that indigenous girls in this province are 26 times more 
likely to take their lives than their non-indigenous peers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are, I’m sure, highlights over the last 10 
years. The condition of children in this province, and 
particularly indigenous children, is not something to be proud 
of. In fact it’s a disgrace. 
 
We have a province that, after one decade-long resource boom, 
we maintained through and actually grew the number of 
children and seniors using the food bank. We have the highest 
rates of domestic violence in the country, double the national 
average. We have HIV rates that are at an epidemic level, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So I understand the need to look back and want to talk about a 
legacy, but understand — to the Premier and that government 
— that you own this legacy too. You made decisions to spend 
everything in the good times, to blow through a rainy day fund, 
and the least amongst us have seen their plight not only not 
increase, but be reduced, Mr. Speaker. And so you own both 
sides of that legacy. 
 
I note the Premier stated in his address, or rather the Speech 
from the Throne, during our decade of growth we’ve recorded 
the second-highest job-creation record and the second-highest 
growth in weekly incomes.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the funny thing about averages is this. You can 
have a few people doing very, very well and you can have a lot 
of people doing really poorly, and it increases your average. 
And I’m afraid that that’s what we’ve seen in this province, and 
that is a gap between the haves and have-nots, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is a concern. It’s a concern morally but is also a 
concern economically. It is a concern with regard to justice. It is 
a concern with regard to crime. It is a concern with regard to 
things like HIV rates. It’s a concern with regard to things like 
addiction rates, Mr. Speaker. 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

There was a recent report, very influential report out of the 
University of Saskatchewan, the Howe report, that noted that 
every year that we allow the educational attainment gap to exist 
in this province between indigenous students and 
non-indigenous students, we lose a billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
this is not only a moral imperative; this is an economic 
imperative. 
 
The overall cost to this province — and if you don’t believe me, 
go talk to the chamber of commerce — the overall cost of that 
gap between educational attainment between First Nations and 
non-First Nations students in this province is $90 billion. I’ll 
say that again — $90 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are failing to do the right thing and we are 
failing those children and we are failing economically. And I 
don’t know how when you’re looking back, you can be blind to 
that fact. So by all means, celebrate successes but do not turn a 
blind eye to this because this is also part of your legacy, Mr. 
Speaker. This is part of the legacy of the last 10 years. We had 
an opportunity to do something about this. 
 
We have the Truth and Reconciliation recommendations 
standing in front of us right now. We have a list. We have a list 
with very little progress towards them, and after that last 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we’ve actually seen regression on that 
progress. We have a promise for the Sixties Scoop that has 
gone, not only has gone unfulfilled, the blame has gone back on 
the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] for 
scheduling. Mr. Speaker, when some people want to get a 
meeting done, I see it happens very quickly; other times, it’s left 
to languish. So we wait on that, we wait on that promise, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll say this about obviously the very big education item in 
this Throne Speech around the notwithstanding clause. Mr. 
Speaker, last spring we had consensus around this province 
around Bill 63, around the cuts to education. We had school 
boards: public, Catholic school boards. We had rural folks. We 
had urban folks. We had folks in the North and folks in the 
South all concerned about that bill, Mr. Speaker. We had an 
opportunity in education and that goodwill with relationship to 
build something.  
 
And I don’t disagree, Mr. Speaker, that the Theodore ruling 
provides a very real and significant challenge to us in this 
province. We have an opportunity through relationship, through 
thought to find a real solution for the future in this province 
with regard to education, and the Premier instead has decided to 
grandstand and look at tearing apart relationships rather than 
looking at actually fixing the problem, Mr. Speaker. And I find 
that frankly reprehensible. 
 
And we see it time and time again in the vacuum of leadership, 
we would rather see short-term wedge-issue politics to be 
played that punts the problem down the line to someone else. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is also part of this legacy. Shake your 
fist and threaten to sue. Threaten legal action, but don’t sit 
down with people and look them in the eye and try to come up 
with a solution. And, Mr. Speaker, that is also part of the 
legacy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I probably am near my time. There’s 

more that I can say, but understand, you don’t just own the 
shiny objects. You don’t just own the things that you want to 
put in the letterhead, Mr. Speaker. You also own things like the 
gap between First Nations and non-First Nations education in 
this province. And I would suggest with the rest of your term 
that you put your minds and your hearts towards fixing that 
problem. Mr. Speaker, that is a challenge for all leadership 
candidates in this Assembly. 
 
With that, I will be serving notice that I will not be voting in 
favour of the Throne Speech, but I will be voting in favour of 
the amendment as proposed by my colleague. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to be provided an opportunity to respond to the 2017 
Speech from the Throne. Before I begin, I’d like to thank, take 
this time to acknowledge some important people in my life. 
First of all I’d like to thank my wife, Phyllis, for all the time 
and support she has offered for me to be here, and for the 
patience she has shown recently with the time I’ve spent on the 
road. Whether I’m here in the legislature or visiting constituents 
across my riding, I’m incredibly grateful that at the end I can 
always return home with her. 
 
I’d like to thank my children, Nicole, a teacher that lives in 
Grand Coulee and her husband, Eric. Also I’d like to 
acknowledge my son, Burton, and his wife, Audrey, both 
RCMP officers that are posted in White City, just outside of 
Regina here. Burton, my son, is on the emergency response 
team and Audrey works out of “F” Division in Regina. Also I’d 
like to acknowledge my daughter, Brittany, and her friend, 
Dale, who is an RN [Registered Nurse] in Lethbridge. I’ve been 
blessed to have two beautiful grandsons: Kohen, six, and 
Hudson, two.  
 
One of the reasons I decided to run as an MLA was to ensure 
the bright future for my grandchildren. And I’m ensuring a 
bright future by proud and committed . . . this government has 
shown to education, health care, infrastructure, parks, social 
services, and the safety to ensure that my grandchildren can 
enjoy a prosperous province as we go forward. 
 
I’d like to take the time to thank my constituents of the Cypress 
Hills. It’s been my pleasure to represent the people of my 
constituency every day as part of this legislature. I’d like to 
thank the Cypress Hills constituency association for everything 
that they do to ensure that I can properly represent the people of 
my constituency.  
 
And finally, I’d like to thank my constituency assistant, Twila 
Wedrick, for all her hard work and dedication. Twila, as my 
CA, is the heart of my office. Any who call our office or walk 
through the doors can be assured that they are receiving some of 
the best help our government has to offer. She is kind, 
respectful, and I appreciate everything she does for our office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was able to make a member statement about this 
last week, but I’d like to take a brief moment to touch on this 
again. Twila’s husband, Ron, and her son, Evan, on October the 
17th were caught in the wildfires down home in the Southwest 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

and were severely burnt in amongst the grassfires. Twila’s 
husband, Ron, and Evan are in the Calgary Foothills Medical 
Centre where they are receiving treatment. Her son, Evan, 
received 80 per cent third degree burns, and her husband, also 
similar. Over $100,000 has been raised for Twila’s family 
through a GoFundMe page so far. 
 
I want to thank the communities for rushing in to help the 
Wedrick family and the people from all over the province that 
have stepped up to support this family. This is what 
Saskatchewan’s all about — volunteerism. Volunteerism and 
giving seems to be embedded in the Saskatchewan culture, 
especially when the chips are down. I would express that my 
thoughts and prayers are with Twila and her family again today 
as I deliver this presentation. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge James Hargrave, a young man on 
the Saskatchewan-Alberta border that lost his life in the fire. 
James leaves at home four small children and his wife, which 
he will be greatly missed. 
 
An older rancher from the area, Eddie Riehl, 74 years old, is in 
intensive care in a Calgary hospital also. Eddie was caught in 
the fire and lost his direction and wandered down the road and 
was found laying in the grass a few miles from the intersection. 
 
I must say too, my CA Twila, as big a heart as she has, is 
working with his wife and helping her in her time of stress. She 
is 69 and she needs lots of care also. The Fox Valley and 
community fire department in the last few days had a fundraiser 
to support the four families directly affected by the fire 
physically. I was proud to be there the other night on Monday 
when I wasn’t here at the legislature. They raised 150,000 in a 
silent auction and supper. What an amazing feat. And all this 
money goes to each one . . . is contributed and divided up 
between the families themselves. It was an amazing night and 
evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin my response by acknowledging 
some of the . . . from the Speech to the Throne that means a 
great deal to me, and that is this government’s plan to address 
rural crime. Rural crime prevention has been a significant 
concern for many of our constituents and constituents across the 
province.  
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be proud to be part of 
the caucus committee on crime along with the Minister of 
Advanced Education and the member from Canora-Pelly and 
the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford and the member from 
Estevan and the member from Regina Coronation Park and the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . How do you like that? The committee met with around 58 
stakeholders in 10 communities over 12 days to consult with the 
Saskatchewan citizens on how we can make our rural 
communities safer. After significant consultation, we put 
together a list of eight recommendations. 
 
Our government responded with the creation of the protection 
and response team, PRT, and a total of 5.9 million will be 
invested and support this new group of recommendations in the 
report. The PRT will consist of 258 armed officers who will 
have the power to arrest and detain. One hundred and twenty of 
these officers will be from the RCMP and municipal services, 

including 30 new policing positions. Forty are Ministry of 
Highways commercial vehicle enforcement officers with 
expanded powers, and the final 98 are Ministry of Environment 
conservation officers. By adding the PRT to the rural police 
force, the government will be able to improve policing response 
times, enhance the presence of uniformed officers, and ensure 
increased enforcement of all types of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during my time with the caucus committee on 
crime, I heard too many stories about officers having to drive 
for hours to respond to a call. Many stakeholders rightfully 
pointed out that an increase in police visibility may help to 
address these concerns. Well the government has listened. The 
$5.9 million investment into the PRT is a positive step to 
address one of many major concerns my constituents expressed 
to me, and I am proud to have been part of this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons this government is so easy for 
me to support is because they listened to the people of this 
province. This is true for my previous example on rural crime 
prevention, and it is true with the next topic I would like to 
touch on. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest rate of impaired driving among 
many of the provinces in Canada. More than 600 people have 
been killed and 4,000 injured in the last decade. This problem is 
particularly relevant in, and it also . . . such as concerns with 
impaired driving where it conveys my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has taken steps to try to curb the 
type and number of impaired driving instances by increasing the 
age at which drivers are prohibited from driving, from having 
any drugs or alcohol in their bloodstream, from 19 and under to 
21 and under; introducing a three-day vehicle seizure for drivers 
over the age of 21 having found to have blood alcohol levels 
between .04 and .08 for the first time; and making 
Saskatchewan’s ignition interlock laws the toughest in Canada. 
 
But more can be done. The announcement that the government 
will be urging municipalities to allow ride-sharing services is 
another positive step in reducing counts of impaired driving. 
 
Companies such as Uber and Lyft will fill a significant void in 
rural Saskatchewan and enable SGI to offer these companies 
affordable insurance and another step in ensuring that all the 
people in this province have access to a safe ride home. 
 
This is a future profit, Mr. Speaker . . . This is future proof, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government is willing to listen to the people 
of rural Saskatchewan. And the citizens across the entire 
province will be able to drive on better quality highways than 
any they had experienced before this province took power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m always proud to say I’m a member of the Sask 
Party because rural, urban, and both or either, our party will not 
leave anyone behind. We’re always working towards making 
Saskatchewan the best province it can be for everyone, and this 
Throne Speech does exactly that. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion the 
member of Estevan put forward and I will not be supporting the 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready . . . I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 
take my place, join the debate. Getting a lot of encouragement 
from Coronation Park. Much appreciated. It’s also good to 
follow the member from Cypress Hills in this debate. I can 
attest first-hand as to the beauty of that individual’s 
constituency. I was out there last Thursday for a funeral and 
saying goodbye to a neighbour of mine that . . . buried him out 
on Nekaneet First Nation. But a beautiful part of the world and 
it was a hard time saying goodbye to a good friend there, Mr. 
Speaker, but interesting to join the debate at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start where we all should, of course, 
thanking your good self for presiding in this Chamber, being the 
guardian of our rights and privileges in this Assembly. I thank 
my colleague from Lakeview for reminding me of that just so 
folks realize that it wasn’t you setting that hook, Mr. Speaker. 
But thank you for the work that you do, and indeed all the 
people in this beautiful building that we get to work at, the work 
that they do in support of the people’s business. 
 
And you know, it’s always a bit of a thrill. Earlier in the season 
around the time of Treaty 4 signing anniversary time in 
September, Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina had the Treaty 4 
flag flying strong from the Albert Street bridge. How beautiful 
that looked. The Canadian flags are out there right now against 
the snow. You sit there driving along and you think, you know, 
I’m going to work where? What a privilege it is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to all the people that make this building go, 
we say thank you very much. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is 
the first session where we’re here without the folks that were 
fired by the government as part of the government — the 
cleaners. And I’ve heard it said, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, 
it’s always a measure of an organization or a society or of a 
person as to how they treat the hardest working and the 
humblest amongst us, Mr. Speaker, and again I’m reminded that 
there’s a hard-working group of men and women that should 
have been treated better by this government, and weren’t. And I 
guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s where I’ll go with my remarks in the 
main. 
 
Of course I want to say thank you to the folks that keep the 
constituency office going: Tim, Don, and Jeff. They do a heck 
of a job serving the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. I 
want to say thank you very much to the people of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre for continuing to entrust me with this work, 
Mr. Speaker. And of course I want to thank my friends, my 
neighbours, and my family. And yesterday was my dear 
departed mother’s birthday, Mr. Speaker, and it’s always sort of 
a poignant time of the year for us in the McCall family in 
remembering a woman who had a tremendous impact on all of 
us, and we love her and miss her still. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
thankful that my father is still among the quick and certainly 
always able to provide some keen political insight at a 
moment’s notice. And of course my brother and his family, my 
sister, sister-in-law, and certainly my darling Theresa, for whom 
I am no end of thankful for the love and support that she gives 
me, not just on the clock for days like today and the work that 

we do, but as has been noted repeatedly, this isn’t a nine-to-five 
kind of pursuit. It’s kind of all consuming, and everybody’s 
along for the ride whether they like it or not. And I guess I’m 
just so thankful and so lucky that she brings so much to it, 
including no end of patience. So I’m thankful for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I guess it’s been interesting listening to various of the speeches 
in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the speech that 
actually started the day of the Throne Speech being delivered, 
and that was the prorogation speech that was given, as ever in a 
fine style by the Lieutenant Governor. But the prorogation 
speech had a number of passages in it that were pretty 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. And I guess I think about, you know, 
having stood in this place, you know, for a good long time, but 
for this past year in particular, Mr. Speaker, back to the Throne 
Speech before and then the budget that followed and how many 
things have changed in that circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But still and all, there’s some things that go on that make you 
feel like you’re being gaslit by the government, Mr. Speaker, or 
sort of like you have to go outside to breathe some fresh air to 
figure out, you know, what end is really up. Or to put it another 
way, Mr. Speaker, reminds me of a saying from Marx, and I’m 
sure that my colleague, the member from Coronation Park, will 
be familiar with this particular saying of Marx. Of course, I’m 
referring to Chico Marx from the movie Duck Soup, back in the 
’30s, where he said something along the lines of, you know, 
who are you going to believe, me or your lying eyes? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the disconnect that is there 
between reality and the way that things are actually happening 
on the ground versus some of the speeches that have gone in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, it’s something else. It’s really 
something else. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of that 
chasm between, you know, actual facts and different of the 
speeches that get delivered here, it’s been a while, Mr. Speaker, 
but I still can’t quite get over just how big that gap is, Mr. 
Speaker. And again we’d seen it, you know. Look no further 
than the prorogation speech where the speech went as follows: 
 

While some other governments have chosen to continue 
running deficits indefinitely, my government chose to take 
a different approach. 
 
To secure Saskatchewan’s future, difficult decisions had to 
be made to ensure economic growth and reduce the 
province’s dependence on resource revenues while 
ensuring important services and programs are sustainable 
in the long run. 
 
My government set a goal to return the budget to balance 
in three years, and we are on track to meet that 
commitment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s where the cognitive dissonance sort of goes 
into overtime in terms of again what this government is 
preaching and what is the practice out in reality, Mr. Speaker. 
And we need to look no further than the fact of the leadership 
season that is upon us on both sides of this House, and fair 
enough. And you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
another dynamic where . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I think I 
hear my friend, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. I can 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

hear him but I can’t quite make out what he’s saying. He’s 
maybe going back to Marx or something . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . He’s going to Marx. There we go. Okay. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I guess the thing is, I’ve said this in 
different ways over the years. It’s funny. There are members on 
both sides of this House that I have quite a high opinion of 
personally and that I can be . . . Very happy to see the member 
from Yorkton, when he’s come back from cancer treatment, and 
be very glad for him, Mr. Speaker. You know, I can run into the 
Premier’s mother and father on Throne Speech day and 
sincerely congratulate them on the contribution that their family 
has made in service to the province, and I can do the same for 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker. And this is a point where I’ll say, you 
know, thank you very much for the service. There are aspects of 
that legacy, there are aspects of the decisions that have been 
made that I disagree with, and the record is very clear on that, 
but certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’re not beyond our own humanity 
here where we can’t recognize that in each other. Or I hope not, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of those who have served and are going on to 
another chapter in their life, I say, good luck with that. I say, 
thank you for the service. And in that regard as well, Mr. 
Speaker, I include the member from Northeast who has moved 
out of cabinet, but of course had been tasked with putting a 
budget together after the last election, had been tasked by that 
government with presiding over the magic act that was a 
transformational change, and trying to square the circle of what 
they had said in the election about keeping Saskatchewan strong 
and what had been kept from the people in terms of not 
presenting a budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again we’ve heard different things from 
members opposite about the debt situation in this province. But 
you know, maybe a little vision 2020 in, you know, from page 
47 of the budget, Mr. Speaker, where it says in the year 2020, 
net debt for the province will be $21.8 billion. To give you an 
idea of what that means, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when Romanow 
and the New Democrats took over from Devine and the 
Progressive Conservatives, net debt I believe was on the order 
of $14 billion, $28 billion in today’s dollars, Mr. Speaker. But 
we had the congratulations roll on the part of members opposite 
about how they’ve done such a great job on the debt. I mean 
like I don’t know if they read their own documents, Mr. 
Speaker. And I hope that they do. 
 
So in terms of just the budget and what had gone before the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and looking at the Throne Speech 
which, you know, throne speeches tend to be high-level, sort of 
a broad bold strokes approach to what the agenda of the 
government’s going to be for the year to come, and that you 
await for the detail, the hard detail that comes with the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, where the rubber literally hits the road. 
 
I guess when they came to bring another Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, I was half wondering if they wouldn’t come in and 
provide another budget, Mr. Speaker. Because in terms of the 
boast that was in that prorogation speech . . . And again no debit 
nor fault to the Lieutenant Governor for that section of the 
speech, Mr. Speaker. It’s the government’s words; it’s the 
government’s boast. The idea that their three-year plan to 
eliminate the deficit is on track would be laughable if it wasn’t 

so sad, Mr. Speaker, would be laughable if it wasn’t part of the 
work of a government that kept the books from the people of 
Saskatchewan in the last provincial election, that didn’t have 
the guts to show what the situation really was, and then have 
engaged in this exercise where, well now it’s into this 
three-year plan. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we see the different leadership 
candidates up on that side, Mr. Speaker. Some are saying, well 
no, maybe not a three-year plan; maybe a four-year plan, maybe 
that’s what it takes. Or maybe instead of, you know, dictating a 
3.5 per cent, $250 million cut to the public service, maybe it’s 
more like, well you should take an extra 70 million out of the 
Crowns’ employees and the public service. Or, you know, I 
think one of the members was saying that they should take the 
funding out of the provincial park system, Mr. Speaker — today 
when we see the legislation brought forward for a new 
provincial park. You know, there are different sort of tilts that 
go on on the part of that government where you wonder like, 
has it really come to this? Are they in that much disarray, Mr. 
Speaker? And apparently they are. 
 
But when they come out and say with a straight face that their 
budget from last spring means anything, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
flip-flopped on so many aspects of that budget, and I might add, 
Mr. Speaker, deservedly so because the shoot-first, aim-second 
way that this government approaches so many different files . . . 
And again we’d seen that in a hard piece of work brought 
forward by the member from Riversdale and the member from 
Cumberland on the way that this government shut down STC 
and then tried to figure out how to reckon with the damage 
after. 
 
On front after front, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the expansion of 
the PST, Mr. Speaker, where some things were on for budget 
day and then depending on who was . . . You know, and again 
my colleague from Lakeview was talking about the real people 
as posited by the member from Carlton, P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Carlton, where on Bill 40 they finally heard from the real 
people, Mr. Speaker. Whereas, you know, their own sort of 
campaign promises, that apparently wasn’t enough. Where, you 
know, people across this province coming out and saying, you 
didn’t promise this; you don’t have a mandate for it; we value 
these things that we built together over generations; don’t you 
dare touch them. 
 
It took them a year to get the message, Mr. Speaker. It took 
them a year and two by-elections where people sent them a 
message. And so, great, they finally got the message and they 
moved to, you know, the Premier in a move that was kind of 
Trumpian in terms of Facebook Live and one-way 
communication out there to the followers. Time to say, 
Saskatchewan, we’ve heard the message. 
 
But of course repealing Bill 40 as the Premier promised to do 
on Facebook, you know, you get out into reality, that’s not quite 
what’s happened. In terms of the different provisions of Bill 40, 
Mr. Speaker, when that bill was introduced a year and a day 
ago, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Northwest, then 
the Justice minister and the guy that was tasked with carrying 
the can on Bill 40 — and of course who’s had some very 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

interesting things to say when it comes to the different moves of 
that government — what he said on October 31st, page 974 of 
Saskatchewan Hansard, he had said as regards Bill No. 40: 
“Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will not include a winding up and 
dissolution of a Crown corporation or other restructuring of the 
Crown corporation.” 
 
Whereas, you know, in the past few days, Mr. Speaker, where 
the Premier said that they need to hold on to different aspects of 
Bill 40, and the changes that they made to the regime governing 
our Crown corporations is . . . Well, why do they need to only 
partially repeal instead of fully repeal, like they said they 
would, Mr. Speaker? Well, it’s because they need to wind up 
different aspects of the Crowns. And again, you know, but there 
it is, the words of the Justice minister. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of that individual, I see where he’s calling for a whole 
public inquiry into the GTH. Great idea, great idea. We 
certainly support that, Mr. Speaker, and have for the past — 
what is it? — three years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of different of the candidates over there saying that 
putting the PST onto insurance was a wrong-headed move, you 
know, we agree with that too, Mr. Speaker. That was one of the 
reasons why we voted against that budget. But all the members 
over there, of course, you know, walked right up to that line and 
said yup, we support the budget. You know, pick your measure 
in that budget, Mr. Speaker, where there’s been the 
flip-flopping go on. 
 
There’s some, like, incredibly wrong-headed things in that 
budget, Mr. Speaker. I think of the moves they tried to make 
around libraries, Mr. Speaker, where it was plain that they 
didn’t understand the balance sheets that went with the different 
regional libraries, Mr. Speaker, and the way that they thought 
they were going to get assets out of those entities, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, again they got the memo earlier on that one. That’s 
good. 
 
But you’d think that they’d do some consultation on these 
things. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? They do. Treasury 
board is meeting right now, Mr. Speaker, treasury board’s 
meeting right now. And we’ve got another Finance minister 
that’s come in the wake of the last Finance minister that saw his 
political future go up in flames on the pyre of this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we’ll see what comes now. But I guess it’s refreshing to 
hear some more details, or a more complete accounting of what 
things really mean in terms of the leadership race that’s going 
on over there, and the choices that are really there as opposed to 
this, you know, we’re going to keep Saskatchewan strong, and 
we’re going to promise five things and we’re going to sort of 
renege on half of them. And then, you know, some of them are 
back on. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this comes out of the budget so you’ll 
forgive me if I’m a little reticent in terms of my interest in the 
Throne Speech itself. There is some good things in there for 
certain. There’s some wrong-headed things in there for certain. 
But the thing is, Mr. Speaker, they’re compounding the 
confusion and the mismanagement and the scandal and the 
waste that comes with their budget, and they’re not fixing that 
before they’re moving on to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

So if past is indeed prologue, or the best indicator of future 
behaviour is past behaviour, as some might say in this place, 
Mr. Speaker, well I think they’ve got some fixing to do before 
they move on to the next thing. 
 
So again, you know, the possibilities for disappointment in this 
work are darn near endless, Mr. Speaker, but I was half 
expecting them to come forward with a budget, or at least a 
financial update to let people know where things were really at, 
let them know what the books really mean, what services they 
had cut, what cuts they were reversing, what tax increases they 
had proposed they were going forward with, which ones they 
haven’t. 
 
You know there’s a reckoning that’s coming for that, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s come in places and in moments on a few 
different doorsteps around this province. But it’s still to come 
apparently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s sometimes said that even a broken watch — and 
I’m speaking of course of a dial watch — is right at least twice 
a day. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are some fine measures 
in this . . . Or the sands through the hourglass, as the case may 
be, Mr. Speaker, so are the funny decisions of this Throne 
Speech, so are the way that this government is moving forward 
with different measures that just make you scratch your head, 
that make you question their ability to run a three-car parade. 
 
And despite all that, Mr. Speaker, there’s some good things that 
have happened. You know, I’ve been through the length and 
breadth of the mâmawêyatitân centre, the new Scott Collegiate, 
and the kids there and the teachers and the community are so 
very happy about it. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
been a long time coming. That’s been a long time coming. 
 
You know, I’ve seen Ken Krawetz in here last night and of 
course he’s returned to the building as the chief of staff for the 
Premier, and welcome back, Ken Krawetz. I’m sure he’s still 
sort of trying to figure out how to get bracket creep fixed for the 
budget to come or, you know, different files like that. But we 
wish him all the luck with that. 
 
But of course, he was the guy that . . . We’d put up the money 
for planning in February 2007 for Scott Collegiate. It was 
announced in the budget when that member was the Education 
minister, and then the wait was on, and were the feds in or not, 
and the feds were not. Was the health region going to be a full 
partner in it? And you know, ultimately that government 
directed them out of it. But Scott Collegiate is finally there and 
those kids have a first-class institution to go to, and I’m so very 
happy about that, Mr. Speaker. I think education’s a great 
leveller in our society and I’m so excited that they’ve got that 
opportunity. 
 
Just as I’m excited as for the kids at Sacred Heart, kitty-corner, 
in the Regina Catholic School Board where innovative, 
important things have been done in education, in public 
education, at that institution for many, many years, Mr. 
Speaker. And they carry that tradition forward, and again, 
they’ve got a first-class institution to pursue that work. 
 
So there are some great things happening, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
never deny that, but when you take it in its totality, Mr. 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

Speaker, the way that this government has approached the 
public service, the way that this government approaches the 
public purse, the way that this government approaches the 
Saskatchewan public, Mr. Speaker, you know, they have a hard 
enough time supporting their own budget themselves, let alone 
bring forward a new Throne Speech to talk about all these other 
things that they want to do. So you’ll forgive us if we’re a bit 
skeptical in terms of their planning going ahead, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And that of course is why I’m proud to stand in my place today 
to say that I will be supporting the amendment that was put 
forward by the member from Nutana, and it’s a fine indictment 
of the work of this government, and I’ll not be supporting the 
Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to my 
colleagues for the opportunity to speak to this year’s Throne 
Speech. Just to make it short, I will be voting in favour to the 
Speech from the Throne and against the amendment. 
 
There’s some thank yous I’d like to say. I’d like to say thank 
you definitely to our Speaker. I would also like to say thank you 
to team Telfer. That’s the team that runs my home office. Mary 
Anne, my CA for the past 14 years, and her husband Don have 
been there for me. And she was CA for Arlene Julé for eight 
years before that, so she’s got a vast amount of experience and 
knowledge. Over the years she has become more than just a 
CA. Mary Anne and Don have become close friends. To Mary 
Anne and Don, thank you very much. 
 
Before I begin there’s one more very important thank you that I 
must do, and that is to my dear wife, Valerie. Today is our 42nd 
wedding anniversary. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Yes, I was very young when I got married. She 
has been by my side through the thick and thin, and I am very 
grateful for her support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate several of my 
fellow members, who along with me were elected, I believe, 
November 3rd or 4th. There were 10 members elected that day, 
five from each side of the House. That side of the House, 
they’re all gone; this side, three are left, and that would be the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast, the member from 
Saskatoon Willowgrove, and myself. And I thank them for their 
friendship. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I would like to begin by looking at some of the great resources 
that our province has. There are things that other provinces 
have, but they don’t have them in the quantity or maybe the 
quality that we have. Forty-five per cent of all of Canada’s crop 
land — that is from Vancouver Island to Cape Spear, 
Newfoundland — 45 per cent of this nation’s crop land is here 
in Saskatchewan. It is what’s built this province. It is the 
backbone of this province. It is what sustains this province and 
it is our future. With that fact in mind we must guard and 
protect all things agriculture. The land and the people who toil 

on it are very precious and a very special commodity. 
 
Also 35 per cent of all the world’s uranium is in Saskatchewan. 
It is also the purest and richest in the world. We are now 
manufacturing medical isotopes using Saskatchewan uranium, 
and we’re doing it here in Saskatchewan. Now that is a jewel in 
the Saskatchewan crown. Medical isotopes, of course, are used 
for X-rays, MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], CT 
[computerized tomography] scans, and we’re doing that here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also have more than 54 per cent of all the world’s potash. 
As feeding the world becomes more and more demanding, 
potash as fertilizer becomes more and more necessary in the 
production of food. I had the privilege to tour a potash mine. I 
was very, very impressed with what I saw, and I would like to 
acknowledge the men and women who work in these mines. I 
would like to say to them, thank you. 
 
Oil is the precious black pearl of Saskatchewan. It is a resource 
that we hadn’t been pursuing to its full potential under the 
previous NDP government. I have a map in my office that 
shows oil activity in Western Canada and it is an ’02 
production. The development almost stops at the Saskatchewan 
border and it looks like Alberta has all the oil. The truth is, 
Saskatchewan has more oil than Alberta. 
 
We had a government that did not build on that resource and 
did not create a viable business environment that encouraged 
companies to come here and drill. In fact, they discouraged 
development. Now over the last 10 years that has all changed. 
This year Saskatchewan will have more than twice as many 
wells drilled than Alberta. In fact, the Fraser Institute lists 
Saskatchewan as the number one place in all of North America 
— all of North America — to drill for oil. I believe second is 
Montana and third is Texas. Way down in 43rd place is Alberta. 
How times have changed. Alberta has moved into a government 
like we had, and we have moved into a forward-thinking Sask 
Party government. Is that a coincidence? Governments switch 
and oil switches. Now is that a coincidence or not? Hmm. 
 
Another great resource, and I believe the most important, is our 
people. They have persevered through the hard times and stayed 
here in Saskatchewan. Now we are building a better 
Saskatchewan, from a have-not province to becoming an 
economic giant in Canada in just 10 years. Now that is 
something we can all be proud of. Saskatchewan is growing in 
leaps and bounds and taking its rightful place in the Dominion 
of Canada. 
 
I have just mentioned a few of the big jewels in our province. 
There are many, many more, some of them not as big but just as 
important to the lifeblood of the thriving economy here in 
Saskatchewan. Each one of our resources not only provides 
products to export and sell, they provide jobs. And of course the 
economic impact is unending. 
 
For 70 years the NDP sat on resources and did nothing but lead 
us on a downward spiral. As a result, we became a have-not 
province. Our only export was our children leaving to find jobs 
in other provinces. We were a province with a declining 
population, and we were a province with no future, a province 
in economic decline. So what has changed in just 10 years? And 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2017 

what has changed has been real change. 
 
Now I’d like to look at the numbers, the real numbers from 
Statistics Canada. Statistics Canada says for the last 10 years, 
ag exports have increased by 185 per cent, 185 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, in 10 years. Exports in total have increased by 61 per 
cent. Manufacturing and sales have increased by 44 per cent. 
The GDP [gross domestic product] increased by 24 per cent. 
Capital investment has increased by 90 per cent. Retail trade 
increased by 61 per cent. Average weekly earnings increased by 
39 per cent. These are the facts. These are the true numbers. 
This is where we stand today. 
 
Our government opened the doors to business. Our government 
has given our people a chance to grow their companies or start 
new companies. Our government has undertaken huge 
infrastructure projects to enable our people to challenge the 
world. In the past 10 years, we have spent 26 billion on 
infrastructure for schools, hospitals, and highways. Highways 
alone have received 7 billion. 
 
The NDP are criticizing us about surgical wait times getting 
longer, and in some cases they are right. That does happen 
when you have a growing population. Of course, that is 
something the NDP never had to deal with. They were dealing 
with a declining population, and yet they had the longest 
waiting list in all of Canada. We have recruited more than 800 
new doctors and more than 3,000 new nurses. We have built 
hospitals, schools; not closing them like the NDP did. 
 
The NDP were and are against private MRIs. To date, 900 
people have purchased MRIs, and the private MRI companies 
have done 900 free MRIs. Mr. Speaker, that’s 1,800 MRIs that 
cost the taxpayer nothing, zero, not a cent. I think it’s obvious 
that that is a tremendous success for our taxpayers here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in the House when we were questioning the 
then government NDP on the tremendous loss of people from 
our province. The reply that is now infamous came from former 
NDP MLA, Eldon Lautermilch, and it was, that leaves more for 
the rest of us. What it amounted to was more taxes for the rest 
of us. He was also the man that said it was ridiculous and 
laughable to think we could grow this province. Eldon, where 
are you now? I heard he’s selling real estate in a growing 
province — Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move to issues that are critical 
to our future. The first one is the pipeline, specifically the 
Energy East pipeline. This pipeline is over half built. It runs 
from Alberta, through Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and 
halfway through Quebec. The project has been cancelled 
because Quebec is citing environmental concerns. This from a 
Quebec City mayor who sanctioned the dumping of millions of 
gallons of raw sewage into our river system. 
 
The major reason for building the pipeline is because the 
refinery it was to end up at, in New Brunswick, is refining oil 
from Saudi Arabia and Iran. This results that we are using gas 
and oil from other countries while our oil is being sold at a 
discount because we only have one customer. We need to get 
Canadian oil to Canadian refineries, and also to tidewater so we 
can sell it to other countries. That would mean that the United 

States, who is our only customer, would no longer be able to 
dictate the price they pay for our oil. 
 
I was told that a barrel of oil from the same oil field that 
straddles the Canadian-American border is $17 a barrel cheaper 
on the Canadian side than the American side. This problem 
could be addressed if we could reach world markets. This 
means that we could be able to demand world prices. 
 
Our opponents from Ontario and Quebec say that the pipelines 
aren’t safe. Yes, there’s a risk, but accident records show there 
is a much, much greater risk by hauling the oil by rail. It is far 
deadly and environmentally more dangerous than moving oil by 
pipelines. 
 
We hear that the new federal NDP leader, that he and his fellow 
candidates that ran for the leadership are against pipelines. I’m 
wondering where do the Saskatchewan NDP and their 
candidates stand on the Energy East pipeline, with the 
Saskatchewan economy, or with their far-left partners in the 
East. 
 
The time has come for them to take a public stand and let the 
people of Saskatchewan know their true colours. The time is 
now. The people of Saskatchewan need to know either you are 
with us or you against us. Stand up and be counted. 
 
The next big issue I would like to address is the carbon tax and 
that the federal government is ramming down our throat. Ralph 
Goodale says it’s revenue neutral. If it is truly revenue neutral, 
why would we do it? It borders on the ridiculous. BC instituted 
a carbon tax several years ago with the belief that it would 
reduce carbon output. Instead there has been a huge increase in 
carbon output. This proves that the carbon tax is just a tax grab. 
 
Also the federal carbon tax only looks at how much carbon is 
produced. It does not take into account how much carbon we 
sequester. Saskatchewan, with our immense forest and our vast 
cropland, actually sequesters more carbon than we produce. 
That is because our forest and crops use carbon as a food 
source. Our Boundary dam 3 plant sequesters the amount of 
carbon equal to 400,000 cars off the road. Saskatchewan 
doesn’t get any credit for this. Once again, it’s just a tax grab by 
the feds. 
 
The question must also be asked, where did the NDP stand on 
the carbon tax? With the damage it could do to the provincial 
economy, how can they support the Trudeau carbon tax? Tell 
the people of Saskatchewan where you stand. If you can’t stand 
up for Saskatchewan, what are you here for? Don’t just follow 
your federal members. Stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank our Premier, but what do you 
say? You’ve set a new standard for Saskatchewan. You’ve lead 
us from a have-not province to new heights. I think of John F. 
Kennedy’s quote, ask not what your country can do for you, but 
what you can do for your country. And you have done so much. 
Thank you. It has been quite a ride, this tremendous journey. 
Thank you for all you have done for Saskatchewan. We will 
continue on the course you’ve set for us. May the good Lord be 
with you and abide with you and your family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all these reasons, for all the situations that are 



November 1, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

happening in Saskatchewan, I will definitely, definitely be 
voting for the Throne Speech and I will be voting against the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2739 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2739 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2740 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2741 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2741 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2741 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2741 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2742 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2742 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Honouring Attack Victims 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2742 
 Movember and Prostate Cancer Awareness  
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2742 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2743 
 Habitat for Humanity Project in Nipawin 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2743 
 2017 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2743 
 Couple Saves Two Lives in Rescue 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2743 
 New Schools in Saskatoon Southeast 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2744 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Responses to Sexual Harassment Allegations 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 
 Review of Global Transportation Hub 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2746 
 SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2746 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2746 
 Access to Bus Service for Northerners 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2747 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2747 
 Delivery Services Within Health Care System 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2747 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2747 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2748 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2748 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2748 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2749 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2749 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2749 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2749 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2750 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2754 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2755 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2759 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2762 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2764 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2767 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




