






















































Hansard: March 21, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 61A  TUESDAY, MARCH 21, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1805 
 March 21, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I’d like to recognize some guests sitting 
up in our gallery today. They are students from the 
Saskatchewan collaborative bachelor of nursing program from 
the Sask Polytech, which is in my constituency. They’re a 
fourth-year clinical group. They’re participating in community 
health nursing rotation at Campbell Collegiate, which is also in 
my constituency. 
 
In addition to their nursing courses, they’re taking some courses 
on social, political, and economic aspects of nursing. The 
students are really interested in question period, Mr. Speaker, in 
the political process. And attending QP [question period] is 
actually not a program requirement for them. They’re here 
completely on their own volition. So I would like all members 
to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
It’s wonderful to have you here. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in welcoming the 
students from the nursing program. Wonderful to see you here 
and see these students making the connection between politics 
and health outcomes. As you well know from your training, it’s 
those social factors — income, education, housing, nutrition — 
that make a big difference in our health outcomes, and it’s here 
that we get to make those decisions and hopefully influence 
health for the better. So thank you for your studies and your 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and to welcome three special quests to your gallery on 
this March 21st, the day for the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Fresh off a very successful 18th annual event on Sunday, I 
would like to welcome the board members and president of 
Spring Free from Racism: Barb Dedi, Tim Leier, and Frieda 
LeVasseur and congratulate them on a very successful event. 
And I would invite all members to join me in welcoming them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite and welcome Barb Dedi and the board 
members from Spring Free from Racism. I’ve had the 

opportunity to attend the event for a number of years now, and I 
must commend not only the organizers but the committee on an 
outstanding event and bringing attention to issues of racism and 
discrimination. And I’ll follow that up with a member’s 
statement a little later, Mr. Speaker, but I ask all members to 
again join me and the member opposite for a welcome, Spring 
Free from Racism, Barb Dedi, here to her Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision on imposing a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I do 
so present. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased again to 
rise today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April of 2014 the minister of Social Services said the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing 
detox facilities, hospitals and police cells, while keeping people 
safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out, that the minister of 
Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental 
health and addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
The petitioners point out that this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. We 
couldn’t agree more on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. The 
reality is when Social Services might save a small amount of 
money not paying per diems, but it sure inflicts a lot more cost 
down the line on health and justice and does not give people the 
dignity that they deserve. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisits their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
answering the call from the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote for someone to help her stand up in this Assembly to 
fight for a second bridge for Prince Albert, I stand in my place 
today to present that particular petition. And the need for a 
second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is 
today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
the businesses that send people and products through Prince 
Albert require a solution. Therefore the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we say day in, day out, many people from 
throughout Saskatchewan have signed this petition and on this 
particular page that we are presenting today the petitioners are 
primarily from La Ronge and Saskatoon. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m rising to 
present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent 
Crown corporation sell-off. The people who have signed this 
are residents of Saskatchewan and they want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a 
new definition for privatization that allows the government to 
wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum; that in 
2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations returned 
297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. Mr. Speaker, over the last decade, it’s over $3 billion. 
Those dividends should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not 
private investors. 
 
We know our Crown corporations employ thousands of 
Saskatchewan people across the province, and under section 
149 in the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are 
exempt from corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 
per cent of the shares are held by a government or province. 
 
The Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized. This 
short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of dollars of 
Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of 
Saskatchewan. So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

The folks that have signed this today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a position regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And we 
know that there are many issues with this, and that the citizens 
of this province believe in an economy powered by 
transparency, accountability, security, and equity; and that all 
women should be paid equitably; and that women are powerful 
drivers of economic growth and their economic empowerment 
benefits us all. 
 
We know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on the average 
63 cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, 
women earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man 
makes. According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national 
gender wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every 
dollar a man makes. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 
We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from the 
city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has 
had to close its doors during the daytime hours, resulting in a 
loss of resource to people in distress. Many people in Prince 
Albert do not realize that mobile crisis is no longer a 24-7 
operation. And if you look online, it’s still advertised as being a 
crisis intervention centre that’s open 24 hours, seven days a 
week, which is misleading. And when people are in crisis, Mr. 
Speaker, they will be looking for those services. 
 
And we need to make sure that we have these crisis services 
because Prince Albert is the third-largest city in this province. 
And when times are tough, like our economy is, we know that 
sometimes social issues may rise, and people will have these 
crisis situations. And it is this government’s responsibility to 
ensure that services are available. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. Although they 
do the best that they can to provide services, they’re not the 
appropriate people to be providing these crisis services. So I’ll 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition are 
from Saskatoon and Holbein. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: to the fact that Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. They want 
us to know that StatsCan data shows that 55 per cent of all 
victims of sexual offences were children under the age of 18. 
 
Child sexual abuse has lasting impacts throughout the child’s 
lifetime and these impacts and effects include depression, 
anxiety, decreased school attendance and achievement, as well 
as decreased productivity throughout the lifespan. Victims of 
childhood sexual abuse are four times more likely to commit 
suicide than their peers, and currently there is no 
comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum regarding 
the prevention and reporting of sexual child abuse in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Education takes immediate and concrete action to help 
develop and implement Erin’s law; that such legislation 
would ensure that a comprehensive health education 
program be developed and implemented which would 
require age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault awareness 
and prevention education in grades K through 12, along 
with training for school staff on the prevention of sexual 
child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina. 
I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling 
for a reversal of the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-17 provincial budget. They 
point out that Aboriginal court workers play an important role 
in helping Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension 
cases. They point out that Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres. They point out that Aboriginal court workers 
successfully help to make our community safer through reduced 
recidivism rates. 
 
[13:45] 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are well aware that this 
government has pointed to the Aboriginal court workers 
program as part of this government’s response to the calls to 
action from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Mr. 
Speaker, while at the same time cutting the program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Stanley Mission and Air Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to present a petition to ensure job security for victims of 
domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rates of 
domestic violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian 
provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence will follow them to work. 
Financial stability and a supportive work environment are vital 
for any victim of domestic abuse, and victims of domestic abuse 
should not be further victimized at work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the 
direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. Manitoba has 
already enacted legislation, and Ontario is on its way to 
enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims of 
domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last week the opposition tabled a private 
member’s bill that called for exactly this thing plus two other 
supports that are desperately needed in Saskatchewan for 
survivors of domestic violence, and we hope to see that the 
government will also acknowledge that this, and recognize that 
this is a serious problem that needs to be addressed immediately 
and consent to our private member’s bill. 
 
Individuals who are signing this petition today come from 
Regina and Moose Jaw. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to stop 
the redirection of funding to the Northern Teacher Education 
Program Council, Inc. NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program], Mr. Speaker, has been a very successful program for 
the last 40 years, with almost all of its graduates staying in the 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

North and staying in the teaching profession. 
 
NORTEP has allowed for people of the North to access good 
jobs and also provided great role models for youth in the North. 
It’s been locally controlled and well managed. But we’re 
hearing, Mr. Speaker, of a plan to transfer control of this 
program to a different college and yet we haven’t heard any 
convincing reason to change this excellent program. 
 
There are many serious concerns about this change. Students in 
this program have received bursaries for tuition, bursaries for 
books. We’ve heard no confirmation that those bursaries will 
continue. This is a challenge for access to education. There is a 
risk of jobs being lost, and we’re also very concerned about the 
sale of residences and other assets belonging to the NORTEP 
Council. It is not too late, Mr. Speaker, to honour the five-year 
agreement and maintain NORTEP as the excellent program it 
has been. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
This petition is signed by people of La Ronge, Air Ronge, 
Sandy Bay, and Cumberland House. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Spring Free From Racism 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 21st, 
marks the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. This weekend I attended and brought greetings 
at the 18th annual Spring Free from Racism event here in 
Regina with some of my legislative colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that every person is entitled to human 
rights without discrimination. However, in some areas of the 
world this is not the case. Mr. Speaker, today the world 
commemorates past and present fights against racism and racial 
discrimination, how far we have come, and how far we need to 
go. This day is led by the UN [United Nations] Secretary 
General with a goal to see racial discrimination, xenophobia, 
and other related intolerances condemned. Diversity is what 
makes our society strong, bringing residents closer and 
strengthening our communities. We must commit ourselves and 
rise above intolerance, as racism and discrimination are not 
welcome here in our society or anywhere. 
 
I congratulate the committee and volunteers of Spring Free 
from Racism on another successful event and thank them for 
reminding us that it is our individual and collective 
responsibility to celebrate diversity and protect those who have 
no voice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge all members to lead by example so we 
can eliminate racism from our province, as racism has no place 

in Saskatchewan, not now, not ever. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with the member 
opposite, I too had the opportunity to attend the 18th annual 
Spring Free from Racism event here in Regina. Also attending 
were my friends and colleagues, the Leader of the Opposition 
and the member for Douglas Park, along with former NDP 
[New Democratic Party] candidates Ted Jaleta and Tina 
Vukovic. 
 
Spring Free from Racism celebrates and brings awareness to the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
by hosting a family day full of cultural entertainment, food, and 
displays. This year’s event was held at the Italian Club and, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a packed house. In fact there was even more to 
see and do and eat than ever before, which is really quite an 
achievement if you’ve been to prior events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than half of the population growth we have 
seen in our province in recent years comes from international 
immigration. People from around the world not only bring their 
skills and their talents to our province, they bring their 
languages, cultures, and unique identities. It is our diversity that 
makes this province strong. That’s why events like this, that 
bring our community together to celebrate and learn from each 
other, are so important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the president of Spring 
Free from Racism, Barb Dedi, as well the committee members 
here today and those not here today for putting on such a 
fantastic event and for working to draw attention to issues of 
discrimination and racism throughout the year. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatoon Region Economic Outlook Forum 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 
February I had the opportunity to attend the 2017 Saskatoon 
Region Economic Outlook Forum with the member from 
Moosomin and the member from Saskatoon Westview. This 
was an incredible event where guest speakers from across the 
country came together to share insights and ideas on how to 
strengthen and grow the local and provincial economy. 
 
We heard stories about some entrepreneurs that are pioneering 
new ways of doing things seen nowhere else in the world. There 
were resource and mining executives who talked about the 
royalty and tax structure that has made Saskatchewan a 
world-class place to invest. We saw examples of out-of-the-box 
thinking which would allow Saskatoon and the whole province 
to grow as a leader in business development. 
 
This event, the attendees, and the businesses represented are 
shining examples of why our provincial economy is moving in 
the right direction, and those innovators can count on our 
government to keep Saskatchewan a great place to invest. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking the 
organizers, volunteers, and sponsors who came together to put 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

on an amazing event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to recognize International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination. On this day in 1960, police opened fire 
and killed 69 people at the peaceful demonstration against 
apartheid in Sharpeville, South Africa. This tragedy provoked 
the United Nations to proclaim March 21st the official day for 
the elimination of racial discrimination and to call on the 
international community to redouble its efforts to fight against 
all forms of racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although we’ve come a long way towards 
dismantling racism since then, in all regions too many 
individuals and communities suffer from the injustice that 
racism brings. Racial discrimination still occurs daily, and this 
hinders progress for millions of people around the world. The 
fight to create a more inclusive and fair world must continue, 
and that’s why days like today are so important. 
 
The theme for this year’s International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination is racial profiling and incitement to 
hatred, including in the context of migration. This theme is 
especially relevant to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. As a 
province we are growing more and more diverse, and we must 
ensure we celebrate and nourish that diversity in order to keep 
our province strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in recognizing 
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination and in doing all that is possible to ensure a 
diverse, inclusive, and racism-free Saskatchewan for our future 
generations. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Quilts of Valour Presentation Ceremony 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I, along with 
the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who is our military 
liaison, and the member from Regina Pasqua had the honour of 
attending and bringing greetings at a quilt presentation 
ceremony hosted in Regina by the Quilts of Valour — Canada 
Society. Also in attendance were Chief Warrant Officer Fleet 
and Commanding Officer Lieutenant-Colonel Wintrup of the 
Snowbirds 431 Air Demonstration Squadron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quilters from across Canada donate their time to 
design unique, one-of-a-kind quilts for injured Canadian Armed 
Forces members and our veterans. 
 
Today 47 veterans were honoured at Wascana Rehabilitation 
Centre with a quilt to thank them and their families for their 
incredible sacrifices. Each quilt is accompanied with a card. I’d 
like to read that card: 
 

It is a privilege to live in a country that allows all citizens 
the freedom we have here in Canada. Thank you for your 
service to our country and for your personal sacrifice in the 
line of duty. Please accept this quilt as our way of saying 
thank you. 

 
These words truly represent what the Quilts of Valour program 
is all about. Mr. Speaker, for those of us who have never 
experienced war, we cannot fully understand the sacrifices these 
veterans have made. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Cheryl Dvernichuk, 
Laura Sheppard, and all the volunteers who have given their 
time and talents to the Quilts of Valour program, and also in 
thanking the quilt recipients for their service and sacrifice in the 
defence of our great country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Lumsden Curlers Win Mixed Doubles Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to congratulate constituents of mine, 
Mackenzie Schwartz and Sam Wills from the Lumsden Curling 
Club, who placed first in the Saskatchewan Mixed Doubles 
Curling Championship for 2017. The championship was held at 
the Saskatoon CN Curling Club in February. 
 
Wills and Schwartz had a great start to the weekend. They 
finished first in their pool, giving them strong momentum 
heading into the semifinals and championship round. 
 
They battled Tyler Travis and Crystal Fenwick from the 
Sutherland Curling Club for first with a tight match heading 
into the fourth end break and only a 4-2 lead. After the break, 
Wills and Schwartz had back-to-back steals in the fifth and 
sixth ends which would lead them to victory by a 6-3 margin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the champion pair will now represent 
Saskatchewan in the 2017 Canadian mixed championships this 
April in Saskatoon. With home ice advantage, I know they will 
do Saskatchewan curling proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Mackenzie Schwartz and Sam Wills on their 2017 provincial 
title, and best of luck in the Canadian mixed championships 
next month. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Fiscal Plan Pays Off 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, our sound fiscal plan of 
repaying operating debt when resource revenues were high is 
paying off for the people of Saskatchewan. Today 
Saskatchewan is the lowest debt per capita in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Alberta NDP government 
released a budget that relies on future generations to be 
burdened with almost double the debt per capita than here in 
Saskatchewan. But that shouldn’t be surprising. Throughout the 
NDP’s 16 years in office in this province, they never really 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

believed in Saskatchewan’s potential. They did not believe we 
could be a have province, and they bragged about receiving 4.4 
billion in equalization payments while having the worst 
economic growth rate in Canada. On this side, we reject that 
path. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a few months, new schools with new child care 
spaces will be opening in communities across Saskatchewan, 
part of our budget to keep Saskatchewan strong. I’m pleased to 
announce that the children attending these new schools and 
child care will have a lower debt burden than children did when 
we first came to office and in fact will have the lowest debt 
burden in the entire country. That’s because tomorrow our 
government will be meeting the challenge so our children can 
have a prosperous future filled with opportunity, and 
Saskatchewan will continue to be the best place to live, work, 
and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts 
Committee Meeting 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this morning we tried 
again to get some answers into the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal. We asked for the former ministers 
who were responsible at the time to come and testify at the 
committee. Conveniently, we knew that one of them was 
available and should be at every PAC [Public Accounts 
Committee] meeting because not only was he welcomed back 
into caucus, but he was also added to that committee’s 
membership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will shock you, but they voted no. We’re not 
going to give up, so maybe here today the Premier will finally 
start to be straight with Saskatchewan people and answer a 
simple, straightforward question. Can he tell us when he first 
learned that the transactions were more than just a little bit 
questionable, and when did he learn that the original seller was 
the landlord for the former minister of the GTH? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course as members know, the auditor has looked 
into this matter. The auditor had access to all of the individuals, 
all of the documentation pertaining to this transaction. The 
auditor did a very thorough analysis of that information and a 
review of those individuals in terms of their testimony to her. 
 
The auditor made a number of recommendations — 10 in fact, 
Mr. Speaker — eight pertaining to the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure, two to the GTH. We accept those 
recommendations. We’ve implemented or are implementing all 
of those recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Further to that, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
have said they’re looking into the matter. We pledge our full 

co-operation with that review. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, still no answer from the 
Premier. Eleven million dollars of Saskatchewan people’s 
money ended up in the pockets of two Sask Party supporters. 
Eleven million dollars gone, but they don’t want to talk about 
that, and they aren’t going after that money. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re refusing to go after the foreign conglomerate they 
handed the Regina bypass contract to as well. They don’t even 
want us to talk about the billion-dollar overrun, but they’re 
happily throwing some of the lowest paid public servants out of 
their jobs and firing people who support those who are 
struggling with addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from billions of dollars being wasted to desperate 
sell-off schemes to job and program and services cuts, all the 
way to jacking up the tax for taking our tackle out on the lake, 
how does this Premier think that he can keep denying, denying 
accountability from Saskatchewan people? How can he justify 
making Saskatchewan people pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I reject the premise of the question. So much of the 
preamble is just fundamentally wrong. As we hear day after day 
in this House, the Leader of the Opposition takes to his feet, the 
interim Leader of the NDP takes to his feet and is not able to 
correctly present the facts as it relates to certain matters, 
including the bypass, Mr. Speaker, including the bypass, which 
is not over budget. 
 
The bypass project’s scope has changed, and we have covered 
this issue a number of times in the House .When it was 
originally proposed, it was much smaller — much, much 
smaller — in scope at about $400 million. But then, Mr. 
Speaker, the government moved, in consultation with the city 
and communities around Regina, to make it truly a perimeter 
road, to expand it dramatically. The price is now the amount 
that’s on the public record and, by the way, it’s on time and on 
record. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to fees or taxes, Mr. Speaker, at 
this side of the House we’ll stand on our record of reducing 
taxes in this province since we were elected by a cumulative 
amount of $6 billion. We have reduced taxes for farmers, taxes 
for families, taxes for small business. All of that has helped 
create the Saskatchewan advantage that just last week, even in 
the midst of commodity price downturn, this province, the 
province of Saskatchewan led the Dominion of Canada in job 
creation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve clearly forgotten 
who they work for, Mr. Speaker. Before the election of course 
they hid the facts, hid the budget from Saskatchewan people. 
And they were anything but straight with Saskatchewan people 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

as to the true state of our finances. Only off of course, Mr. 
Speaker, by billions of dollars of deficits. They refused to put 
out a first quarter update this year, now a third quarter update. 
Make no mistake — a Facebook update is no replacement for a 
full financial update. 
 
They blew through the dollars when times were good, and now 
they’re making people pay for Sask Party mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. They’re attacking working people, Mr. 
Speaker, cutting jobs, cutting our schools, cutting our hospitals 
and our care centres. 
 
We get a lot of bluster from the Premier about what he wants 
Saskatchewan people to believe his priorities are, but the Sask 
Party’s actions speak much louder than his words, Mr. Speaker. 
To the Premier: with all the hiding and all the broken promises, 
the desperate sell-off schemes and the cuts, does the Premier 
really blame Saskatchewan people for wondering why he and 
his party have stopped working for them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think I agree with the 
interim leader of the NDP, at least for part of his preamble 
when he said actions speak louder than words, Mr. Speaker. For 
16 years when members opposite had the chance to be the 
government they would talk a lot, they would talk a lot about 
better health care. But there were shortages in nurses. There 
were shortages in doctors. We had, Mr. Speaker, long-term care 
facilities in terrible condition and a shortage of beds. Mr. 
Speaker, we had teachers that were fired, Mr. Speaker, by 
members opposite. We had schools that were closed, 176. They 
would talk about supporting education; they closed those 
schools. They talked about taxes for Saskatchewan families and 
they increased taxes umpteen times, over 20 times in their time 
in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, words do matter than 
action. We’ve reduced taxes by $6 billion, Mr. Speaker, over 
the life of our government. Thirteen new long-term care 
facilities, finally a children’s hospital in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a brand new psychiatric and corrections centre 
in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, 40 brand new schools, Mr. 
Speaker — all part of the record. More nurses, more doctors. 
Mr. Speaker, more teachers, and we need more teachers. Why? 
Because there’s now 1.15 million people that we, Mr. Speaker, 
we are very proud to serve and will continue to serve with a 
budget that is forward looking, with a budget that balances the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people and keeps this province in the 
leadership position it is in the country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Balanced Budget Legislation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, these are not complicated 
questions, and we’re talking about Saskatchewan people’s 
money, not the Sask Party’s. The only thing that belongs to the 
Sask Party here is their responsibility for the massive deficits 
and growing debts, and that’s eight deficits in 12 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, last spring instead of facing the music for 

their mistakes, they scrapped our balanced budget law. The 
minister promised that a new version was coming last fall. Then 
in the fall he promised it was coming soon, and yesterday he 
told us that the balanced budget laws are “paper tigers.” Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s only a paper tiger if the Finance minister 
refuses to give it teeth. Mr. Speaker, as a staffer he saw a 
government drive this province to the brink of bankruptcy, and 
over the last 10 years he and his colleagues have proven that 
they have not changed their stripes.  
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally commit to bringing back a 
balanced budget Act this spring? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the exact same question was asked yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I 
think we’re in day . . . What are we, in day nine of this session 
or whatever the . . . day 10, I think, of this session, and we’re 
getting the exact same questions day after day. I gave you the 
answer yesterday. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, under the former 
balanced budget law was when we had a GRF [General 
Revenue Fund]. We’re now under summary financial 
statements, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at what other 
provinces are doing with respect to summary financial 
statements and what a fiscal accountability framework would 
look like, given the fact that we can have wild valuations and 
mark-to-market valuations on such things as natural gas on 
March 31st, Mr. Speaker, the last day of the fiscal year, that 
could throw us into a deficit position through nobody’s fault, 
Mr. Speaker, simply through a mark-to-market valuation. So we 
are taking a look at . . . Well is the member interested in an 
answer or just wanted to chirp from her seat? 
 
So we are taking a look at, Mr. Speaker, what other provinces 
are doing with respect to balanced budget law. We are looking 
at a fiscal accountability framework to ensure that the 
Provincial Auditor agrees with it, that academics agree with it, 
that the accounting community agrees with it, Mr. Speaker. 
When it is ready to go, we’ll bring it to the floor of the 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we haven’t heard so much about 
wildly gyrating revenues since Rod Gantefoer was the Finance 
minister over there. 
 
The Sask Party refuses to be accountable when it comes to 
balanced budgets. They’re shifting the blame and the pain, Mr. 
Speaker. In just the two first weeks of this spring session, the 
same two weeks where they’re celebrating the first good jobs 
report they’ve seen in quite some time, Mr. Speaker, this 
government fired 250 workers. Those are people with families 
who pay taxes, who buy goods and services in their 
communities. Most of these people are among the lowest paid 
public servants in the province, but the government went after 
them to find $5 million in supposed savings.  
 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

So if the government chose these 250 hard-working women and 
men to shoulder the load of $5 million of their deficit, can the 
Minister of the Public Service Commission tell us who are the 
Sask Party’s next targets to pay the price for the more than $1 
billion left in the deficit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, last June I stood in my 
place in this Chamber, on June 1st, and I presented the ’16-17 
budget and said we were going to undertake transformational 
change in this province. Transformational change means 
change, Mr. Speaker. I indicated that this government was 
going to get back to the delivery of core services across the 
province. 
 
Our core services as a provincial government, Mr. Speaker, is 
not cleaning government-owned buildings. Our core services, 
Mr. Speaker, is delivering health care. We’ve got some nursing 
students in the gallery here today, Mr. Speaker. Our core 
service is delivering health care across the province. Our core 
service is delivering education in the K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] sector, Mr. Speaker. Our core service is providing 
funding for our post-secondary education system, Mr. Speaker. 
Our core service is delivering to those most vulnerable in 
society through our social services budget, Mr. Speaker. Our 
core services is ensuring that we have a highways infrastructure 
situation in this province that allows the movement of goods 
and people across the province in a safe manner, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what we’re focused on. They’ll see more of that 
tomorrow in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister goes on 
about core services. I have to think about those three extra 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. You know, 
sometimes I wonder if they really expect us to take them 
seriously. That minister, all of those ministers are and have 
been government, and they have been and are in charge today. 
They’ve made the decisions that have got us to where we are 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 47 is more of their games. But they’re still 
refusing to engage in an adult conversation about 
acknowledging that they are at fault. We’re already taking the 
pay cut, but they aren’t cutting the cabinet offices and they 
aren’t cutting the Premier’s office. 
 
So in the absence of balanced budget legislation, will this 
cabinet member, will these cabinet ministers take a 20 per cent 
cut to their ministerial bonuses? Will they show leadership and 
start the process to cut five MLAs? That would save over a 
million dollars every year, and that minister should know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before punishing more Saskatchewan people, will 
the Sask Party ministers show this leadership? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — This coming from a member who 
won’t even show up to the Board of Internal Economy to take 

his own minus 3.5 per cent cut, Mr. Speaker. We’ve scheduled 
four separate Board of Internal Economy meetings. They won’t 
show up, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we had to introduce a bill to 
legislatively mandate their reduction because they refuse to take 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on top of that, speaking of reductions, I mean we just 
announced, Mr. Speaker, the shutting down of executive air, a 
savings that is significant for the government of the province. 
We have reduced travel in this government by $700,000 per 
year from when they were the government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. We have significantly fewer political staff in the 
building than when they were the government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. We have 24 less staff in Executive Council than 
when they were the government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This side of the House is showing leadership and they won’t 
show up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After 
blowing through years of record revenue, the Saskatchewan 
Party expects everyone except cabinet, the ones that got us into 
this mess, to pay the price. It’s ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Along with cabinet, you knew who else is coming out ahead? 
The corporations who have been handed sweetheart P3 
[public-private partnership] contracts. On the bypass alone, the 
Saskatchewan Party has not only signed us on to a contract that 
has ballooned to $2 billion without any explanation, they also 
refuse to provide information on how much we are paying, Mr. 
Speaker. We have asked for the average cost a kilometre of 
highway, the average cost for the overpass, and they have 
steadfastly refused. This is basic information, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
information that the Saskatchewan people have the right to 
know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again to the Minister of Highways: how much are we paying 
per kilometre of highway? What is the average cost per 
kilometre of twinning on Highway No. 6? And what is the 
average cost per bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskBuilds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we hear the same 
questions day after day, Mr. Speaker, and the answers are the 
same, Mr. Speaker. The contract documents, the 
value-for-money report, Mr. Speaker, and the fairness opinion 
are all online. And that member knows, as the former minister 
of Highways, Mr. Speaker, that those contracts have 
commercially sensitive information removed, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday I gave a quote from the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker, verifying his position with respect 
to those matters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about who’s going to benefit 
from this bypass, I’ll tell you who’s going to benefit, Mr. 
Speaker: the people that use that bypass, Mr. Speaker; the 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

communities that are having the overpasses built, Mr. Speaker, 
those that use it; the safety and the economic development 
opportunities for this, Mr. Speaker. Now I can go on and on, 
Mr. Speaker: a list of 95 Saskatchewan companies that are 
benefiting from the bypass, employees that work for these 
companies, Mr. Speaker, all paying taxes, many of them living 
in the constituencies that are represented by members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. Perhaps they should go and talk to those 
employees. Perhaps they should go and talk to the 
Saskatchewan companies that are doing this work on the 
bypass, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps they should go and talk to the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association and the Saskatchewan 
Trucking Association, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This project is good for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s good 
for the residents that live and use that bypass, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s certainly good for everyone else in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s utter nonsense that the 
Minister of Justice gets up to answer a question directed at the 
Highways minister, Mr. Speaker. And there’s reasons for that. 
The people of Saskatchewan have to know. We’re asking for 
basic information. That basic information should be provided 
here in the Legislative Building so we can scrutinize these. 
 
The Ministry of Highways’ own documents show that the 
average cost to twin, grade, and pave Highway 16, another 
project with high land cost, was no more than $1.3 million per 
kilometre. The minister’s own document showed the average 
cost per kilometre for the Estevan bypass, an expensive 
greenfield project with a high land cost, was $1.2 million per 
kilometre. And even with the most generous assumptions, 
including service road, the bypass project is costing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers 10 times those amounts. 
 
For every kilometre, Saskatchewan taxpayers have a right to 
know the details and the cost that we are on the hook for. It’s 
not their fault that the Sask Party signed on to this 
public-private secrecy pact with a foreign conglomerate. And 
why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So once again, will the Minister of Highways — not the 
Minister of Justice, but the Minister of Highways — provide 
those answers today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskBuilds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve repeated over and over again to the member — who’s the 
former minister of Highways; he will know this, Mr. Speaker 
— that commercially sensitive information is redacted from the 
contracts, Mr. Speaker. The Information and Privacy 
Commissioner said, and I quote: 
 

The severed information, if disclosed, could disadvantage 
SaskBuilds and the Government of Saskatchewan in its 
future negotiations for highway construction projects. 

 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the last thing that we 
want to do, that we want to disadvantage the government or 
SaskBuilds or the Minister of Highways or any other, Mr. 

Speaker, any other ministry within government by disclosing 
commercially sensitive information, Mr. Speaker. We stand by 
the comments that the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
has said. 
 
And I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, if the member doesn’t like 
what the Information and Privacy Commissioner has to say, he 
could certainly go back to that office, an independent officer of 
the legislature, and ask these very questions again. He’ll get the 
same answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Teacher Education Programming in 
the North 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, they’re refusing to answer 
questions about billions disappearing down the road, but they’re 
happy to justify their cuts to education in the North. Like 
everything else with the Sask Party, the process for cutting 
NORTEP was anything but transparent or clear. 
 
The minister has said, and I quote, “In making a determination, 
I must take into account a broad spectrum of priorities for 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary sector.” Mr. Speaker, a broad 
spectrum of priorities. Shouldn’t her top priority be ensuring 
accessible, affordable, post-secondary education that provides 
hope and opportunity for people in the North? But it would 
seem that this minister has other things on her mind; maybe 
how to make students and teachers pay for the $1.2 billion 
deficit caused by this government. 
 
This minister is tasked with ensuring that people across 
Saskatchewan have access to higher education. How does this 
decision to cut this successful program help us achieve that 
task? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
assume the member opposite isn’t criticizing the good work of 
Northlands, which seems to be the implication of his question. 
And I would encourage him, Mr. Speaker, to read some of the 
things that his colleague, the member for Cumberland, has said 
about Northlands College, and I quote: “Northlands does a 
really good job out there, and we know in partnerships they do a 
good job.” That was in 2012. In 2014 he said, “Northlands does 
a great job. They do an excellent job trying to train individuals.” 
That’s a pretty ringing endorsement, Mr. Speaker. After all, a 
solid board made up exclusively of northerners; university 
programming already up and running in La Ronge, Creighton, 
Buffalo Narrows, and Ile-a-la-Crosse; and plans to expand 
university programming across the North — I think the member 
for Cumberland was on to something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, no one here is criticizing 
Northlands College. That’s spin and it’s just not cutting it, 
which is funny because this is all about cuts. It’s all about cuts. 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

This is no mere transfer. This has been presented as a transfer, 
but there’s been no guarantee of maintaining the current 
programs or the current services. 
 
For 40 years, Mr. Speaker, NORTEP has provided affordable, 
accessible education to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
NORTEP removed barriers for students in the North. There 
have been bursaries for tuition, bursaries for books, but no 
guarantee from this minister that those supports will continue. 
Where are those supports? When students and communities in 
the North lose access to education, access to those supports, 
that’s not a transfer. That’s a cut. 
 
When the only reason for a change is so the Sask Party can put 
a few more bucks back in the budget deficit that they caused, 
that’s a cut, Mr. Speaker. This is a cut that will have huge 
impacts on northern communities. Does this minister not 
understand that this is a cut, or does she just not care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
talk about needing inspiring stories, particularly in the North 
perhaps. And Northlands College has a lot of them, Mr. 
Speaker, some of which were featured in a recent Maclean’s 
article. 
 
And I know Northlands and its partners will provide an 
excellent teaching education program to do the best by students 
and expand their post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. They 
said so in their press release last week. Let’s not forget what 
they said, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

We all want to see northern students . . . receive a top-rate, 
culturally affirming education so that they can enjoy a 
good quality of life and continue to be proud of who they 
are and where they are from. We have an opportunity 
before us [they said], and by all working together . . . we 
can develop a post-secondary system that is broad in 
scope, rich in culture, high in quality and a model for the 
rest of the country. 

 
Hear, hear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having increased difficulty hearing that 
response and the questions asked today. I would ask members 
please to improve the decorum. 
 
I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the minister denied yet again that he is making cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms to pay for his government’s mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. He actually asked me to prove that cuts to 
education were a part of how that government is paying for the 
deficit that they have created. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read out just some of their record on 
this. They refuse to fully fund a teachers’ contract that they 
committed to. They clawed back WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] rebates to school divisions. They forced 
school divisions to dip into their reserves just to pay for 
day-to-day operations. And now they want to take away those 
funds as well, leaving school divisions, even the ones that saved 
up for tough times, with nothing to fall back on in case of 
emergency. And, Mr. Speaker, that minister wants to open up 
local teachers’ agreements, putting our kids’ sports and 
extracurricular activities at risk. Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid the list 
goes on and on. 
 
What will it take for this minister to admit that his 
government’s plans to cut their way out of their deficit runs 
right through our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Minister, the member opposite talks 
about a list that goes on and on. Our commitment to the 
children of this province goes on and on. 
 
I’m going to read a list of the new 21 schools that are opening 
in our province this year: in Martensville, Lake Vista and Holy 
Mary; in Warman, Traditions and Holy Trinity; in Saskatoon, 
Sylvia Fedoruk, Ernest Lindner, Colette Bourgonje, Chief 
Whitecap, St. Nicholas, St. Thérèse of Lisieux, St. Kateri 
Tekakwitha, St. Lorenzo Ruiz; and in Regina, École Harbour 
Landing, Plainsview, École Wascana Plains, Scott Collegiate, 
St. Kateri, St. Nicholas, St. Elizabeth, Sacred Heart. And, Mr. 
Speaker, she even opposed the new school for Connaught. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s 21 new schools. Actions speak louder than 
words. We support the children of our schools and our province 
21 ways. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 279. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled responses to the 
question 279. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017/Loi de 2017 réduisant les 

traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise today on second reading of Bill 
47. What I have to say is . . . some degree of sadness. I was 
hopeful in the context of the discussion around the reduction of 
MLA salaries that the members opposite would do their job and 
show up at the Board of Internal Economy. And if they 
disagreed with the position of the government, they could vote 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

against that position. But they refused even to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. They refused to show up at the Board of Internal 
Economy, which means that government now has to introduce a 
statute to reduce the salaries of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly by 3.5 per cent. And the statute is very . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m having difficulties hearing the 
minister. The opposition will have a chance to reply on second 
reading. I would ask that they would please give the respect to 
the members of the government as well. I recognize the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know 
the Deputy Leader of the NDP has serious concerns, I assume 
from his heckling, about taking the 3.5 per cent reduction to his 
salary. I can tell you though, Mr. Speaker, on this side we are 
united. We believe that it’s important to show this leadership. 
We as a caucus are united. We’ve had obviously a discussion 
and a consensus to move forward in this fashion. Clearly, 
members opposite have a different view. They’ve refused to 
show up at the board to do this. We therefore have to move 
forward with this statute. 
 
And it’s a very straightforward statute, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would cite the title, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly, 2017. Pretty self-explanatory what 
this bill’s intention is. I would just . . . It’s one section, Mr. 
Speaker, with three subsections and the coming into force 
provision. What it does very straightforwardly is reduce MLA 
salaries by 3.5 per cent and reduces the grant to the political 
offices of government, political offices of both the NDP and the 
Sask Party caucuses, by 10 per cent as well which we feel is 
reasonable and appropriate. 
 
You know, I would cite . . . Because I know members opposite 
are going to stand up, like they did in question period, and rant 
and rave about the reduction to this and that and the other thing. 
I want to put on the record, Mr. Speaker, the very real 
leadership shown on this side of the House with respect to the 
reduction of the political costs of government. 
 
Well I mean members opposite, again, they don’t want to take 
their 3.5 per cent reduction. We know that, Mr. Speaker. They 
have said publicly otherwise, but why would they be fighting 
this to this degree if they were willing to accept that? We know 
they don’t accept that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what I would point to, Mr. Speaker, the overall salary costs 
in the political part of this government are $333,000 less per 
month than they were under the NDP when they were in 
government — 27 per cent less, the political costs are. In 
Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, which is the Premier’s office, 
there are 24 fewer staff than there were under the NDP. Salaries 
are $165,000 per year less than under the NDP, $2 million per 
year less than under the NDP. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In ministers’ offices on this side of the House versus when 
those members were in government, 26 fewer staff in ministers’ 
offices, Mr. Speaker, $169,000 per month less salary than when 
the members opposite were in government. 
 

With respect to travel, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 
government, they used executive air to the tune of about a 
million dollars, a million dollars plus, per year. Last year we 
spent $300,000 on travel as an executive council — 70 per cent, 
70 per cent less than members opposite. 
 
And we know particularly the deputy leader of the NDP, I think 
he personally spent more than $300,000, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
actually fairly certain he did. The deputy leader of the NDP, 
who was minister of Highways at the time — which is slightly 
ironic that he wouldn’t actually travel on the highways — he 
took the plane, Mr. Speaker. So there it is. But that’s the record 
of the deputy leader particularly, over there. So 70 per cent 
reduction in travel costs last year over the NDP time, Mr. 
Speaker. And on top of that we announced just last week that 
we would be selling the two planes of executive air and that we 
would be shutting down that service, Mr. Speaker, to save an 
additional 700,000 to a million dollars per year, in addition to 
the reduction in overall government travel costs. 
 
We have been showing genuine leadership on this side of the 
House. With regard to their comment, I’m sure they’ll talk 
about fewer MLAs. We know, Mr. Speaker, and you know, Mr. 
Speaker, very well that we reduced the overall budget of the 
LAS [Legislative Assembly Service]. This year it’s going to be 
a reduction by 5 per cent. Last year there was a reduction as 
well. There was no additional cost to the treasury of the new 
MLAs. There were savings recognized within the Legislative 
Assembly Service to ensure that those MLAs did not cost any 
additional money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have shown real leadership. Their 
arguments are political. They’re posturing on these matters, Mr. 
Speaker, and the reality is they refused to show up for the Board 
of Internal Economy. They refused to vote on a reduction to 
their own salary. That’s what’s motivating this, Mr. Speaker. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of Bill 47. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour to rise and enter into this debate, because whenever we 
talk about the proceedings and how we operate this very 
important institution called the legislature, it’s important that 
we take this in a very serious, serious way. And while I think 
the member talked about his sadness, all I can think about is 
crocodile tears. 
 
You know, here’s a guy that was right out there talking about 
how he had a bigger hit than anybody else — some 49 per cent 
more. People should appreciate how hard the cabinet ministers 
over there are suffering because they had 49 per cent more of a 
hit than anybody else . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I 
don’t know what calculators they’re working on, but that might 
have been the problem that got us into this. 
 
But this is a serious issue. This is a serious issue, and those 
members know. And that member over there, when he says that 
he’s unsure about this side of the House, we’ve been very clear, 
very clear right from the beginning that we accept that we will 
have to have a 3.5 per cent wage cut. We understand that, and 
we are going to work to make that happen. But we have some 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

really serious problems with the heavy-handed operation of that 
side of the House. And I think many members of the opposite 
side have a long history of working with heavy hands when it 
comes to how we make sure we operate this House in a way 
that respects democracy. 
 
Now that may be a foreign term for some of those folks over 
there, but for us that is very, very important. We understand and 
we accept the role of cabinet to make decisions, financial 
decisions. We understand that. But they must also understand 
and appreciate the role of opposition. Many of them have been 
in opposition. And when they were there, they did a good job 
and we hope that they get back there soon. But it’s very, very 
important that in democracy we have a strongly supported 
opposition. And this government would like to see, and they’ve 
. . . [inaudible]. 
 
It was interesting the minister did not talk about the one aspect 
of this budget, the 10 per cent cut. He would actually like to see 
the cut to 100 per cent. Mr. Speaker, he talks about the savings 
by the MLAs. And I don’t know what planet he is from, Mr. 
Speaker, but you’ve got to know, you’ve got to know that when 
we do the accounting, we all know MLAs have a salary. We all 
know they have offices. Those are real costs, and there’s no 
way of doing funny business in the math to make sure, like the 
49 per cent, to make it go away. Those are real numbers. Those 
are real numbers. 
 
And I know the member often has said that they campaigned on 
this, but I don’t think they actually did. In 2011 when they 
actually came up with this idea of adding three more MLAs, 
there was never any talk about doing that. And all of a sudden 
when they got back, all of a sudden we had hoisted upon us 
three more MLAs, and then we were into it. 
 
But I know when we look across Western Canada, where do we 
rank? We represent about 16,000 people. Manitoba, each MLA 
represents twenty-some . . . 22,000, 25,000. Alberta is 46,000. 
British Columbia is 65,000. Ontario is 125,000. So clearly if 
they’re looking for sustainable, long-term cuts . . . And the 
Minister of Finance today talked about transformational change. 
If he’s serious about that, then he really seriously has to look at 
how we are governed in Saskatchewan and particularly in our 
own backyard, the legislature here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a lot of questions about this. As I 
have said, we are accepting the 3.5 per cent cut. That has never 
been a point of debate. It’s these other things that have come 
heavy-handed that really show what this government feels 
about the Board of Internal Economy, and we have seen it slide 
more and more in the last little while. We used to talk about 
these things and work things out beforehand, and then we 
would come to the meetings and we’d be all on the same page. 
But that whole tradition is disappearing, and I’m sad to see that 
as parliamentarians we’re not working together more and more 
and talking about, how can we make this legislature work? I 
think that’s critically important. 
 
And you know, we have a former minister . . . You know, I find 
it interesting he’d chirp from his seat because . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you’re refusing to show up. 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Refusing to show up? In fact actually, Mr. 
Speaker, if you recall the day we did come and told you we 
weren’t going to be able to come to fulfill our duties, these guys 
wouldn’t show up. But you know, it really, it shows a lack of 
respect, a lack of respect for the opposition when we’re not 
included in any of the discussions, any of the discussions about 
what we might do as a legislature. 
 
Now they could come and say, we want to do the 3.5 per cent 
wage cut because everybody in the public service is going to get 
that. We get that. We’re not immune from that. And I think 
every time they’ve asked for a wage freeze, we’ve honoured 
that. There’s been no, no fighting back. We’ve always done that 
kind of thing. But when they start adding all these things and 
then starting to rush things, then it creates a bit of a mockery of 
the Board of Internal Economy. It really does. And I think those 
folks over there really have to think about how much they really 
respect the institution of the Board of Internal Economy. 
They’re the ones who are really creating the problems here. 
 
We could meet. We could talk. We could meet and talk and, 
you know, the member, the minister speaking, you know, he 
really needs to think long and hard about this, about what kind 
of legacy does he want to have for the board. 
 
So we have a problem with this, Mr. Speaker. So we will have 
lots of questions and we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — There’s a lot of emotion. I would ask that 
people please give respect to the speaker that’s on his feet. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I listened with 
interest as the minister went on and on about the cuts they’d 
done, as if they were supposed to be congratulated on that. And 
some of them have been . . . We need to go through them, and 
we will in the course of the budget. 
 
But they still, a level of . . . They refuse to take any kind of 
responsibility for where we are as a province with the kind of 
situation where we’re going to have to have deep cuts. And 
we’ll see what kind of tax implications we have tomorrow. And 
this government here, he will talk about the things that they’ve 
done better. And of course we have a lot of questions about the 
accounting of that, because we know you can make . . . 
especially that minister who demonstrated the 49 per cent. He 
can make anything sound 49 per cent better than what it really 
is, just to give him a minute with a calculator. But we have 
some real questions about this. But they still will not take 
responsibility for what they’ve done to create the situation we 
find ourselves in. 
 
Now they can add up all the small things that they’ve done, but 
it still doesn’t make things right. We are in a tough situation, 
and tomorrow when we see the budget we’re going to have . . . 
There’s going to be a lot of people in this province who are 
going to feel particularly hard done by, punished by the lack of 
good judgment of the folks over there. And yet they will take no 
responsibility for that, and we’re talking about the cabinet 
ministers. 
 
We think it’s only reasonable that they consider taking a 20 per 
cent cut on their allowances. We know that’s done in other 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

provinces when they have failed to deliver on a balanced 
budget. And we have a Finance minister who’s really 
discounting . . . And yesterday he called it a paper tiger, and I 
agree with my colleague who says it’s only a paper tiger if you 
don’t put teeth to the tiger. So there’s some real questions here, 
Mr. Speaker, about cabinet ministers taking their real 
responsibility for the financial mess that we find ourselves in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’ve talked a lot about the five 
MLAs and we should really work towards that. That would be a 
sustainable change, a transformational change that would save 
us at least a million dollars a year, and would give a signal that 
we are all in this together. But we are overrepresented and we 
could do that cut for sure. And, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier the 
minister didn’t really talk about the 10 per cent cuts, the 
caucuses, and the implications they have for the quality of work 
that we do in here, and we have a real question about that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, as we have said and I will say 
again, and of course I think everybody except for that one 
minister refuses to acknowledge that we have agreed right from 
the beginning about the 3.5 per cent. And so with that, Mr. 
Speaker, we are willing to see this bill move to committee. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly be committed to the Committee of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 
troubles me that we’re entering into the debate that we are here 

today with the bill before us, a bill that should never be before 
this Assembly, a bill that is a deceitful bill to Saskatchewan 
people and a betrayal, a betrayal of so much of what has been 
said and promised to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we look at the growing mismanagement and the broken 
promises and a government that hasn’t been straight with 
Saskatchewan people on front after front, from the finances and 
their issues there through to our Crown corporations, I’m 
reminded of a Tommy Douglas quote back some time ago, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s, I think, pretty apt in this current circumstance 
where we clearly have a government that has a wishbone in 
place of where they need a backbone, Mr. Speaker, where they 
should have a backbone. And we have a doctor in the House 
and we could make a diagnosis on this front as well. 
 
[14:45] 
 
This Sask Party government spent time and money looking 
Saskatchewan people in the whites of their eyes, holding hand 
over heart, promising that they wouldn’t privatize our Crown 
corporations. And now we see a bill like this before 
Saskatchewan at this point in time, a privatization of our Crown 
corporations putting at risk all that’s been built by generations. 
This is nothing short of a slap in the face to good, hard-working 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations have been built with pride 
and hard work by generations of Saskatchewan people, in four 
generations of Saskatchewan people. They arose to meet needs 
of our diverse and large province, delivering services to all 
Saskatchewan people, providing stability economically, and 
providing revenues to provide services that we all count on, like 
health care and education. They’re money-makers. They’re 
service providers. They’re job creators, Mr. Speaker. And the 
bill that we see before us puts all of this at risk, from a 
government that wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan people and 
a government that’s looking for a quick buck to fill the budget 
hole and budget mess that they’ve created. 
 
Trading their budgetary mismanagement with their corporation 
from France and beyond with their billion-dollar bypass 
overrun, trading in and cashing in the chips on our Crown 
corporations like SaskTel, like SaskEnergy, like SaskPower, 
like SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], Mr. Speaker, 
you know, it’s no wonder that Saskatchewan people are feeling 
deceived on front after front. It’s no wonder that people are 
feeling betrayed. It’s no wonder that people are feeling let down 
all across Saskatchewan, right in the heart of Swift Current and 
down into the corners of the far reaches of the Southwest to the 
Southeast, up both sides of the province, up the middle and 
straight into the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill defies common sense. It sells Saskatchewan people out 
of our Crowns, which we all value, our Crowns which of course 
provide us hundreds of millions of dollars a year into our 
budget to fund health care and classrooms — something that 
you would think this government would look a little bit more 
long term at this point in time, a government that hasn’t been 
able to balance the budget during the best years, now selling 
Saskatchewan people out, looking for a quick buck to sort of 
make up some sort of charade in this fiscal year. 
 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

An attack on the Crowns means an attack directly on the 
thousands upon thousands and thousands of jobs directly 
connected to our Crown corporations, the proud workers of 
Crown corporations, the families who depend on these jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, in communities all across Saskatchewan. And the 
thousands of direct jobs are important jobs, jobs that we need at 
a time where we need jobs in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it goes beyond that. The economic hit is much bigger. 
There’s a supply chain that connects to hundreds of businesses 
all across Saskatchewan, proud businesses in rural communities 
and smaller communities, in our urban centres, that have 
proudly supplied services and goods to our Crown corporations 
for many, many years, hundreds of businesses that support 
thousands of jobs there as well, thousands of direct jobs, 
thousands of indirect jobs, hundreds of businesses — a direct 
hit, Mr. Speaker. This bill is a direct hit, and the actions of this 
government, on the economy of Saskatchewan and the economy 
of our future, the economy for our kids, the economy for the 
next generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course we also know our Crowns provide incredible 
service to our province, a large and diverse province with 
communities far . . . you know, at times in remote portions of 
our province, and provide those rates at the lowest rates 
possible. And when you look at the bills of Saskatchewan 
people when it comes to things like their cellular or their mobile 
phone, mobile device charges, or if you look at auto insurance, 
something that every family needs, Mr. Speaker, these rates 
matter in the lives of hard-working Saskatchewan people. And 
this bill itself and the privatization of our Crowns is a direct hit 
on affordability and will definitely hike the costs for 
Saskatchewan people and families all across our province. 
 
So we’re talking about hundreds of millions of revenues in fact 
in the last decade, $3 billion. Over $3 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
being put at risk. And if we forecast out, we’re talking about 
billions upon billions of dollars that we’re ripping away from 
future generations for services and programs we need, for the 
classrooms of tomorrow, for patients and for health care, Mr. 
Speaker, just because we have a government that’s bankrupt of 
ideas and bankrupt of decency when you see a government ram 
forward a bill that’s completely contradictory to what they had 
promised time and time again. 
 
Thousands and thousands and thousands of jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
Proud workers that have worked for generations in our Crown 
corporations being put at risk. An economic hit at a time where 
our economy definitely needs stability. Our Crowns have 
always provided some diversity and some stability within our 
province — all being put at risk, Mr. Speaker. And of course, as 
I’ve said, a direct hit on the costs that Saskatchewan people pay. 
More hikes, more hikes to the cost of living from this 
mismanaging government, Mr. Speaker, more hikes to the 
things that families need at a time where many families are 
struggling with jobs, and in many cases this government’s 
taking away their jobs. Mr. Speaker, this government’s forcing 
increases to Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Sask Party and this Premier have no mandate to privatize 
our Crowns. They have no mandate to ram forward Bill No. 40 
as they are here, Mr. Speaker. And this bill as well, of course it 
completely contradicts what that Premier pledged to 

Saskatchewan people time and time again, lacking any level of 
decency and common sense. But it also, as I say, we have a 
circumstance where we have a Premier and a Sask Party that 
lack a backbone. They have no mandate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Shortly after this last election where, hand over heart, they 
promised that they wouldn’t privatize our Crown corporations, 
they started looking at options to sell off SaskTel as but one 
example, Mr. Speaker, as but one example. And then of course 
we know this government spends all sorts of money on polling, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think they quickly learned what they should 
have known, had they been in touch with Saskatchewan people 
and the realities that Saskatchewan people face, and the hopes 
and dreams of Saskatchewan people is that they would not win 
a referendum to privatize our Crown corporations. 
 
So now we see this deceitful bill, Mr. Speaker, that of course 
breaks the promise that that Premier and the Sask Party made in 
the election, Mr. Speaker, and time and time again before that. 
But it does indirectly what that government knows they can’t do 
directly if they had the backbone to go to Saskatchewan people 
and ask for the permission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As Saskatchewan New Democrats, we’re going to continue to 
work and rally with, frankly, people across political stripes that 
are offended, that are angry, that are feeling betrayed by the 
Sask Party, many, many, many people, thousands of people that 
actually voted for the current government that are feeling 
deceived and betrayed because this government is . . . Its 
actions just don’t meet their words in that election, Mr. Speaker. 
And front and centre on that are our Crown corporations. 
 
We will not, we will not let our Crown corporations be 
privatized without one heck of a fight, Mr. Speaker. We’ll work 
every step of the way to continue to fight for those jobs, those 
Crowns, and all people of the province that benefit 
economically and benefit from the affordability provided from 
our Crown corporations. And we won’t, we won’t let the Sask 
Party get away with this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when I say this, this is a call to action to Saskatchewan 
people because I get calls and I get emails and I get letters from 
people in every corner of the province on this issue, many 
expressing that they had voted for this government but never 
again over the betrayal on the privatization of our Crown 
corporations. We need those people and those communities and 
every one of the constituencies across Saskatchewan to stand up 
and to say, enough is enough. 
 
You know, we heard that message recently when we had a 
by-election up in Meewasin where clearly the people of that 
constituency said enough is enough, and sent a message to the 
Sask Party to hold them to account for the broken promises, for 
the betrayal, Mr. Speaker. And front and centre in that were the 
Crown corporations and the privatization schemes that we see 
from this government. 
 
We saw it just a couple of weeks ago again with a massive rally 
in front of the Saskatchewan legislature with people from every 
corner of the province coming to their Assembly, the people’s 
Assembly to fight for their Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
They know and we know that when they’re gone, they’re gone. 
Sadly I think that Premier and the Sask Party know this also, so 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

this is an important battle. 
 
This bill is damaging. It’s deceitful, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 
reflect any of the words or promises of the Sask Party opposite, 
and Saskatchewan people will hold them to account on this 
front. We have a government that wasn’t straight with 
Saskatchewan people about the finances, wasn’t straight about 
the historic mismanagement that we see, weren’t straight about 
the fact that they couldn’t get the job done during the best years, 
Mr. Speaker. They couldn’t balance the budget during the best 
years — not saving a dime, draining the rainy day fund, Mr. 
Speaker, and leaving Saskatchewan vulnerable. 
 
And now you’ve got a government that certainly has a deficit 
when it comes to dollars, but also a deficit when it comes to 
basic decency to Saskatchewan people with a bill like this, a 
government that’s old and tired, a government that wasn’t 
straight with Saskatchewan people, and a government that’s 
looking for a quick buck to fill the budgetary mess that they’ve 
created. 
 
We’re going to do all that we can, Mr. Speaker, on this front, 
but we need Saskatchewan people to continue to rally and to 
continue to phone. And you know, members opposite are 
heckling, but they need to listen to their constituents on this 
one, Mr. Speaker. They need to think about the legacy and the 
service that’s been built by the Crown corporations, the hard 
work that’s gone into establishing what we have, and a 
government that’s sitting around and letting this . . . you know, 
putting this all at risk. 
 
This is a time where the backbench needs to have a backbone, 
Mr. Speaker, as well, at a time where . . . You know, there’s 
few other historic battles in this province that would be more 
worthy of a backbencher saying, you know what? Enough is 
enough. I’m not taking it. We didn’t run on this. We weren’t 
straight with people on this. This isn’t in the interests of my 
kids’ future or our community’s future, and it’s not in the best 
interests of the next generation, Mr. Speaker. It sells out 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So this is a time where, you know, we don’t hear much. And 
there’s some good people on those back benches, Mr. Speaker 
— people that I think, frankly, if they were in the front benches, 
Mr. Speaker, we’d see a lot more forthrightness on a whole 
bunch of fronts, Mr. Speaker. But you know, it’s going to be 
time where . . . It’s not a time for them to sit on their hands. It’s 
not a time for them to sit quiet at a caucus. It’s a time for them 
to speak up for our province, to stand up for people, and to fight 
for the future of our province. Time’s a-wasting. 
 
This is a government that’ll use its big majority any way they 
want these days. It’s pretty clear that this Sask Party is all about 
themselves now, all about their self-interest, all about their 
political interest — a Premier who’s pocketed over, you know, 
it would appear about half a million dollars from large, big 
money over the last decade, Mr. Speaker. There was all sorts of 
serious questions about influence and who he’s serving on that 
front, to then have this historic betrayal, Mr. Speaker. No 
wonder Saskatchewan people are questioning who he’s serving. 
 
This is a time for the Sask Party to have a little contrition. It’s a 
time for members opposite, who I suspect that there’s some of 

them that are less than comfortable . . . I hope that it’s more 
serious than that with this broken promise to Saskatchewan 
people, what’s being placed at risk to the future of the province. 
 
And I implore members opposite to realize that, you know, we 
go down in history as footnotes, and we’ll be all forgotten and, 
you know, in many ways. But we’ll be remembered for days 
like this. We’ll be remembered for bills like this. We’ll be 
remembered by schemes like this. We’ll be remembered for 
how we acted in the historic sellout of Saskatchewan people 
and sell-off of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people who value our Crown corporations are of all 
political stripes, Mr. Speaker, from the political left through to 
the political right, Mr. Speaker. New Democrats through 
Liberals through those that have voted Sask Party through to 
Conservative, Mr. Speaker, they know the value of our Crown 
corporations. They know how wrong it is to have a Premier 
taking away something that has provided us strength for 
decades, Mr. Speaker, and putting that at risk into the future. 
 
So I ask members of the backbench because we can’t do it 
alone. There’s, you know . . . We’ll fight as hard as we can but, 
you know, we don’t have the numbers. We’re outnumbered by 
that massive government, a government that you will . . . a 
massive majority that certainly weren’t straight with people in 
the last election. But we need some of those members opposite 
to do the right thing, to stand up for their ridings, to stand up for 
their communities, and to stand up for people and our province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
You know, all of this is, it’s another example as well of a 
government that just, you know, doesn’t do any due diligence, 
doesn’t think about other unintended consequences. In this case, 
they’re just racing to fill their budgetary hole, the budgetary 
hole and mess that they hid from Saskatchewan people, but they 
didn’t even do the basic due diligence to understand that what 
they’re looking at doing . . . If they sell even just 10 per cent, 
over 10 per cent of any one of these Crown corporations, that 
that Crown and the people’s money of Saskatchewan is then 
subject to taxation federally, sending millions and millions and 
millions of dollars to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan 
people’s money, money that we need here in Saskatchewan to 
build Saskatchewan, to provide jobs, to keep rates low. All of 
this is being put at risk. All of this is being compromised by this 
deceitful bill from a government that wasn’t straight with 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We’re going to be continuing to fight. We’ve been holding 
meetings and listening to people all across this province, in 
many of the communities that members opposite represent, Mr. 
Speaker, and Saskatchewan people will not tolerate this sort of 
betrayal. There’s ramifications for these sorts of actions. But I 
guess it’s not too late. 
 
And that’s why I reach out to members opposite to finally speak 
up at that caucus table, finally stand up to the cabinet control 
over there, Mr. Speaker. And if there’s going to be one thing 
that they’re going to do in this session or as their term as an 
MLA, stand up for our Crown corporations. Do what’s right. 
 
We’re going to certainly be pushing forward as we go through 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

different processes in here as the bill may go into committee. 
There’s a very critical place for witnesses from across 
Saskatchewan to come forward to speak to the value and the 
consequences of the reckless actions we see from the Sask 
Party. And we’ll be calling upon and urging co-operation and a 
constructive approach by the governing party opposite to make 
sure that happens. And we’ll be reaching out every step of the 
way to call on this government to abandon this track, to step 
away and repeal this bill and this attack on our Crown 
corporations. 
 
At this point I’m going to support obviously the reasoned 
amendment brought forward yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I’ll cede 
the floor to the member from Elphinstone, but I’ll support the 
motion here: 
 

That all the words after “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 40, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 because: 
 
the bill creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up 
to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum; and further 
 
that the bill risks sending millions of dollars of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of 
Saskatchewan because under section 149 of the Income 
Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from 
corporate income tax provided not less than 90 per cent of 
the shares are held by a government or a province. 

 
I support the reasoned amendment. We’re going to fight for the 
Crown corporations that have been built by and for 
Saskatchewan people. We’re going to fight for these 
money-making, service-providing, job-creating innovators 
across our province. We’re going to fight for the thousands and 
thousands and thousands of jobs, hundreds of businesses that 
will take a hit with the privatization of our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to take a stand to keep rates affordable 
for Saskatchewan people, something being put at risk at a time 
where affordability and the cost of living are high for 
Saskatchewan people and jobs far too often are a challenging 
reality for many in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to fight for the hundreds and hundreds of 
millions of dollars annually that Saskatchewan people need and 
deserve, their dollars to fund things like education and health 
care. We’ve got a government that right now is looking for a 
quick buck, a quick sale, one-time sell-off, Mr. Speaker, that 
shortchanges the people of Saskatchewan time and time again 
into the future; a government that’s putting at risk billions of 
revenues that will help fund the future in this province; a 
government that, with their quick sell-off, Mr. Speaker, for 
which they have no mandate, ends up forcing Saskatchewan 
people to pick up even more of a tab, a greater hike in their 
costs, Mr. Speaker, and greater economic consequences for the 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste of this government. 
 
As I started, Mr. Speaker, this Premier and the Sask Party have 
no mandate to sell off our Crown corporations. We will fight 

this desperate sell-off every step of the way. We will fight a 
government that’s selling out Saskatchewan people every step 
of the way. And we’ll stand and rally with Saskatchewan people 
in communities across this province — rural and urban and 
northern and otherwise, Mr. Speaker — rallying across political 
divides, Mr. Speaker, to protect our Crown corporations and 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, to build those Crowns and put them 
to work to build the future that every Saskatchewan person 
deserves. 
 
I stand vehemently opposed to this deceitful bill, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand in full support of the reasoned amendment, and I stand 
with Saskatchewan people in this historic sell-off of their best 
interests. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always an honour to take your place in this Assembly, to say 
your piece, to speak on behalf of the people that sent you here, 
and certainly in my case, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and to be here today on this bill, Bill 40. 
 
This is quite the interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s certainly . . . And for those that follow Saskatchewan 
politics, in a lot of ways this is a bill as old as the province 
itself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of some of the debates it gets into. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the ebbs and flows that we’ve had 
around public enterprise versus private ownership and, you 
know, what is rightly in the place of Crown activity, what 
should be rightly left to the private sector, there have been ebbs 
and flows in that debate over the years as well, Mr. Speaker. 
And certainly I’ve talked about it many times, the fact that in 
the McCall family, Mr. Speaker, my dad was a big, strong, farm 
boy. Him and my grandma come in from the farm in ’56 after 
getting flooded out, out Montmartre way in the home quarter. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long after that, that my father 
came to work for SaskPower. And for many years worked as a 
gas serviceman in the gas division, SaskPower, and then of 
course, in the late ’80s, was one of those hardworking people 
that had their lives thrown into no small amount of chaos by the 
government of the day when they split off SaskEnergy from 
SaskPower creating a stand-alone Crown corporation and then 
proceeded to try and sell off SaskEnergy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, in some ways it’s the more things 
change, the more they stay the same because the moves that 
were made by the then Devine government on SaskEnergy and 
various other public assets in the main came after the 1986 
election where they had sworn up and down that there was no 
such plan in the works. And you know, they narrowly won that 
election by the seat count, but lost it on the popular vote. But 
you know, as with Donald Trump, Mr. Speaker, they won the 
seats and got to form government, and then proceeded to do a 
bunch of things that they didn’t talk about in the election.  
 
And one of those was to take a big, old run at SaskEnergy and 
trying to sell that off. And those were different rules in the 
Assembly at the time, Mr. Speaker, but of course the bells rung 
and the people rallied and the Devine Progressive Conservative 
efforts to sell off SaskEnergy were defeated. And then of course 
it led the way to the 1991 election, and we know what happened 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

then. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s interesting in 
terms of my perspective on the bill is that I was a high school 
student through the late ’80s, and we had these conversations 
around our kitchen table. And you know, there were others I’m 
sure that had different . . I know certainly my seatmate was a bit 
younger at the time, a little bit, and others in this Assembly had 
unique perspectives on that debate as well. And one of those 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, was of course the Premier of the 
province, who at the time was a young ministerial aid working 
in the office of the then minister of Public Participation which is 
what they called the ministry to privatize whatever they could. 
It was sort of an early rendition on apparently on how they’re 
pursuing transformational change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, the Premier’s a smart guy. He’s a highly 
intelligent person and that’s borne out again and again and 
again. And those who underestimate the intelligence of that 
individual do so at their peril. And you know, when you’re 
sifting through the different sort of games that have gone on 
with SaskTel over the past year, Mr. Speaker, it’s something 
that we don’t forget, is the intelligence and the memory of that 
individual. 
 
And we don’t forget the fact that this is an individual that 
sought and lost a nomination in 1991 to go out and run under 
the Progressive Conservative banner. We don’t forget, Mr. 
Speaker, that not long after taking office himself after the ’99 
election, if not immediately after, soon thereafter, was 
appointed the Crown Corporations critic for the Saskatchewan 
Party official opposition. And we don’t forget, Mr. Speaker, 
that he was very much integrally involved in the 2003 campaign 
and involved in the position of the Sask Party at the time which 
was to have a referendum before proceeding with any sales. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know it had a certain utility in the 
straightforward quality of that position because of course then 
you could see it coming. And it wasn’t this business of, you 
know, will there be a referendum or won’t there. Are we able as 
a province to have a referendum that is a worthwhile democratic 
exercise which has been weighed in on in other quarters? That 
was roughly their position and a turning point in that election. 
 
And you know, certainly members over there well remember 
this, Mr. Speaker, is when in the leaders’ debate the then leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party, Elwin Hermanson, said that he 
would be crazy not to entertain offers on SaskTel. And you 
know, I think we’ve all knocked on a lot of doors in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and that was a . . . You know you 
could feel the change out there across the hustings. 
 
And in terms of what then came after with the ascension of the 
member from Swift Current to the leadership of the 
Saskatchewan Party, again as a highly intelligent individual, 
Mr. Speaker, he said well we can’t let that happen again. And 
there are different things that he’s used, the device of talking 
about, you know, being able to finish the sentence. But one of 
the, if I’m remembering correctly, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure 
I’ll be corrected if this isn’t the case, but one of the things was 
to not let the NDP finish the sentence for them in terms of their 
approach to the Crown corporations.  
 

[15:15] 
 
So in 2004, Mr. Speaker, when the Crown protection Act came 
before the legislature, we all know what happened then. And 
again this is available on November 22nd, 2004 in Hansard 
where yes, the yeas did indeed have it on Bill No. 75, The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act wherein all 57 
members in the Assembly voted for that bill, and it was 
unanimous, Mr. Speaker. There wasn’t any of this business of, 
you know, well how’s this going to impact The Interpretation 
Act or what will the World Bank say, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
pretty straightforward proposition. 
 
And again this is an individual that is intelligent and 
demonstrated intelligent leadership to his team. But of course, 
Mr. Speaker, in 2007 sometimes you had to work to get the 
team back all on the same page. And in 2007, when the member 
from Cannington . . . And again, I’m always interested in what 
the member from Cannington has to say because sometimes it 
gets pretty colourful, Mr. Speaker. But in September of 2007, 
the Premier again getting out there with the dustpan looking to 
clean up some of the remarks from the member from 
Cannington, what he had to say was, the Premier said this, 
“Crowns are not going to be privatized and (subsidiaries) are 
not going to be wound down.” 
 
That was the member from Swift Current, of course, when he 
was the leader of the opposition, making his proposition to the 
people of Saskatchewan as to why they should vote for the 
Saskatchewan Party. And again, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite and that leader were certainly astute enough to realize 
that they had a trust problem when it came to their approach to 
the Crown corporations. 
 
And you know, last night in the debate, oh, the Minister of 
Justice who’s been . . . I don’t know how the process went into 
. . . I know we’ll get the Minister of Justice to bring this 
forward, you know, interpretation Act being one part of that 
decision. I don’t know if it’s some kind of penalty that he’s 
serving, Mr. Speaker, or that he’s wanting to lend his good 
name to fronting Bill 40, but it’s interesting that he has been 
tagged with carrying this bill forward. And certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, last night I think he was on about the shoe factory 
which of course dates back to the ’40s and was one of the 
earlier foibles of the Tommy Douglas CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] government. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, it was great to get the reminder on the record because 
these kind of decisions, these kind of arguments are as old as 
the province itself. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it came to addressing this deficit that 
this government has, or this political party has in terms of the 
trust that people had in them or not when it came to the question 
of, you know, well where are they at on the Crowns, can we 
trust them on the Crowns? They took the pledge in 2004, Mr. 
Speaker, and then of course we’d seen the member, the leader 
from the then opposition, the member from Swift Current, come 
out and clean up the remarks for his member from Cannington.  
 
And we’ve seen different sort of variations on that theme since, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen where they came out and said, you 
know, we’re going to privatize all the new liquor stores 
because, you know, that keeps our promise whole. That keeps 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

our promise whole. We didn’t say anything about new liquor 
stores so, you know, obviously that’s keeping our promise. It 
brings to mind the old sort of debate over commission and 
omission, and I defer to my Catholic friends in this matter. But 
you know, that wasn’t promised so they said, well you know, 
that wasn’t in the black letter of the promise so away they went; 
all the new liquor stores, private stores. And they had some 
misadventures there as well, Mr. Speaker. Then we had ISC 
[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] which had 
not been covered by the Crown protection Act, and of course 
they were happy to sell off part of that institution and then of 
course all of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then in the last election because they’d done a lot of 
preparing the ground, they said, well let’s take a look at selling 
off 40 liquor stores. And you know, that was the headline, Mr. 
Speaker. In the article that followed below of course in their 
platform was the fact that they wanted to take SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] right out of the 
Crown protection Act. And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, I 
disagreed with their position, but I would compliment them on 
being straightforward about it, on at least having gone to the 
people and said, here’s something we want to do. It’s a 
fundamental promise on which we’ve gained your trust, on 
which we’ve gained the support to govern this great province. 
 
And they went to the people, and again we can have a different 
discussion about the election, Mr. Speaker, but they certainly, 
on that ground that was the promise that they had made. The 
only sort of prevarication from their three elections in support 
for the Crown protection Act was to remove SLGA and then 
proceed to sell off 40 stores. And of course this was all going to 
balance out and be revenue neutral. But you know, I’m here to 
talk about Bill 40 and not other magic acts on the part of this 
government. 
 
So that brings us pretty much to today, Mr. Speaker. And 
immediately after the election, the government started making 
moves on SaskTel in response to what had happened to MTS 
[Manitoba Telephone System]. And you know, you can leave 
aside the questions around the dividends that MTS has paid into 
the Manitoba coffers or the paucity of those dividends 
compared to the hundreds of millions of dollars that SaskTel 
has returned to the people of Saskatchewan. You can leave 
aside the sort of, is there going to be a referendum or we’re not 
putting a for sale sign on the front of SaskTel, but, you know, 
here’s what a great offer would look like. And again I’m always 
sort of reminded of there was one commentator at the time said, 
do they think we’re stupid, Mr. Speaker? Anyway these are 
some of the games that got played with SaskTel. 
 
But then of course we come to Bill 40. And Bill 40, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s kind of hard to talk about in plainly parliamentary 
terms because in terms of the promise that was made to respect 
the Crown corporation protection Act, there wasn’t a promise 
about, you know, we’ve got our fingers crossed behind our 
back. And you know, times are going to change and then we’re 
going to open up this loophole using The Interpretation Act 
which, you know, it’s certainly got imaginative qualities to it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the government keeping all of their promises 
around support for the Crown protection Act, which again has 

been stated 2007, ’11, and ’16, they had a chance to stand by 
their word. And now with a straight face of course, they say, 
well you know, we’re just great stewards. We just want to open 
up the possibilities for partnerships, should they exist. And they 
will say, you know, the Grant Devine government and the way 
that they wanted to sell off everything, Mr. Speaker, that’s, you 
know, another time. 
 
Or in the mid-’90s, when there was a broader consultation took 
place in terms of the role of Crown enterprise in the 
Saskatchewan economy, the then member, the then leader of the 
Progressive Conservatives, the member from Kindersley, and 
his doughty band of PC [Progressive Conservative] MLAs, Mr. 
Speaker, they were of course, like, sell off that SaskTel as fast 
as you can. And then of course, you know, history has unfolded 
and the highly intelligent person that’s the Premier of this 
province learned some lessons from that. 
 
Which brings us to, you know, well what’s changed, Mr. 
Speaker? Because certainly I’ve done some consultation. I had 
the privilege of being up in Regina Northeast on a lovely day in 
January and knocking on doors along north Broad, along 
Upland Drive, along Fairview Road, along Elmview Road, and 
I couldn’t find a darn person that was supportive of this 
government’s approach to open the door to sell off 49 per cent 
of any of the Crowns that they previously pledged to protect. 
Not a single person, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then I guess the other thing that is interesting along, you 
know, not long thereafter, we had a by-election in Saskatoon 
Meewasin. And it was most interesting, Mr. Speaker, talking to 
people that identified as previous supporters of this government, 
people that said, you know, I voted for them and never again. I 
remember in particular one small business, retired small 
businessperson up on Nahanni, up on Nahanni in the riding. 
And I know they don’t like this, Mr. Speaker. I know they don’t 
like this, but one of their former supporters said, you know, I 
don’t feel . . . You know I don’t . . . I’m not quite there to 
voting NDP. I know that Romanow come in and cleaned up the 
mess from the last bunch and, you know, we’ll see where that 
winds up. But when it comes to this bunch, you know, how can 
we go through this again, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I guess the overriding principle, of course, has been that, 
you know, you’ve gone through the boom, and I can remember 
the member from Silverspring talking about how the NDP was 
blowing the boom a few years back, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, here we are today. 
 
And in terms of decisions that this government has made and 
the way that they’ve presided over some of the best times in this 
province’s history and not saved a dime but in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, blown through all the cash that was on hand, blown 
through the rainy day fund, went to the people last spring and 
said, you know, we were going to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
And then of course the deficit starts to creep up and we can’t 
have a first quarter report. And then they, you know, okay well, 
you know, mid term. And then we can’t have a third quarter 
report. But in dribs and drabs, Mr. Speaker, the news comes out 
where the deficit is at $1.2 billion and climbing. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the kind of decisions that 
then confronts a government with . . . And we’ve seen in too 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

bold a relief the kind of priorities that these decisions relate, Mr. 
Speaker, with the firing of 230 cleaners last week. You know, 
there’s a deficit fight on and the first ones they want to enlist is, 
you know, the 230 cleaners with their jobs. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what they campaigned 
on and that’s not what they promised. But I guess the thing is, I 
don’t know if it was the, like, hold your breath and hope that 
resource prices go back up, or what the MO [modus operandi] 
was on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve made a 
bunch of decisions and that bill has come due. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you know, we’d seen 1,200 people on the lawn of the 
legislature last week and again, you know, they can keep it up 
with the eyes wide shut business all they like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After the results in Meewasin, the Premier very properly said, 
you know, congratulations to the new member from Meewasin. 
And he was asked, you know, did they send you a message in 
that election? And then the Premier said, well I get sent lots of 
messages every day. 
 
And you know, would but they had ears to hear, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the way that they should take account of their own 
actions, where they should take some responsibility for the 
decisions that they have made. And you know, then maybe the 
rest of it could be taken seriously, Mr. Speaker. But there’s 
been no acknowledgment, no contrition shown on the part of 
this government in terms of the role they played in the 1.2 and 
Lord knows how much billion in deficit that this province faces. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an excellent, reasoned amendment put 
forward by my colleague from Regina Douglas Park last night. I 
think that says a lot about the approach that should be taken 
when it comes to Bill 40.  
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I hope to have the chance to vote 
for that, not just with my colleagues on this side, but hopefully 
with colleagues across the Assembly that are looking for a way 
to make sure that promises are kept whole and that, you know, 
damage that will last decades is not done under the guise of this 
bill. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment moved by the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. We’ll take the motion as read. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The amendment motion is not carried. Debate 
continues on the main motion . . . Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:31 until 15:47.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the amended motion 
please stand. 
 
 

[Yeas — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Cheveldayoff Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Ross 
Weekes Brkich Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 11; 
those opposed, 48. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. The question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 40 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be committed to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to The 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

Pipelines Act, the amendment to The Pipelines Act, 2016. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation for us to be 
discussing. Obviously the safety of what we transport — 
whether that be hydrocarbons or other materials through 
pipelines, whether that’s through land, over and under water 
and other sensitive areas of our environment — obviously an 
extremely important thing for us to get right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been an issue of significant concern in this 
province over the years, and in particular in the last 12 months. 
For example, in early 2017 we saw 200 000 litres of crude oil 
spilled in the Ocean Man First Nation from an older pipeline, 
and more dramatically, given its relationship to a water source, 
the 225 000 litres of crude oil that were spilled in July 2016 
from a Husky oil pipeline. 
 
That was a particularly drastic event, Mr. Speaker, causing 
significant hardship for those near the spill and downstream 
from the spill, with the cities of North Battleford and Prince 
Albert having struggles accessing clean drinking water. Those 
larger cities were able to find ways around, able to access 
drinking water through other sources. However, smaller 
communities — First Nations, smaller towns — were not able 
to do so so easily and faced significant hardship. 
 
Of course we also saw challenges beyond drinking water, where 
you have livestock or wildlife that are drinking the water from 
those rivers that could be contaminating well water nearby as 
well, and also, Mr. Speaker, the aquatic life of course, as we see 
the fish and waterfowls that are affected by the oil that spilled 
into the water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so this is, as I say, an extremely important thing 
for us to get right, to know what we’re doing on maintaining the 
safety of the pipelines that transmit materials such as pipelines, 
and when we look at . . . such as hydrocarbons. 
 
So when we look at what’s been going on in this province in the 
last while, we’ve seen something interesting which is a pretty 
drastic reduction in the number of spills that are reported, which 
is interesting given that we’ve had such large spills. There was 
a report on OurSask.ca, a blog here in the province, that talked 
about a decrease from 459 spills in 2014 to 146 in 2016. 
 
That’s interesting and that could look like really good news, but 
on further investigation by that reporter, really that investigation 
turned out some pretty serious concerns about the methods 
through which these pipeline spills have been reported. So it 
seems that it’s not so much a drastic reduction in spills, Mr. 
Speaker, so much as it is a drastic reduction in the number of 
spills being reported. Increase by multiple-fold the amount of 
oil travelling through pipelines in the province, but this big 
drop. 
 
And that likely has something to do, Mr. Speaker, with the 
method of recording using this government’s recently 
introduced integrated resource information system, an online 
reporting system for any challenges that go on with pipelines. 
And that’s going to be shown to be of a bit more concern as we 
get deeper into the current amendments, Mr. Speaker. But what 
IRIS [integrated resource information system] really allows us 
to do, or is supposed to allow us to do, is have companies, when 
a spill is reported, report that spill quickly and thoroughly. 

So when I say quickly that means within the first five days 
they’ve got a report, says this is what has happened; this is our 
initial understanding of the spill. And then within 90 days 
they’re to have a detailed report that fully describes the 
amounts, the damages done, etc. And within six months they’re 
expected to have a report that not only details that initial 
understanding of the spill, it not only details the ramifications of 
this spill, but also their methods put in place to remediate what 
damage has been done from that spill, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
a good thing, a good system to have, very important to have that 
in place if it’s used and used properly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what seems to be the case is that according to IRIS there 
are hundreds of known spills in which the detailed and 
reclamation reports, months and even years later, have not yet 
been filed. They’re either overdue or they’re missing. People 
just aren’t, these companies aren’t following through with that 
reporting. And as of February 17th that included the Husky 
spill, that very large spill that gathered international attention to 
the damage done to the North Saskatchewan River and the 
communities around it. We’ve seen this process, through the 
Husky spill, with that company and this government being very 
slow to provide answers and being very slow to provide 
samples to the communities and scientists and others that need 
it to do the work to understand just what was going on in that 
spill. And we saw an article in The Globe and Mail this fall that 
was criticizing Husky for not providing those samples at a 
reasonable time, and also this province for not having an 
independent regulator. 
 
So when we had this major spill, what we heard from this 
government was that it was up to the Minister of the Economy 
to do the full assessment. The Ministry of the Economy, as you 
well know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a bit of a grab bag of files, 
lots of different things in there including Immigration and 
others, which means that they don’t necessarily have the proper 
specialized attention to the issues at hand. Having files like that 
in a broad-based basket like the Ministry of Economy might not 
result in the type of focused analysis that is necessary. And it 
could be more focused rather on the short-term profit, on the 
profit of some of those corporations — perhaps some of the 
corporations that donate significantly to the Saskatchewan 
Party, be more concerned with their profits than they are with 
the Saskatchewan people or the environment that sustains us 
and that allows us to have a functioning economy. 
 
So really what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a patchwork system 
involving the Ministry of the Economy, Ministry of the 
Environment, and the Water Security Agency digging into these 
matters. Other institutions, for example Alberta, have developed 
an independent regulator, something that has been praised by 
many as a much more robust system to actually analyze what’s 
going on with oil spills and with pipeline safety. 
 
That brings us to what’s happening here in these amendments. 
And as I said, this is a very important topic, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I believe there are some important additions to our 
ability to have safe transport through pipelines through this bill. 
There are some things that are commendable, one example 
being that initial change of the inclusion of flow lines, the flow 
lines part of the pipeline system — 80,000 flow lines in this 
province previously exempt from any of the pipeline safety Act, 
so not having any type of oversight. So that’s really important 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

that we include those in this Act. 
 
And the change of the definition, amplifying the definition of 
pipelines to make sure that we’re not only talking about 
hydrocarbons, steam, and carbon dioxide. This is very 
important to make sure that anything that’s travelling by 
pipeline is governed by the same regulations. 
 
Of course we want to be really clear about what else could be 
going through pipelines and make sure that we really 
understand what is the extent, what products, whether it’s for 
example diluents mixed in with the bitumen from certain 
sources that could be posing a greater risk. And make sure that 
analysis is done, that this pipeline Act will actually provide us 
with enough security and safety for this enhanced variety of 
contents that could be passing through pipelines in our 
province. 
 
The other thing we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this bill is an 
increase in power to inspectors, increased power to enter 
property, and be able to access pipelines and observe them and 
inspect them. And also increased ability to ask for information, 
to obtain information from companies, from owners, from 
others who are doing the work with the pipelines, making sure 
that they’re able to access that information better. 
 
[16:00] 
 
We also see — and that’s a really important thing to be able to 
do — adding power to those inspectors to be able to do the 
work of actually inspecting all of the pipelines, flow lines, and 
those pipelines covered under the existing legislation. Very 
important, but I’ll return back to a caveat on that a little bit 
later. 
 
Another thing that we see in this legislation is immunity to the 
government from litigation from pipeline owners if there was 
some mistake from the inspector, so long as that work was done 
in good faith. And that seems like a fairly legitimate thing, so 
long as that good faith is able to be shown, that that should 
protect the government from any further liability. 
 
Another thing that we see in this Act is the introduction of the 
use of the IRIS system that I mentioned earlier. I just want to 
make sure that I get the acronym right: the integrated resource 
information system. So that, as I said, we’ve seen some 
concerns over that, that we . . . Are we are seeing the owners of 
pipelines actually reporting spills effectively and thoroughly 
and giving their full reports at the 90 days and six-month period 
to make sure that all has been done in terms of understanding 
and taking efforts to rectify whatever damage has been done? 
 
With those limitations shown with the use of IRIS so far, we’d 
want to make sure that (1) that that is corrected; and (2) that the 
IRIS system for licensing will be thoroughly used; that we 
won’t see people failing to fully complete; failing to complete 
in time prior to beginning a construction project, that that would 
be done without full and proper use of this IRIS system. So that 
will obviously need some further examination to be certain that 
that’s done properly. 
 
Another thing that’s outlined in this legislation is the shift away 
from regulations to what is described as directive, and that’s 

described as something that’s been happening in other 
jurisdictions. And that is the case, that’s been happening in 
many places. There has been some concern raised about that 
direction in other places, Mr. Speaker, where there’s some 
concern about the uniformity of directives. So you want to 
make sure that the directives that one company is receiving are 
the same as the directives that another company is receiving, so 
that there is uniformity across the board in order to ensure 
fairness, in order to ensure equitable and equal application of 
the laws. 
 
Also want to make sure that those directives are clear, that it’s 
very clear to those who might want to start a project, a 
proponent of a pipeline project, but also to the general public, 
exactly what is meant by those directives, that they are as clear 
as the pre-existing regulations and that they’re very clearly 
available, which comes to the last point which is around 
transparency. There are concerns from some quarters that 
directives may be less publicly distributed. So you’d want to 
make sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that whatever directives are put 
in place are as publicly available online, etc., as the current 
regulation so that we have that transparency. 
 
And that’s certainly something that we want to be very 
cognizant of with this government in particular where we’ve 
seen troubles with transparency. We’ve seen troubles with 
transparency around, for example, failing to produce a budget 
prior to the last provincial election and hiding what was 
happening with the finances from the electorate. Troubles with 
transparency, right now failing to share the third quarter report 
and leaving that up until budget day. Failure to be transparent 
around what’s happening with NORTEP, that change in that 
program of northern education — a process that was under way, 
a process started by this government that was then ignored and 
the bid or the project given to a college that didn’t even 
participate in that process. 
 
And of course the type of transparency that we see when we see 
language misused. For example, this Bill 40 that is before us 
where we’re being asked to reimagine the definition of 
privatization and take what is really an unlikely and 
counterintuitive definition that you could privatize nearly half 
of something and call it still a public good. Really that’s the 
lack of transparency that we’ve seen. So we would want to 
make sure that whatever is happening with that shift from 
regulations to directives, that we’re very attentive to what’s 
happening and making sure that transparency is being served. 
 
Also in this legislation we see a change in the fines from 
$50,000 to a max of $500,000. And that may be more in 
keeping, as the minister said, that that’s more in keeping with 
fines in other jurisdictions. 
 
However once again as we’ve discussed in the Water Security 
amendments, increasing the fines is a very fine thing. Increasing 
the fines can be helpful to change behaviour, but only if they’re 
actually applied. So a really important question for us to ask, 
and I think we’ll want to discuss in committee is, have these 
fines ever been applied? Have we seen people being fined? And 
have we actually seen that these fines, whether at the current 
level or at a higher level, are actually an effective deterrent? Are 
they useful as a way to actually change behaviour? And you 
know, the problems we’re seeing and describing with spills 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

being reported, you know, will these fines actually lead to 
under-reporting? Will we have the type of attention to what’s 
going on to make sure that the fines are a useful deterrent 
because people know that they will be actually pointed out 
when they have done something wrong and that they will be 
expected to correct it, and will they actually be applied? 
 
The other things that we see in this legislation are new rules 
regarding the transfer of pipelines, that that transfer from one 
pipeline owner to somebody new owning that project, that that 
would have to be done in the public interest, which I think is 
really interesting. It’s important, of course, and it’s a very good 
concept. There’s not a lot of definition of what that means, what 
will be considered in the public interest, how will that public 
interest be defined. And I think that’s important for us to get 
into. Will that public interest be very narrow or will it actually 
be looking at a triple bottom line of what’s good for the 
province’s economy, what’s good for the social well-being of 
the people of the province, what’s good for protecting the 
environment? 
 
And also of interest I think is that that clause around public 
interest really seems to apply only to the transfer of pipelines 
from one owner to another. And one wonders if the same 
process of public interest will be taken into account and put into 
place when we’re looking at new pipeline projects. Will those 
always go through a rigorous triple-bottom-line analysis? 
 
Another thing that’s being introduced in this legislation that is 
quite valuable is the insistence on financial assurance, so 
knowing that a pipeline owner or proponent of a new project is 
actually able to have the funds in reserve to deal with a problem 
if one should arise, and that they have an emergency response 
plan in place to deal with a problem should that problem arise. 
And that seems like a very wise thing. It’s a bit surprising that 
that hasn’t been the case. 
 
One of the things that did concern me slightly however was the 
language that the minister used in describing that particular 
aspect where he said, and I quote, that they would provide “. . . 
new regulatory authorities to require financial assurance from 
operators for pipelines located in high-risk locations such as 
water crossings.” 
 
Now I spoke at the beginning of the spill that recently happened 
at the Ocean Man First Nation community. That wasn’t near a 
major body of water, but that still has significant impacts on the 
land around that spill, the people living on that reserve. So we 
would want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that that applies not 
only to water crossings but actually anywhere that a pipeline is 
crossing, that there should be in place an emergency response 
plan, that there should be in place the financial assurance to 
make sure that any spills that do happen are able to be 
remediated, that the company that has put that pipeline in place 
also has the financial and planning resources to be able to 
respond quickly. 
 
And certainly there have been some concerns with the speed of 
response with some of the spills in recent years and this could 
be a very valuable addition to make pipelines safer in the 
province, but you’d want to make sure that it didn’t apply only 
to water crossings but actually applied to everywhere that 
pipelines are passing. 

I now want to return to what I think is the largest priority 
concern. As I mentioned, this bill adds powers to the inspectors 
to be able to do their work in a slightly better way, which I 
think is a very valuable thing to be able to . . . And I’ll just want 
to quote again here the minister, where he said, “. . . new 
inspection, investigation, and compliance audit powers for 
ministry staff,” which I think is an excellent consideration. 
However in the same speech the minister said that, and I quote, 
“The proposed amendments will not automatically trigger new 
spending on pipeline regulations.” 
 
Now that may be the case and perhaps new spending isn’t 
required, but it is important for us to think about, if we have 
new powers for inspectors, more work for inspectors to do, do 
we have the inspectors to do so? Do we actually have the 
people on the ground that are able to do that work? In 2016, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there were 78 inspections of pipelines in 
Saskatchewan. In the same year in Alberta — and granted there 
are more pipelines there, but nonetheless there’s quite a lot here 
in this province — over 2,000 in Alberta, 2,000 inspections 
versus only 78 in this province. That strikes me as concerning. 
You know, when we hear those numbers of 80,000 flow lines, 
clearly that means there are many thousands of pipelines as 
well. Are those being inspected regularly enough for us to be 
feeling secure that more incidents like the Husky pipeline spill, 
more incidents like Ocean Man are not going to occur? 
 
And when you think about inspectors and the inspections that 
they do, we’ve heard no new money here so I’m assuming that 
means no more inspectors. We’ve also been hearing a lot from 
this government and the Premier about the idea of pay cuts for 
workers in the public service and this idea of unpaid days off. 
So there’s more work to be done, and there’s more work going 
to need to be done as we add those 80,000 flow lines into the 
mix of things that need to be inspected. If we’re also, while 
there’s more work to be done, telling people that once a month 
they don’t need to come to work, that’s a bit of a problem. 
 
So we need to make sure that we don’t have those unpaid days 
off. That’s not a good idea in any part of the public service, 
including in something so essential as making sure that 
pipelines are properly inspected in order to protect and preserve 
the environment around them, protect waterways, protect farm 
land, protect other important elements of our environment. 
Because the work is already not being done enough, and we’re 
telling the inspectors they’ll have more work to do but that 
they’ll be paid less and be allowed to do it less often. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just review quickly some of the 
major elements of this bill that are of concern and interest to us. 
One is the inclusion of flow lines, the 80,000 flow lines 
previously exempt. We think that’s a very positive thing. We do 
think it’s important to broaden the definition of pipelines to talk 
about anything that’s being transported through pipes, not only 
hydrocarbon, steam, and carbon dioxide but also to make sure 
as a caveat to that that we’re actually investigating the risks of 
any new materials or different materials than previously used 
that are being transferred through that method. 
 
Encouraging and applauding the increased power to inspectors 
and inspections, as I said, but of course, wanting to make sure 
that that is informed by an understanding that if you want them 
to do more work and be able to do more work, you have to 



March 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

make sure that the people are there to do the work. 
 
The use of the IRIS system for online licensing, again 
potentially favourable, might be a portal to allow people, allow 
companies to register more easily. You want to make sure that 
IRIS is actually being used properly. Some instances of concern 
around whether or not that’s being used well enough in terms of 
reporting incidents of spills. Will it be used properly in terms of 
registration of new pipelines and their approval? 
 
Of course, the shift from direct regulations to directives, Mr. 
Speaker, is something of concern as we want to make sure that 
that’s done in a way that is uniform, clear to the proponents of 
projects, and transparent to the public. Regarding the increase in 
fines from 50 to 500,000, that is an important consideration, 
wanting to make sure that we actually look at the evidence. 
What’s been done in other jurisdictions? Has been that change, 
has it actually changed behaviour? Is it a successful deterrent, 
and is it applied? Have we been applying the existing fines in 
such a way that they’ll actually change behaviour, and will we 
apply those that are proposed? 
 
[16:15] 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will simply say that I think that this 
is a bill that is very important for us to be considering. It adds a 
great deal of points for discussion, and is important for us to 
look at ways that we can prevent the types of incidents that 
we’ve seen in recent years, such as Ocean Man and the Husky 
oil spill, but also that we are more ready to deal with oil spills, 
should they happen. With that, I would like to adjourn debate 
on Bill 43, the amendment to the pipeline safety Act. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as ever, thanks to colleagues for the support and I’ll try to 
live up to their expectations for the speech, not be a drain on 
their faith or anything like that, but anyway. 
 
This is, all kidding aside, Mr. Speaker, out in too many places 
in the province this is as deadly serious a piece of legislation as 
they come. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, just by way of explanation, earlier on 

I was talking about coming, my grandma and my father coming 
off the farm in the ’50s, and they were flooded out, Mr. 
Speaker. They had initially proved up the back quarter. My 
ancestors back in the 1880s let it go soon thereafter, having 
come to the opinion that the only thing it was good for growing 
was ducks. But the cycles changed, and they proved it back up 
for 1906, and that’s still the McCall home quarter. And I’m on 
the title with my father, my brother, and my sister for that 
parcel of land. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that particular piece of 
land go through a lot of different changes as well. And you 
know, again there’s some broader super cycles at play. But 
certainly, come time for what led to my grandma and my dad 
leaving the farm in the mid-’50s, it was a terribly wet part of the 
calendar. And my father remembers the hooves rotting off the 
cattle, things were so wet. The ditching that they did in the sort 
of . . . You know, my father, you know, all he needs to do is 
smell the cordite or dynamite, Mr. Speaker, from the ditching 
they were doing and it takes him back to a time that exacerbated 
health problems for my grandfather, and during which my 
grandfather passed away. And then dad and grandma tried 
making a go of it on the farm for another year and decided to 
move to the city. 
 
And I guess that’s something I always think of when you see 
the different issues that come with ditching, and the way that 
that sets neighbour against neighbour and the kind of issues that 
that involves, and the role for government to play as an honest 
broker in navigating those conflicts, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I also think about back to the flooding that went on at Waldsea 
and at Fishing Lake in 2005-2006, and the way the closed 
basins in this province, they’re right out there in terms of . . . If 
you’re going to have problems with ditching and whether 
government is playing the proper role as regulator, again as 
honest broker or not, and different things being let to go, then if 
you have those wet years, the ditching rolls into the closed 
basins and then of course there’s nowhere for the water to go. 
And we see that again recently in different places in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, where that impacts lives and homes and 
livelihoods in ways that it hasn’t previously, Mr. Speaker. So I 
guess I just want to say that off the top by way of recognizing 
the complex set of issues that a piece of legislation like this 
represents. 
 
And you know, questions of keeping watersheds discrete and, 
you know, you think about the different discussions we have 
with our neighbours in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
different watersheds, problems here washing up on Manitoban 
shores and the way that that’s another sort of variation on the 
theme of the very real conflict that goes on between neighbours 
when it comes to land that is overtaken by the groundwater and 
then by the moisture. And it again poses some very difficult 
situations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know not exactly in your neck of the 
woods, but certainly I think about Little Quill and Big Quill 
lakes — and now of course it’s all one Big Quill — and the 
heartbreaking circumstance that that poses for the families who 
can’t get out on the land to seed, that see their capital being 
eroded. There’s a story I’m familiar with with a widow whose 
. . . That’s the estate. That’s the stake for moving on to the next 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2017 

stage of life, and is it worthless? So in a lot of different ways, 
there’s a lot of work that’s been done on this legislation, and I 
don’t know if we’re there yet, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where 
we need to be. 
 
And certainly I don’t agree with everything that happens at a 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention. But you know, you’ve got the member from Wood 
River sitting in the cabinet, and the way that SARM was not 
supportive of this legislation, despite having been very much 
involved in the consultations that have gone into developing it. 
And again just referring to the minister’s second reading speech 
from March 6th when we’d just come back into the House, it’s 
again a signal to the kind of conflicts that this legislation and 
related regulation and the Water Security Agency seek to 
ameliorate. 
 
So in terms of the way that different lenses have been put on 
these problems, there’s the work from the Ombudsman that’s 
been done. The minister does a good job of outlining the 
consultations that’ve been undertaken by the Water Security 
Agency in terms of the measures that are proposed, Mr. 
Speaker. Again we’re very interested to hear what the different 
stakeholders have to say, and we’ll be doing consultation with 
those folks to make sure that we’ve got a clear picture on who’s 
in support and if there are better ideas to be brought to bear, Mr. 
Speaker, then where are they in relation to this legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I realize that there’s a lot of work to be done 
on this. This is legislation that again was brought in at the start 
of this session. It certainly impacts the ability to get out and do 
that consultation, but we’re certainly going to endeavour to do 
the best we can there, Mr. Speaker. But at its base, this is 
something the government needs to get right, and it’s something 
that people rightfully look to a government to get right because 
it’s . . . You look at the, you know, the packed halls that 
accompanied community meetings in Quill Lake and 
throughout that region. And again, Mr. Speaker, we pray for a 
good spring and a good staging of the runoff. I know that the 
southeast of the province has been forecast for particular 
challenges, and may those not be realized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, this legislation is smack dab in the middle of some 
conflicts that have been going for, in some cases for years, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll be very much looking to the affected parties 
to come forward with their consideration of the legislation. And 
again we, you know, thank the minister and officials of the 
Water Security Agency country but as well we thank the 
affected parties because this is a, like I said at the start, this is 
about as real as it gets for some folks in terms of their 
livelihood, in terms of being able to make the living off the land 
that has often been in, you know, been in some families 
generations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues have a 
more informed perspective to bring to bear. I know that our 
work of consultation on this legislation is ongoing. And in aid 
of those objectives, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, 
The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 pm. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:28.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1805 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1806 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Spring Free From Racism 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1808 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1808 
 Saskatoon Region Economic Outlook Forum 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1808 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1809 
 Quilts of Valour Presentation Ceremony 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1809 
 Lumsden Curlers Win Mixed Doubles Championship 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1809 
 Fiscal Plan Pays Off 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1809 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts Committee Meeting 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 
 Balanced Budget Legislation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1811 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1811 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1811 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 
 Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 
 Provision of Teacher Education Programming in the North 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1813 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1813 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1814 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1814 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1814 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 réduisant les traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1814 



 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1817 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1817 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1820 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 1823 
  Merriman (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ...................................................................... 1823 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1823 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1827 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


