






















































Hansard: March 07, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 53A  TUESDAY, MARCH 7, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1561 
 March 7, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I would like to introduce in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, a number of students that are here from 
the Student Medical Society of Saskatchewan. The Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health and I this morning had an opportunity 
to meet with two of them. We met with Jacqueline Carverhill 
and Alison White. They have a number of colleagues with them 
as well. I understand that two of them . . . I apologize; I don’t 
have the names of all the students here. I know a couple of them 
met with the Deputy Premier. I think some met with the caucus 
policy committee. Some also met with members of the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health and I 
had an interesting discussion with Jacqueline and Alison. 
They’re making a compelling case on drug coverage for HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus]. We had a tremendous 
conversation, I think. I’ve committed to having the ministry 
look into this and committed to responding back to them. I 
welcome them here to the Assembly, and I’d ask all members, 
Mr. Speaker, to please join me in welcoming them. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite on behalf of the opposition to 
welcome the students here today from the Student Medical 
Society of Saskatchewan. I know in my time here as an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly], I’ve always appreciated 
the issues that this group of students brings forward every year, 
whether it’s mental health of students, whether it’s seniors’ 
issues, whether it’s about how to retain medical student grads or 
medical grads here in this province, and today this very 
important issue around the HIV epidemic here in this province 
and the need for universal coverage for antiretrovirals here in 
the province. 
 
So thank you for all that you do. I know this is important to you 
as students and future doctors, and it’s important to the people 
of Saskatchewan. So thank you for your willingness to come to 
the legislature and share those important issues with us and I 
look forward to a continued, really great working relationship. 
And with that, I ask all my colleagues to join me in welcoming 
these folks to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce, seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Brad Bulbuck of Redvers in my 

constituency. Brad and his wife Corinne moved from Ontario 
four years ago, and Brad works for CNRL [Canadian Natural 
Resources Limited] in the oil patch in the area and is a town 
councillor. His wife is the office manager at the Redvers 
Medical Clinic and is on the health foundation. 
 
Brad also admits to having a wonderful sister-in-law, Sheila 
Sterling, who works in the Speaker’s office, and he wanted to 
make sure she knew and understood his appreciation of her. So 
I would ask all members to welcome him to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce and welcome a friend seated in the 
west gallery, Mr. Michael Androsoff. Give us a bit of a wave so 
we know who you are. Michael is a CPA [chartered 
professional accountant] who has provided EMS [emergency 
medical services] consulting services for the past 30 years, and 
his main goal has always been to create fairness and especially 
towards enhancing EMS services, particularly in the rural areas 
of Saskatchewan, which are ultimately to the benefit of our 
citizens. He is visiting us here today in the Chamber, even in 
this Saskatchewan blizzard, as he is doing business in Regina 
and in the rural areas of our province. And I say, travel safe out 
there, Michael. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
Michael to the legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader.  
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce a couple of different groups of folks here today, or I 
guess one individual seated in the east gallery, and I’m speaking 
of Trevor Davies, Mr. Speaker. Trevor and I met about a 
million years ago on the campus of the University of Regina. 
He was smarter than me then and it’s still the case today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He’s put in 23 years as a proud employee with SaskEnergy, 
ranging around the province. And at one point we were very 
proud to have Trevor carry the standard for us in the riding of 
Wood River, as a proud resident of Assiniboia and an active 
member in that community, and certainly someone who’s given 
a fair amount of his life through community service, through 
service with the military. But all around great guy, and it’s good 
to see Trevor here in his Legislative Assembly. So I’d ask all 
members to please welcome Trevor to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 
group seated in the west gallery. I’m speaking of some folks 
from the SaskTel telephone pensioners association. We’ve got 
Ron Carlson, Brian Renas, Dale Richardson, and Dale Franklin 
joining us here today. Mr. Speaker, these are individuals that 
put together a petition drive that gathered more than 4,000 
signatures calling on the government to take the appropriate 
steps to secure the pension of these individuals, Mr. Speaker, 
that have given so much to the province through their service at 
SaskTel over many decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’re also calling on the government not just to take the 
for sale sign off the front of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. They’re also 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

calling for them to, you know, cut out any sort of backdoor 
actions that would see them privatize part of that organization 
as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you could join me and all members in 
welcoming these important individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Battleford. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 
to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Rosthern, 
Wakaw, North Battleford, Battleford, Meota, Cochin, Cut 
Knife, Murray Lake, Blaine Lake, Shellbrook, Marcelin, 
Richard, Waldheim, Leask, Aberdeen, Krydor, Saskatoon, 
Hafford, Dalmeny, Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Leoville, 
Bellevue, Glaslyn, Medstead, Hepburn, Livelong, Glenbush, 
Mayfair, Unity, Canwood, Deer Ridge, Holbein, Prince Albert, 
Parkside, Pense, Wild Rose, Debden, Hague. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Under 
the direct order of the member from Prince Albert Northcote, I 
stand today to present a petition to fight for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert as we do on this side of the Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has 
never been clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities 
north of Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and 
products through Prince Albert require a solution. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout the land. And on this particular page, they 
are primarily from Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse program. 
The people that have signed this want to bring to our attention 

the following. In April of 2014, the then minister of Social 
Services said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take 
pressure off of existing detox facilities, hospitals and police 
cells, while keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold 
winters.” On the very same day, the then minister of Health 
said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental health 
and addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
And this government has repeatedly indicated that the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital 
emergency rooms and out of jail cells. In 2015 the Provincial 
Auditor called upon the Minister of Social Services to provide 
the correct amount of assistance, not to revoke this essential 
service and thereby putting the most vulnerable at risk. These 
ministers are now trying to place responsibility for repairing 
budget deficits on those experiencing addictions, 
unemployment, and poverty, and who are living from day to 
day without proper services. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse their recent 
cuts to funding that allows extremely vulnerable people to 
access the services of the Lighthouse stabilization unit in 
Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition of a strict and 
narrow definition of homelessness in November of 2015 
which forced the Lighthouse to cut back its hours of 
essential service in February of 2016; and to take 
immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition today regarding pay equity in Saskatchewan. The 
petitioners want to bring to your attention the following: that 
the citizens of this province believe in an economy powered by 
transparency, accountability, security, and equity; and that all 
women should be paid equitably; and that women are powerful 
drivers of economic growth and their economic empowerment 
benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016 women earned, on average, 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes. And in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 
from the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatchewan want 
to bring this attention to you. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit 
has had to close its doors during daytime hours, resulting in a 
loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime closure of 
Prince Albert Mobile has put stress on Prince Albert police 
services, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may not be 
trained and/or qualified to provide counselling and intervention 
services to clients. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert Mobile Crisis Unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition are from the 
city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those who 
have signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care 
centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed 
non-profit centres pay commercial property taxes, and this is 
something that’s not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC 
[British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to simply balance their budget. This issue threatens both the 
number of child care spaces as well as the quality of care. 
Quality child care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s 
future outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development. It’s appropriate that they have the same 
tax treatment as schools. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act, and that we exempt 
all licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition that I am submitting 

today reside in Yorkton. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition bearing the signatures of some 4,145 
petitioners. 
 
It’s been brought to the Assembly by beneficiaries of the 
SaskTel defined benefit pension plan and, Mr. Speaker, they are 
concerned about the possible results caused by recent actions of 
the Saskatchewan government, putting the pension plan at risk. 
They’re concerned about the removal of the requirement for 
SaskTel to fund this plan under the solvency valuation method 
without assuring the plan would have access to public support 
for funds, and thereby exposing the plan and putting members 
at risk. They are requesting that both members of the 
government and opposition give plan members an assurance 
that should SaskTel be unable to properly fund this plan or 
should SaskTel be sold, that the provincial government would 
provide appropriate funding, if needed, to deliver the benefits to 
all members of the SaskTel defined benefits plan, as determined 
in the negotiated plan text. Further, Mr. Speaker, they oppose 
the privatization of SaskTel in whole or in part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’d pointed out, this petition has been signed by 
over 4,000 individuals from throughout Saskatchewan, and they 
are calling on their pension to be protected by the government, 
which is only what they bargained for these many years on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present another petition calling on the government to reverse 
the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. 
Although the members on the other side don’t seem to 
understand, I know the members on this side sure understand 
that Aboriginal court workers play an important role in helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal court 
workers’ work help to address the delays in our court system as 
well as the overcrowding in our jailhouses, Mr. Speaker, some 
of the two most expensive problems we have in our justice 
system today. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and La Ronge. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a petition to 
stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. NORTEP [northern teacher 
education program], as it’s known, has been a very successful 
program at retaining local graduates and promoting culturally 
positive education that helps to preserve local language and 
local culture, key elements of the commitments of this 
legislature to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s 
recommendations and to the future health of the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. and 
continue to fund NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La 
Ronge. 

 
Those signing the petition come from the communities of 
Pinehouse, Air Ronge, and La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, I do so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Memorial for Glen Day 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
February the 18th of this year, friends and family said goodbye 
to Glen Day. It was a loss for them as well as the community of 
Nipawin. 
 
Glen was born in 1945 and grew up on a farm outside of Edam. 
After finishing high school, he moved to Saskatoon and 
attended the Saskatoon Teachers’ College, receiving his 
certificate in 1964 and from there began his career in teaching. 
Glen and his wife, Hughene, were married in 1966. He returned 
to Saskatoon shortly after and received his Bachelor of 
Education and Bachelor of Science. In 1969 Glen and his young 
family moved to Nipawin, where he taught at L.P. Miller high 
school until 1995. In 1980 Glen was elected to the Nipawin 
Town Council where he was an alderman for 17 years. In 1997 
he became mayor for four consecutive terms. 
 
Glen was honoured in 2010 with the Scoop Lewry Award in 
recognition of outstanding service in municipal government. 
Glen and Hughene also owned a successful flower and gift shop 
in Nipawin for 17 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Glen’s contribution and dedication to the people 
of Nipawin was extraordinary. I wish to offer my condolences 
to his family and friends and to all those whose lives he helped 
throughout his years of service in the community of Nipawin. 
Nipawin is a loss for having what happened to Glen. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Challenge 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have an HIV 
epidemic in this province. The HIV rate in Saskatchewan is 
more than double the national average — more than double, 
Mr. Speaker. That should be shameful to all of us. 
 
This disease disproportionately affects indigenous people and 
people living in poverty. Here in our province we have high 
rates of mortality associated with HIV. In other parts of Canada, 
if you had HIV, it would be unlikely that you would get sick or 
die. That is not the case here. 
 
The rates of this preventable and treatable illness continue to 
grow. The number of new cases jumped from 114 in 2014 to 
158 in 2015. Additionally, Saskatchewan has the unfortunate 
distinction of still seeing mother-to-child transmission, 
otherwise most unheard of elsewhere in this country. 
 
I hear time and time again from people working directly in this 
field that more needs to be done. We have an HIV epidemic in 
this province, and the Sask Party government needs to 
acknowledge it and to address it. We need to commit to the 
United Nations AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] 
90-90-90 target. By 2020, 90 per cent of people living with HIV 
will know their status; 90 per cent of those diagnosed with HIV 
will be on sustained antiretroviral therapy; and 90 per cent of 
those on ARVs [antiretroviral] have their viral loads 
suppressed. I call upon my colleagues in this House to take 
immediate action to work to ensure better access to testing and 
to antiretroviral treatment, and address this urgent issue. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Citizen Named Volunteer Champion 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to be 
able to stand in this Assembly today and to acknowledge a 
constituent of mine who recently was honoured at a Melfort 
Mustang game. Don Moskal was this year’s Melfort Mustang 
SaskEnergy Volunteer Champion, an award given out yearly to 
an individual who demonstrates exceptional volunteerism and 
community spirit in their support of our local SJHL 
[Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] team. The Mustangs had 
a tough choice when they made this choice because of the 
fantastic group of volunteers they have. And these people make 
each and every game a success, especially to watch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don was chosen because of his tireless efforts to 
organize and recruit volunteers to help with the games. He’s 
also known for being the first person to fill in in any of those 
positions if a person does not show up. Even in receiving the 
award, Don was quick to acknowledge the many volunteers that 
make these games possible. Mr. Speaker, Don’s volunteerism 
and hard work for the local organization demonstrates 
something amazing about this province of Saskatchewan. I 
invite all members to join with me in congratulating Don 
Moskal on being this year’s Melfort Mustang SaskEnergy 
Volunteer Champion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

Labour Leader Honoured 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize Barb Byers who has been named a Member of the 
Order of Canada for outstanding contributions for her 
leadership and advocacy in the Canadian labour movement. 
 
For many years Barb fought for workers’ rights as a social 
worker and then as a member of the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union. Barb became the first female president of 
SGEU in 1984 where she fought against issues such as poverty, 
indigenous concerns, gender equity in the workplace, LGBTQ 
[lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] 
workers’ rights. 
 
She then went on to become the president of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, and under her five terms as president she 
successfully fought against the anti-labour policies of the 
scandal-ridden Grant Devine government. She was the founder 
of the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] summer youth 
camp and co-founder of the SFL Prairie School for Union 
Women. 
 
For the last 12 years Barb served as the secretary-treasurer for 
the Canadian Labour Congress and has represented Canada as a 
delegate in the governing body of the UN [United Nations] 
International Labour Organization. In recognition of her work, 
Barb was appointed to the United Nations Women Executive 
Director’s Civil Society Advisory Group in December, and just 
a few weeks ago was selected to receive the 2017 YWCA 
[Young Women’s Christian Association] Regina Women of 
Distinction Lifetime Achievement Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Barb Byers on her many recent and well-deserved awards. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Heroes Participate in All Seniors Games 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is an adage 
that you are only as old as you feel, and I saw that first hand 
when attending the eighth annual All Seniors Games last month 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Organized by All Seniors Care, the games are a celebration of 
camaraderie, competition, and activity that is good for both 
body and mind. It is also an opportunity to come together as a 
group and discovering new friends or reconnect with 
neighbours. The games are open to all adults over the age of 55. 
From bowling, cribbage, and kaiser to golf and track and field, 
there was an activity that everyone could participate in. 
 
This year’s theme was heroes. There is no doubt that many of 
the men and women participating in the games are heroes in 
their own right. The decision to socialize, exercise, and stay 
positive is key to living a longer, healthier, happier life. It has 
been said that we don’t stop playing because we grow old; we 
grow old because we stop playing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the athletes in this year’s All Seniors Games and 
wish them all the best in their future in sport. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Professional Association Encourages Recruitment 
and Retention of Women 

 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month I had the 
privilege to attend the council of the Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan’s 30 by 30 
initiative. This event was coordinated by Engineers Canada who 
realize that we need to do better with recruitment and retention 
of female engineers. APEGS [Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan] has made it its 
goal to increase the percentage of all licensed engineers to 30 
per cent of the workforce by 2030. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an admirable goal and something that this 
government can stand firmly behind. We know average 
education levels for women continue to rise, and we encourage 
more and more women to join STEM [science, technology, 
engineering, and math] careers. Mr. Speaker, engineers are 
often the backbone of industry, from agriculture and forestry to 
construction, manufacturing, utilities, resources, and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week was proclaimed Engineering and 
Geoscience Week in recognition of all the men and women who 
call themselves professional engineers. Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask all members to join me in recognizing Engineering and 
Geoscience Week as well as commending APEGS on the work 
they are doing to bring more women into STEM careers. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Preschool and Parent Education Program in Esterhazy 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great honour 
to stand in the House today and acknowledge a long-running 
program, and that’s the first of its kind in rural Saskatchewan, 
that is providing support for children and families. The 
preschool and parent education program in Esterhazy is focused 
on providing social and educational opportunities for parents 
and their preschool children. The unique nature of this program 
allows for both children and their parents to benefit by 
equipping them with skills and providing the supports they need 
to succeed in life. The program has seen significant uptake from 
new Canadians and people who require additional family 
supports. The focus of the program recognizes parents as a 
child’s first and most important teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program is supported administratively by the 
Good Spirit School Division and is hosted in one of the 
classrooms at Esterhazy High School. The funding for the 
program comes from the Public Health Agency of Canada, the 
Community Initiatives Fund, and local businesses who have 
been quick to support. This is a creative program that has seen 
positive outcomes for both the families involved and the 
community. 
 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Laura Petracek, Krista Dutka, and Andrea 
Bogard, the organizers of the PPEP [preschool and parent 
education program] program, for making it a success in the 
Esterhazy area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Drinking and Driving Legislation and  
Members’ Code of Conduct 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, at the very least it’s the 
function and duty of any government to provide confidence for 
the people it serves that it stands by the laws it passes. And 
yesterday we saw a new MLA swear to uphold the MLA code 
of conduct. Like him, we’ve all sworn to act “lawfully” and to 
“protect the public interest and to enhance public confidence 
and trust.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier wrote: 
 

Too many of us are still drinking and driving and it is 
taking the lives of our neighbours and friends, fathers, 
mothers and our kids. And it is devastating the lives of 
others who are left behind.  
 
We need to stop this. 
 

I couldn’t agree more. We have a serious problem in 
Saskatchewan with drunk driving. 
 
To the Premier: how does inviting back someone who broke the 
MLA code of conduct and broke the law by driving under the 
influence and has not yet finished serving his sentence stop 
this? What message does this send to kids and communities 
across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of comments to the 
member’s question. Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the 
member, who was supported in his return to caucus by members 
of this side of the House, continues to certainly pay a price, 
both personally and professionally. He was formerly in the 
cabinet. He was formerly the deputy premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and is no longer serving in those capacities. And 
I think he would share quite freely that that is a price that he 
continues to pay. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that 
the Criminal Code portion of what was required of him has now 
been served and completed. 
 
I would also share with members that when I spoke with the 
member that the interim leader of the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] is referring to, we chatted a little bit about his ongoing 
desire to be a champion on this issue, to have some very 
difficult but important conversations with Saskatchewan people, 
to champion in a proactive way the need for us as a country . . . 
For the auto-making industry to make a bigger priority out of 
interlock and likewise similar technologies to prevent anyone 

from driving when they ought not to be driving, period, as one 
of the proactive measures that can be taken by the federal 
government and by us in terms of calling on the federal 
government to do those things. 
 
The member should not misunderstand the fact that we do view 
this as seriously as anybody, as seriously as he. This is why the 
minister responsible has brought in significant changes, 
significant changes that I think now present our province as 
very, very tough on the issue of drinking and driving, but also 
prescribing some additional proactive measures that we can see 
to reduce it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I expect there’s another question, and I’d like to 
get into some of the measures that we’ve taken, action taken by 
this government to end this because it is not acceptable on the 
part of anybody in this province or anybody in this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Accounts Committee Meeting and  
Details of Land Transactions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this reflects poor judgment 
of this Premier. I wish the member well. I wish him well as a 
person. I like the member in discussion here today. But to 
trivialize the consequences of drunk driving, the consequences 
are real and they’re harsh for Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s not the member, whether or not you’re invited back into a 
caucus that are a consequence. The consequences are for kids, 
like those kids of Tanner Kaufmann who went to sleep again 
last night without having their dad at their side. Those are the 
real consequences and the real losses at play. This speaks to this 
Premier’s judgment once again. 
 
We see this on other fronts as well. We see poor judgment 
exercised as it relates to the lack of accountability with the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] scandal of this government.  
 
We saw this in committee this morning, once again where in 
fact the members opposite came in and actually stopped 
witnesses from testifying, but witnesses that have been there 
before — not new witnesses, but very important ones that 
should be there as well — but actually stopping the GTH CEO 
[chief executive officer] and the deputy minister of Highways 
from coming before. They’ve testified before, and in fact the 
House Leader, who was subbed in at the last meeting to run the 
show, said that they’d be welcomed back. But again they 
blocked them again at committee, blocking basic accountability. 
 
You know, if they’re going to keep blocking accountability at 
committee, we can ask the questions here. And this one hasn’t 
been answered by the Premier, time and time again, despite it 
being asked on the floor of this Assembly. When did that 
Premier find out that the original owner of the GTH land was 
the landlord of the former minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the preamble to the member’s 
question dealt with the issue of drinking and driving in the 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

province, and I indicated in my previous answer that I wanted 
to run through some additional changes that are being made. I 
think all members would agree it’s very important that we 
reiterate these changes on every opportunity, and this is 
certainly one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so as a result of the changes implemented actually 
back to 2014, since June 2014 legislative changes, alcohol- and 
drug-related fatalities are down by 13 per cent or eight fewer 
lives lost. Obviously, obviously one is too many. The purchase 
of 47 automatic licence plate readers, the $1.3 million 
investment; and the number of changes that were brought in 
October 2016, including increasing the age of zero tolerance for 
drugs and alcohol for all drivers at 21 and under, and for all 
drivers in the graduated driver’s licensing or motorcycle GDL 
programs, regardless of age; added three days of vehicle seizure 
for experienced drivers for first-time below blood alcohol 
content offences; and strengthened ignition interlock laws to be 
the most effective in Canada. 
 
We’re continuing to engage in education and advertising and 
open to additional improvements, Mr. Speaker, in laws that we 
have and proactive action that we can take as an Assembly and 
as a people to ensure that this doesn’t happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about the 
GTH, which we know wasted millions and millions of dollars 
on this deal. The question as it relates to drunk driving again 
reflects poor judgment on that Premier, and we need to do a 
better job of supporting enforcement in this province. 
 
But when we look at the GTH we don’t even know what the full 
cost will be yet. It’s climbing. The former Ministry of 
Highways director of property standards says, and this is a 
quote, that it’s a “horrendous problem for the Ministry of 
Highways.” In an interview with the CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] he said, “Everyone’s going to want 
103,000-an-acre and it’s nowhere near the true value of the 
land.” He also said that there was political pressure on this deal, 
and he said that the numbers were fabricated by government. 
 
Mr. Speaker — and the Premier can heckle from his seat or he 
could try answering a question on the floor of this Assembly — 
the nuns were ripped off by that Premier and that government. 
Taxpayers were ripped off by that government. Two friends of 
government received, I believe, about $11 million in profit. 
This very simple question is back to the Premier, the one he just 
failed to answer, the one that he’s failed to answer when it’s 
been asked to him time and time again. When did the Premier 
find out that the owner of the GTH land in question was the 
landlord to the Minister Responsible for the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 
question just asked by the Leader of the Opposition, he referred 
to the Public Accounts Committee meeting of this morning. 
And I would say that he mischaracterized, mischaracterized 
what happened at the Public Accounts Committee meeting. 
What indeed happened is that there were a number of 

undertakings made with respect to returning to the committee 
with certain information. Those undertakings are taken 
seriously. Ministries are working on providing that information. 
And of course . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the deputy 
leader is heckling from his seat. Apparently he’s not interested 
in the facts and the answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is that those undertakings will be fulfilled. Those 
answers will be provided to the committee. And with respect to 
the allegation from the member opposite on the other matter, 
just recently, Mr. Speaker — we just announced it in the last 
number of weeks — land of the GTH was sold for $256,000 per 
acre, Mr. Speaker, which is more than the $103,000 per acre 
referenced. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of  
Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s beyond weak and 
pathetic that the Premier of Saskatchewan can’t answer that 
very simple question for Saskatchewan people, you know, and 
they just can’t be straight. They can’t be straight with this GTH 
deal. They can’t be straight with the finances, and they can’t be 
straight about our Crown corporations. 
 
You know, yesterday after a bunch of musing and noise, the 
Premier said that SaskTel was not for sale, after of course our 
province rallied and sent him a message. But I didn’t hear him 
say anything about withdrawing Bill 40, a bill that would 
effectively allow him to sell off up to half of our Crowns. He 
openly admits that he doesn’t have the support to sell off 
SaskTel and our Crowns, yet he’s ramming forward a bill that 
would allow for a desperate sell-off of our valued Crowns 
without even having the decency to ask Saskatchewan people. 
He has no mandate to do this. 
 
To the Premier: will he finally and simply do the right thing and 
withdraw Bill 40? Our Crowns are not for sale. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hypothetical. There is no offer to sell any part 
of any of the Crown corporations, and there won’t be an offer, 
Mr. Speaker, unless we have a consideration in terms of what’s 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and those 
Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Northcote said that she was concerned that we should be 
spending more time working on enhancing and strengthening 
our Crowns. That’s exactly what this Act does, Mr. Speaker. 
This Act is built upon one word, Mr. Speaker, and that word is 
undefined in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. This Act, Bill 40, 
simply seeks to define a word that should have been defined in 
the legislation when they were on this side of the House, when 
they brought that legislation through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel pensioners who are here 
with us today would like the Premier to stand by his word. 
When it comes to selling all or part of SaskTel they want the 
whole truth, not a half-truth. They do not want this government 
sneaking in the back door what they now admit they can’t get 
through the front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 lets them sell off 49 per cent of our 
Crowns without even asking the Saskatchewan people’s 
permission through a referendum or an election. It’s shameful, 
Mr. Speaker. The pensioners here are concerned that the Sask 
Party is putting their pensions at risk. 
 
Will the government give members of that plan an assurance in 
writing that they will not sell off any part of SaskTel? And will 
they protect the retirement benefits that these SaskTel workers 
have earned by serving our province for decades? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources and SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I have said in the past, at committee as well as in writing to a 
number of pensioners that have written to me, the plan that is 
the responsibility of SaskTel and is managed by SaskTel, it is 
fully funded on an ongoing concern basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier did indicate that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would retain the ownership of 
SaskTel going on into the future. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the 
pension for pensioners of SaskTel, employees of SaskTel who 
are now retired and are pensioners, Mr. Speaker, the pension is 
secure. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Release of Third Quarter Update 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those retirees spent 
decades building SaskTel, and they are understandably worried 
about their pensions. And the Sask Party is leaving current 
workers hanging as well. They’re forcing pay cuts and ripping 
up contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the Sask Party that has run more deficit 
budgets than surpluses. It’s the Sask Party who have wasted 
billions with their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. But it’s 
the people of Saskatchewan they’re forcing to pay. Failures like 
lean, the so-called smart meters, the $2 billion Regina bypass, 
the GTH scandal — the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the games, the lines, the spin, the yelling, and the 
laughing from members opposite, those Sask Party responses 
are just not acceptable. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to 
know the state of the finances. Other provinces, on summary 
finance reporting, have released their third quarter updates; in 
fact that minister did it last year. So why won’t the minister 
come clean now with the Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

how clearer I can be. We’re going to release the third quarter 
update on March 22nd. I’ve said this last week. I’ve said it 
yesterday. I say it again today, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of 
members opposite, including the Finance critic. If she hasn’t 
heard me before, I’ll be very clear — we’re going to release the 
third quarter update on March 22nd. 
 
Now what we’re finding here, Mr. Speaker, as we engage in 
this debate, as the members opposite are trying to engage in this 
debate about where the deficit came from in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s fair to say and I hope that members would 
acknowledge that we’ve lost $1.2 billion in resource revenues 
in this province over the last couple years, Mr. Speaker. We 
have 150,000 more people living in this province, more people 
utilizing our education system, our health care system, our 
social services system. At the same time, we’ve had a reduction 
of $1.2 billion in resource revenues. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, recently the Federated Co-op, an 
organization that member should be familiar with, announced in 
their results that they’re down from $9.1 billion to 8.4 billion in 
revenues . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I think you should 
pay attention to this. Their CEO, their CEO of the FCL 
[Federated Co-operatives Ltd.] said, “The company’s declining 
revenue and profit are largely attributable to a $774 million 
decline in energy sales,” Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what 
we’re seeing here in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
happening with the Federated Co-op. It’s happening in the 
potash industry. It’s happening in the uranium industry, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know why those members can’t recognize that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Sale of Crown Land 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the lines that we keep hearing 
over and over again are just not believable. They drove 
themselves and all of Saskatchewan into billion dollar deficit 
after billion dollar deficit. And they’re selling everything that’s 
not nailed down to fill the hole that they dug. 
 
Now we see them selling the ground under our feet. They’re 
hoping to make up for their mistakes by selling off Crown land 
assets. And we know from previous Sask Party Crown fire 
sales, they don’t exactly get the best return on investment, from 
the Saskatchewan Capital Network to Information Services 
Corporation. There is a theme here, Mr. Speaker. They can’t be 
trusted to buy land and they can’t be trusted to sell, well, 
anything. But how does the minister expect the public to trust 
them to protect our Crown land when they have made a mess of 
so many other short-sighted Crown fire sales in the past? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. Selling vacant Crown land is not new 
to the ministry; only the platform we are using this time is 
different. 
 
For decades the ministry has sold vacant Crown land via a 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

tender process, both in the spring and the fall of each and every 
year. We’re now using a new platform, online auction, to sell 
this land. Online farm land auctions are very common, and we 
wanted to keep up with the way that many, many farmers 
purchase land these days. And so that’s what’s changed. We’ve 
just updated the platform. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Support for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s answer to 
everything is to cut it or to sell it. Earlier this year, the Sask 
Party released their rushed health care report. No surprise, it 
calls for even more cuts. 
 
Communities across Saskatchewan are already struggling with 
grossly inadequate health care services. We’ve heard concerns 
about the loss of local voices and what will become of the 
health care facilities that communities have helped build with 
their own money. When the minister announced the Sask 
Party’s plans to cut health regions, he couldn’t even estimate 
possible savings. Scrapping health regions will do nothing to 
undo the damage already caused by the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
To the Premier: how can he justify further damage to cut deeper 
into health care when people are already struggling to get the 
basic care they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that question was odd. It was all over the place. The member 
opposite is talking about cuts to health care. The consolidation 
of health regions from 12 regions into one region is not about 
cuts to front-line health care. It’s about doing management right 
and about governance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently we have 12 CEOs for the 12 health 
regions. We have 62 vice-presidents. The members opposite, 
including that member, for quite some time now have talked 
about being too top heavy in management in health care, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what this is going to address. I would assume 
she’d have been supportive of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a line . . . A three-person panel did an 
outstanding job on the recommendations. That’s what we’re 
endorsing. There’s a quote in there that says something like 
this: currently, there’s 12 health regions that are accountable to 
the minister but not accountable to each other.  
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do with this is ensure that this 
system operates as one. Mr. Speaker, there’ll be efficiencies and 
better line health care for that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Rate of HIV Infections 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that boasts 

about all the money they’ve spent. It was wasted because they 
have failed to get the job done. They’re achieving less and 
failing Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rates of HIV in Saskatchewan are over double 
the national average. This is unacceptable. We have talked 
about this year after year, and things don’t get any better. 
 
The Minister of Finance spent most of yesterday justifying why 
they are cutting from health care, education, and social services. 
But what he fails to understand is by properly investing, we 
could actually save money. They just don’t get it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring that all those who have HIV get the 
medication they need to keep them well will save money and 
will save lives. When will the Sask Party implement 
cost-effective measures like universal access to medication that 
will reduce the rates of HIV? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes the 
high rates of HIV in Saskatchewan extremely seriously. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, last fall I had the opportunity to 
meet with the new member from Saskatoon Meewasin and his 
colleague, Dr. Skinner. We had what I thought was a very 
productive conversation on where the province needs to go 
down the road and that. 
 
As I mentioned in introductions today, we have some incredibly 
bright young students in the gallery today that made 
presentations both to myself, the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health, the Deputy Premier, a number of other colleagues in the 
room. They made a very compelling case, Mr. Speaker, not 
only from a compassionate point of view, which is the most 
important, but also an economic case on possibly providing 
universality for HIV drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we make decisions like that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
heckling over a very serious case. In fact the critic, who 
constantly is upset if anyone heckles, her and her seatmate 
continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to weigh these in terms of productivity 
versus other drugs. Mr. Speaker, I see I’ve ran out of time. I 
hope she does a follow-up question. I’d like to speak further on 
this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — So, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard, HIV rates in 
Saskatchewan are unacceptably high. And I do hope that we’ll 
see universal drug coverage in the upcoming budget. We also 
know that some communities are hit even harder and that 
poverty is at the root of the cause of this epidemic. The Sask 
Party has failed to fulfill the promise to develop a poverty 
reduction strategy, and now they’re threatening to undermine 
one of the key building blocks to our future health. 
 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, last November the Minister of Advanced 
Education travelled north to discuss the NORTEP-NORPAC 
[Northern Professional Access College] program. She ignored 
the advice of indigenous leaders and community members. She 
ignored the protests happening in the North and here at the 
legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late now to make a change. It’s 
not too late to listen. Will this minister reverse the Sask Party’s 
plan to take away northern control from NORTEP-NORPAC 
and continue to provide the five years of funding that was 
promised? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a decision 
on NORTEP that we take very seriously. It’s a decision 
obviously that first and foremost is important for NORTEP 
students. And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, more information 
has been requested as part of due diligence, which I felt was 
important and crucial to review. A decision will be forthcoming 
very soon. 
 
Certainly I appreciate the co-operation of NORTEP council in 
co-hosting and reviewing submissions by other institutions. 
And certainly I appreciate the other institutions, Mr. Speaker, 
and their genuine wish to provide a well-governed, 
collaborative, sustainable, equitable teaching education program 
and related programs in the North. That we provide practical, 
on-the-ground teaching education so that graduates can teach in 
their own communities in the North or in any community, that 
is my goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the minister recently described the 
conversations around cutting funds to NORTEP-NORPAC and 
forcing the council to find a new partner as an edifying 
experience. I wonder what the minister found edifying about 
disregarding First Nations chiefs, community leaders, students, 
and people of the North while they pled to keep control of their 
successful program. 
 
This is a program that they have managed, and managed well, 
Mr. Speaker. NORTEP-NORPAC has been an extremely 
successful program, giving rewarding careers at home in the 
North to hundreds of local teachers and, more importantly, 
giving much-needed positive role models to thousands of youth 
in the North. 
 
Does this minister not understand that community-controlled 
programs like NORTEP and NORPAC are vital to the future of 
the North for education, for jobs, for financial security, for 
healthy families? Mr. Speaker, why would the minister charged 
with advancing higher education decide to take us backwards? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First and 
foremost, the students are of importance here. And I take hope, 

Mr. Speaker, in the fact that since we formed government, 
almost 50 per cent more First Nation and Métis graduates have 
a post-secondary certificate, diploma, or degree. That means a 
great deal, and that we have to build on. 
 
Of course there’s still work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
beginning to see a difference, an inspiring difference across the 
province. First Nations and Métis enrolment in post-secondary 
institutions has increased 34 per cent since ’07, Mr. Speaker; 43 
per cent at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]; 34 per cent 
at the U of R [University of Regina]. And we can all be proud 
of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According 
to rule 47(2)(l), the use of offensive language is not permitted in 
the House. On three separate occasions within question period, I 
heard the Whip shout from his seat, “lies, lies, lies.” I heard the 
House Leader from the opposition use the phrase “half-truths.” 
And I also heard the critic for Finance, in asking our Finance 
minister, use the question, “lies,” in her questions. And I’m 
wondering if they could retract those please, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, as to the other individuals in 
question, I’d invite the Speaker to review the record and to 
consider what is on offer there. But certainly, for my own 
words, Mr. Speaker — and the Government House Leader 
knows this — it’s not just the words being used, it’s the manner 
in which they’re used that is important in terms of the usage. 
And as such, Mr. Speaker, I would put that my words were 
indeed well in order. I’d ask you, Mr. Speaker, to consider these 
matters and report back to the House with a ruling. 
 
The Speaker: — A point of order was raised today. I will have 
to review the record because some of the point of order was 
referring to what was . . . could have been heckled. And we’ll 
see whether it is captured in Hansard, other than the question 
phrased by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, which I will 
have to, once again, check the record to see what verbiage she 
used in that account. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Motion withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
withdrawal. All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

The Speaker: — Carried. Motion’s withdrawn. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand in 
my place today and enter into debate on Bill 40. Now Bill 40, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 on the surface doesn’t 
sound like that big of a deal. It sounds maybe to the casual 
observer even a bit boring. And it was introduced, of course, 
with little fanfare and almost as if the government didn’t want 
us to pay attention to this bill or the public to pay attention to 
this bill. So the Act that is to be amended with this bill is the 
Act respecting the interpretation of enactments and prescribing 
rules governing enactments, 1995, or The Interpretation Act for 
short. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And as I’ve said, to the casual observer that appears a rather 
long and perhaps boring and dry bit of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s not the type of bill that would draw public attention. But 
make no mistake: this is a very important Act, one of the most 
foundational Acts, and any changes to it should be considered 
and scrutinized very carefully. 
 
This Act prescribes how all other Acts — Acts passed in the 
past, current Acts, and future Acts — or regulations, or portions 
of Acts or regulations, are to be interpreted. Simply put, this 
Act impacts all other legislation, all other Acts including The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act, but I’ll get back to 
that. 
 
About halfway through The Interpretation Act, you come to a 
heading, “Forms, Words, Definitions.” And section 26 refers to 
the use of forms and words. Now I did find something here that 
I would suggest that the minister could clean up and modernize, 
the language under section 26(2): “Words in an enactment 
signifying male persons include female persons . . .” So ahead 
of International Women’s Day perhaps that is something that 
could be cleaned up. But of course that’s not what the minister 
chose to focus on here. And I suspect that modernizing 
language isn’t why this bill is before us. No. 
 
There is some other very interesting words in section 26(1) 
regarding forms. And I’ll read it: 
 

When a form is prescribed by or pursuant to an enactment, 
deviations from it that do not affect the substance and are 
not calculated to mislead do not invalidate the form used. 

I’ll repeat that part: “. . . do not affect the substance and are not 
calculated to mislead . . .” Those are very interesting words, Mr. 
Speaker. Interesting because this Act fundamentally affects the 
substance of The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
and it threatens the very spirit of that Act. And make no 
mistake: this Act that we see before us is entirely calculated to 
mislead. 
 
It is intended to draw attention away from what is staring us in 
the face, Mr. Speaker. A very real, calculated, imminent threat 
to our Crown corporations by a desperate third-term 
government that is tired, is out of money due to their own 
mismanagement, and that has had their eyes on privatization of 
our Crowns for a very, very long time indeed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this bill, the English version is only two pages 
long, and one whole page is dedicated to cleaning up language 
about the sovereign, whether the sovereign is a queen or a king. 
 
But the page that I’ll focus on has only two main clauses, and 
I’ll focus on the one that really matters here, Mr. Speaker. That 
is the clause that proposes to simply insert a definition for the 
term “privatize.” And I think while I’m at it here, I’ll read that 
proposed definition. So on the surface, Mr. Speaker, a very 
small bill that only proposes to insert the following: 
 

“‘privatize’ means, with respect to a Crown corporation, 
the transfer to the private sector of all or substantially all of 
the assets of the Crown corporation, the controlling interest 
of the Crown corporation or the operational control of the 
Crown corporation through one or more transactions that 
use one or more of the following methods. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the methods are listed: 
 

(a) a public share offering; 
 
(b) a sale of shares through a negotiated or competitive 
bid; 
 
(c) a sale of the assets and business of the Crown 
corporation as a going concern; 
 
(d) a management or employee buyout of the Crown 
corporation; 
 
(e) a lease or . . . contract; [or] 
 
(f) any other method prescribed in the regulations [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
What we have here is that the premise of this bill is that we 
suddenly need this definition of privatization, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister claims that this is what the World Bank uses. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve found no such definition or no such clear 
definition of the word “privatize” by the World Bank and, more 
importantly, no other jurisdiction in the Commonwealth has a 
definition of “privatize” in their interpretation Act. I’ll repeat 
that. No other jurisdiction in the Commonwealth has a 
definition of “privatize” in their interpretation Act. 
 
Now if the minister were to want to provide any evidence of 
either a World Bank definition or another jurisdiction that saw 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

fit to define “privatize” in their interpretation Act, I’d be happy 
to see it, but from what I understand, neither exists. I did come 
across this: Mary Shirley, former chief of the public sector 
management and private sector development division of the 
World Bank wrote in the Fordham Law Review, “There are as 
many definitions of privatization as there are analysts.” 
 
Now this is coming from the former, someone in a former 
senior position with the World Bank. So she doesn’t have a 
clear definition of privatization. In fact, she suggests that there 
are as many definitions of privatization as there are analysts. 
“For our purposes, privatization [she goes on to say] is [simply] 
the transfer of ownership of assets to the private sector.” So 
that’s her definition of privatization, Mr. Speaker, but this bill 
proposes another definition. 
 
Many definitions are out there. Not one is agreed upon, yet this 
government wants us to believe that they now, at this point in 
time, must move to define the term “privatize.” Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know. But what we do know is that the federal 
government has a definition of what they consider to be a 
Crown corporation for the purposes of tax exemption, and that 
is a corporation that is more than 10 per cent privately owned. 
In other words, if the Sask Party goes ahead with this desperate 
plan to sell off 49 per cent of any one of our Crowns, the people 
of Saskatchewan will be sending a whole pile of money to 
Ottawa. 
 
Now the minister insists that this is just a very innocuous, 
simple little change. In fact he said, “We seek to define a word 
that’s in legislation that the New Democrats, when they 
proposed the legislation on the floor of this House, refused to 
define.” Well the New Democrats perhaps, Mr. Speaker, along 
with every other jurisdiction in the Commonwealth. So he went 
on, “We’re bringing in to the definition of the Act simply the 
World Bank definition, Mr. Speaker, the most authoritative 
definition that we could find with regard to the word.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I noted, I would be happy to see that 
definition in its entirety but I haven’t come across that yet. 
 
The minister did go on. He said: 
 

This change to the legislation is not about privatizing any 
of our Crowns. It’s simply about bringing a definition to it 
. . . Once the definition has been changed, it will allow for 
all sorts of investments — our Auto Fund . . . our Workers’ 
Compensation fund, funds that can’t invest in these Crown 
corporations the way they are. 

 
Mr. Speaker, then unbelievably: 
 

We’ll have Saskatchewan people investing in our Crown 
corporations to give them the equity they need to continue 
to grow and continue to provide the vital services to the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had to read that a few times. Let me see if 
I’ve got this straight. The minister thinks that we need to 
privatize almost half of our Crowns to allow the people of 
Saskatchewan — the people who already own the Crowns — to 
have equity in them, which they already have because they own 
them, so that the Crowns can continue to provide the services 

that the Crowns, that they already provide to the people that 
already own them, the very same people who built the Crowns 
and who have supported them over the decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that simply defies belief. This is not 
simply about defining the word “privatize.” Mr. Speaker, that is 
absurd. But it’s so much more than absurd when you consider 
this: this government knows very well, so very well that the 
people of this province have no appetite for privatization of our 
Crown corporations. There is a reason, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Sask Party campaigns on promises not to privatize. 
 
I’m just going to look up some of the Premier’s words here, and 
I’m quoting from Planet S magazine regarding the Premier’s 
words regarding the privatization of SaskTel: 
 

Based on comments since 2010, Saskatchewan’s premier 
tends to emphasize two things: keeping his party’s 2007 
election campaign promise not to privatize Crowns [which 
I’ll get back to]; and ensuring that the Saskatchewan 
electorate has the final say (via referendum) on privatizing 
SaskTel. 

 
Mr. Speaker, during the election we heard nothing about this 
bill and we certainly heard nothing about privatization. In fact 
we heard promises to the contrary, that this government had no 
intention, no intention at all of privatization. And then just short 
months after the election we see the introduction of Bill 40, Bill 
40, a bill that proposes to fundamentally redefine our Crown 
corporations and leave them in jeopardy of being almost 
half-privatized — up to 49 per cent privatized — without the 
protection of the Crown corporation protection Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The reason that they promise and they campaign on promises 
not to privatize, and it’s the same reason that the Premier 
backed away from the wholesale privatization of SaskTel 
yesterday, and it’s this: the people of Saskatchewan value their 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. There is no appetite, there is 
no appetite for the sale of the Crown corporations. And there 
are a number of reasons for that, which I will get to shortly, Mr. 
Speaker. That is all true, yet at the same time what we also 
know is that the Sask Party government is no fan of public 
ownership. In his comments . . . the Premier’s previous 
comments as well as members of his caucus, are long held and 
frankly easily searchable in Hansard. 
 
Now we all know that the Premier is a student of politics as are 
members of his caucus, and he learned from a former premier 
that he worked under, a premier that had an explicit 
privatization agenda. He learned from him, but he also learned a 
lot from the former leader of the Sask Party. And this was a 
hard lesson, I’m sure. 
 
In 2003 the Sask Party lost an election that they expected to win 
when their leader at the time said that he had no privatization 
plans but would consider offers from the private sector. Mr. 
Speaker, that sounds familiar. But it’s not at all what we heard 
from this government during the election not even a year ago. 
They learned that lesson. You don’t talk about, you don’t 
threaten to privatize Crown corporations during an election. 
And that’s certainly not what we heard from them. 
 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

Yet again here we are with Bill 40 in front of us, a bill that 
provides a threat to our Crown corporations like we haven’t 
seen before, Mr. Speaker, and not that this government hasn’t 
done its own share of stealthy privatization in the province. 
Those that aren’t protected under the Crown corporation 
protection Act explicitly, there are pages and pages, Mr. 
Speaker, of whole and in-part privatization. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read them all. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Oh, you’ve got someone who wants to read them 
all. Okay, we’ve got time. Mr. Speaker, a lot of them under the 
pretense of Sask first, but this is really a new standard for this 
government, Mr. Speaker, this attempt to change the definition 
of privatize so that they pull Crown corporations out of the 
Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to refer to 
that Act right now. 
 
So those corporations that are explicitly named in the Crown 
corporation protection Act are: well the first one, CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]; the second was 
repealed, that was the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority] — and I guess they did campaign on 
privatization of some liquor stores but not on pulling it 
completely out of the protection of the Act, but that’s another 
story, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation; 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance or SGI; SaskPower; 
SaskTel; SaskTel Holding Corporation; STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company]; Saskatchewan Water Corporation; 
SaskEnergy; SGC Holdings; TransGas. 
 
[14:45] 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you sell the liquor store or give it 
away? 
 
Ms. Beck: — Well there’s questions about whether they sold 
them and gave them away. I think that there’s a pretty good 
debate for the fact that they were given away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, those corporations named in this Act are afforded 
certain protections under the Act, Mr. Speaker, and what is in 
jeopardy with passage of this bill would be those protections 
under this Act. And I want to read what some of those 
protections are. This is important, Mr. Speaker: “No Crown 
corporation shall be privatized unless that privatization is 
authorized by an Act enacted after the coming into force of this 
Act,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So before any of these corporations, Crown corporations, 
including SaskTel, SGI, STC, SaskPower, before any of them 
can be privatized the measures outlined in this Act have to be 
undertaken, Mr. Speaker, and there are a number of them and 
I’ll read them out: 
 

Requirements respecting privatization legislation 
 
Every Bill to authorize the privatization of a Crown 
corporation must be referred to a Policy Field Committee 
established by the Legislative Assembly. 

 
And this happens after the bill has been read for the first time 
and printed and distributed to members and before it’s read the 

second time. So that means once this legislation is introduced in 
this Assembly, there would be an opportunity in committee for 
members of the public to scrutinize, to have a look at the bill, 
and to have public debate. What is being proposed here would 
be to pull that right, that very important scrutiny away from our 
Crown corporations as named in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this sounds like something small and innocuous, but it 
fundamentally changes perhaps less so The Interpretation Act. 
It fundamentally changes privatization in all legislation, but 
particularly I think for our purposes here, Mr. Speaker, it 
fundamentally changes The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act and the protection that our Crowns currently 
enjoy under that legislation. 
 
So in additional to the policy field committee, before the bill to 
authorize the privatization of a Crown corporation is 
considered, there has to be an examination of the terms of the 
proposed privatization. So that’s important, Mr. Speaker, to 
outline clearly all of the terms under which privatization would 
be undertaken. That again, if this bill were to pass, that scrutiny 
would not be afforded, that people would not necessarily have a 
chance to have a look at all of those terms. 
 
And this is important, Mr. Speaker. What also has to happen is 
there has to be: 
 

. . . a valuation of the true consideration that the Crown 
will receive when the privatization is completed, including: 

 
all amounts paid, or assets transferred, to the Crown on 
or before the effective date of privatization; and 
 
[also] the present value of all future consideration to the 
Crown calculated as at the closing date for the intended 
privatization. 

 
And also there has to be a written report prepared on matters set 
out in this clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are all very important oversights, and they 
afford some protection to our Crown corporations. But there’s 
one part that I really want to focus on, Mr. Speaker. Now during 
the last session or earlier on in this session, the Premier noted 
that shortly after the election they hadn’t campaigned on the 
privatization of SaskTel, but he was floating some trial balloons 
to see if maybe someone wanted to buy SaskTel. And he fully 
realized that he wouldn’t have the authority to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, so he proposed a referendum.  
 
It sounded like that was a, you know, very, perhaps open or 
transparent thing to do. But the reason that he suggested a 
referendum, Mr. Speaker, is, I would suggest, this clause here: 
“Notwithstanding any other Act or law, every Act authorizing 
the privatization of a Crown corporation must contain a 
provision . . .” So every time the government would want to 
privatize a Crown corporation, the provision “. . . must not 
come into force until a date that is at least 90 days after the date 
fixed for the return to the writ for the next general election . . .” 
So basically, Mr. Speaker, after a general election or in this case 
the Premier was proposing a referendum. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of trial balloons up in the air 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

right now in this province. One of them of course was that 
referendum around SaskTel. I think we all know here how that 
trial balloon was received by the people of Saskatchewan. They 
wanted no part of it. The Premier knows that if they were to 
hold a referendum on the sale of SaskTel, they would lose, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think we saw that message loud and clear 
yesterday. 
 
But I also think we should pay very careful attention to the 
Premier’s words yesterday when talking about SaskTel. He 
promised that there would be no referendum, Mr. Speaker. If 
this bill passes, that would also promise that there would need 
not be any referendum prior to the sale of 49 per cent of 
SaskTel. So I think that’s very important. And nor did he rule 
out the partial sale, the 49 per cent sale of SaskTel or any other 
Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s something 
that we cannot pay enough attention to. 
 
The minister, in second reading of this bill, in his comments 
mused about other entities, private corporations, or perhaps the 
Auto Fund, or pension plans having the, in quotes, opportunity 
to invest in these Crown corporations, corporations that the 
people of Saskatchewan already own, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
that is very significant. 
 
Our Crown corporations have the mandate certainly to provide 
service to the people of Saskatchewan in a way that is very 
different from the mandate of a private corporation or very 
different from the mandate or the fiduciary duty of anyone on 
the board of governors of a pension plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So that is significant. 
 
If we’re anticipating up to 50 per cent or almost 50 per cent sale 
of any of our Crown corporations, it sets up this dynamic where 
we have duelling mandates. We have a mandate, the public 
policy mandate of the Crown corporation — which I’ll get into 
later — that has served us very well in this province, that 
provides dividends and service, some equitable service to 
people across the province, at odds with this other mandate, 
which is to return maximum benefits, maximum financial 
returns to shareholders or to pension plans, Mr. Speaker. And 
that sets up a dynamic that fundamentally changes our Crown 
corporations. And I think that that is something we really, really 
need to pay attention to, Mr. Speaker, because once these 
Crown corporations are privatized, we don’t get them back. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, continue to 
look at my notes a bit here and see how far off track I’ve gotten. 
 
As I was noting previously, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has 
certainly learned from his trial balloon with regard to the 
referendum and the potential sale of SaskTel, but he also 
learned from his political mentors of the past. And as I noted, 
his former leader of the Sask Party found out pretty clearly, way 
back in 2003, what people think about governments that 
threaten to privatize Crown corporations, and I think they 
learned that lesson fairly well. 
 
You see, people in this province are passionate about their 
Crown corporations, and it’s not due to some blind ideological 
attachments as some on that side would suggest. Mr. Speaker, 
people are attached to the Crown corporations in this province 
simply because they work. They have worked for decades, and 

they provide very real benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I’m going to read a little bit from the web page of the CIC 
looking at the history of the Crowns: “In the early 1900s, 
Saskatchewan’s population was small in comparison to many 
other provinces, and widely dispersed geographically.” I think 
we could still say the same today, Mr. Speaker. “Private sector 
companies either did not offer services, offered them only to 
major centres, or charged rural customers significantly higher 
rates than urban customers.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, private companies did not want to come in and 
provide services in an equitable fashion to people across the 
province. Certainly, you know, you hear tales of the importance 
of rural electrification, the excitement when that single 
lightbulb turned on in the farmhouse out at the farm. This was 
important. And not only was it important to the people in the 
cities who did have access to electrification, it was important to 
people out in the country. It was important to their quality of 
life, to their ability to do business, Mr. Speaker. It was 
important to kids in schools and in medical facilities in rural 
areas, Mr. Speaker. And so much . . . I’m struck by this, how 
much of this still holds true today. 
 
Now it may not be that we’re struggling to get electrification to 
all corners of the province, but think of something like Internet 
service, something that has become as fundamental to the 
people of Saskatchewan as power service was back in the mid 
last century. If we want children across this province to have 
access to education that is equitable, that provides them 
opportunities that maybe they won’t have in their small rural 
school, if we want to open up the world to them in a way that 
frankly should be open to them, there is no reason that 
schoolchildren in the Southeast or the Southwest or in the North 
shouldn’t have access to all of those programs, all of those 
ideas, all of that programming that their counterparts in the 
cities have, Mr. Speaker. But without a telecom, a public 
telecom company, that would be in jeopardy. 
 
The access to that technology is subsidized by the Crown 
corporation. Private businesses are not going to have the 
business case to run lines and fibre optic into the North or into 
rural and remote areas, Mr. Speaker. People in the cities will be 
served probably just fine, but not in rural areas if we were to 
lose something like SaskTel or if the mandate were to be so 
diluted that there was this tension between profits and the 
public policy mandate of that Crown corporation or any of the 
other Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, people in this province value Crown corporations, 
not because of ideology — I would suggest there’s some 
ideology at work here on the other side with regard to getting 
rid of our Crown corporations — but people are attached to our 
Crown corporations because they work. Saskatchewan’s first 
commercial Crown corporations were established because 
essential services such as telephone, power, and hail insurance 
for crops were not available for private companies or were not 
available to all residents on a fair and equitable basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the underpinnings of our Crown 
corporations is this sense of equity, this sense that all people 
who live in this province deserve and should have access to all 
of these important, important services. And that is something 
that has been very well served by Crown corporations. And as I 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

noted, these reasons still hold today. 
 
People value our Crowns because of what they have done and 
continue to do for our province. And I’m just going to take a 
minute to look at my notes here, Mr. Speaker, but off the top of 
my head, I can recall that over the last five years alone, 
SaskPower has returned almost half a billion dollars to the 
general revenue fund in this province, Mr. Speaker. By contrast, 
MTS [Manitoba Telephone System] in Manitoba over the last 
10 years has paid income tax once, and that was for the amount 
of $1.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a lot of money in difference there that we 
are talking about, and something that we potentially stand to 
lose should this amendment Act be passed, but also then the 
domino effect of loosening protection for the Crown 
corporation protection Act, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying to go from 
my memory. If it serves correctly, about three . . . Is it $3 
million per year? Millions of dollars per year, Mr. Speaker, 
returned to the people of Saskatchewan every year by the way 
of dividends. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But that’s only part of the story, Mr. Speaker. We also have a 
rich tradition with our Crowns of investment in community 
events. You see SaskTel out at parades. Our Crown 
corporations sponsor community initiatives, and that work is 
really important. I think of the work of the SaskTel Pioneers. 
Although not directly, certainly people who are committed to 
that sense of giving back to people in our province. And we 
hear today that they are concerned about the viability of their 
pension plan should any of these schemes . . . should this 
legislation pass or there be any privatization of SaskTel, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s a legitimate concern, and it is something 
that would . . . If the government were to propose privatization 
as it currently stands, that they would have the opportunity in 
committee and through that oversight to ask those questions and 
get some answers before the bill was actually passed. 
 
Without that protection, that’s gone. And I think, regardless of 
your views in this province, I think we should hold very tight 
and firm to that notion of oversight, that notion of when 
legislation is passed that it should pass, plainly put, Mr. 
Speaker, the smell test. Or people should be able to ask 
questions and look at the numbers and be able to evaluate, hold 
their elected officials to account, let their concerns or their 
wishes be known. And that’s something, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
concerned about should this legislation be passed. 
 
As I’ve said, our Crowns provide the services that we need in 
this province, and that has been something that’s evolved over 
time. Of course at one time that was rural electrification. Now 
we see fibre optic capabilities, cellular coverage. Cellular 
coverage is very important in the province and that’s something 
that SaskTel will put their map of coverage up against anyone 
else’s, Mr. Speaker. But also having that extra carrier in the 
province has, in article after article, been shown to keep the 
rates, the cellular rates, low. I know with the recent sale in 
Manitoba, there was some concerns by the CRTC [Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission] about 
the lack of competition, and I think we would see certainly 
similar concerns here if we were to see the reduction in the 

mandate of SaskTel here. 
 
So you know, Crown corporation after Crown corporation, if 
you stack them up with similar bundles around the country, they 
provide good value. They provide good rates for people, good 
coverage. And that is all something that we shouldn’t take for 
granted, and we shouldn’t be so quick to pull out of the 
protection and the oversight of the Crown corporation 
protection Act, Mr. Speaker. They keep rates low. They provide 
good, mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, at a time when we’ve 
seen so much job loss in the province. 
 
These are jobs that are, you know, not exorbitantly paid, but 
pay enough to pay a mortgage and keep people in our 
communities. If we saw the sale in whole or part of SaskTel, 
who knows how many of those jobs would be lost? And I think 
that’s something that we have to take into consideration. 
They’re rooted in our communities. There’s very much a sense 
of community, of giving back to the community that is formally 
part of the mandate of Crown corporations but also informally, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that that’s important. 
 
And then there’s this: every man, woman, and child in this 
province is a shareholder in these Crown corporations and, for 
some of us, going back generations. We’ve all had a part in 
building, in shaping, in supporting these Crown corporations, 
and it’s something that we’ve all benefited from in this 
province. 
 
Millions and millions and millions of dollars returned to the 
GRF [General Revenue Fund] by our Crown corporations. 
Millions left in our pockets because we’re paying good, 
reasonable rates with good value for the service. And I mean, 
beyond perhaps ideological blocks, I don’t understand frankly 
why we’re in such a hurry to get rid of these Crown 
corporations that are doing such a good job. 
 
And not only that. These corporations that we know the people 
of this province value, they don’t want to see sold off. We know 
this because this government refuses in the light of day to 
campaign on the privatization of these Crown corporations but 
passes, or tries to pass, sneaky legislation such as this in order 
to meet those same ends, Mr. Speaker. And I find that, frankly, 
disingenuous and wrong. 
 
But we know the Premier has learned the lesson well, that the 
people of Saskatchewan simply don’t want our Crowns sold off, 
and the Sask Party knows it. And that’s why they didn’t make 
any mention of this Act during the election, but again that 
doesn’t mean that this government doesn’t want to or doesn’t 
have plans on privatization. 
 
Now we know that there are rules in place, as I’ve noted, that 
would afford protection to the Crowns under the Crown 
corporation protection Act but if it’s not defined . . . As we’ve 
gone through already, this bill proposes to change the definition 
of privatization so that those protections for . . . I’m getting 
heckled but I think that it fundamentally does change. It 
changes the privatization in the Crown protection Act, which 
proposes one thing, but this would suggest that anything up to 
that 49 per cent would not enjoy those protections under the 
Act. 
 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

And I think it’s really important here to read something that I 
think is important. That’s the preamble to The Crown 
Corporations Act, and this was something that was passed in 
this legislature in 2004: 

 
WHEREAS Saskatchewan Crown corporations are an 
investment in the future of Saskatchewan to provide 
necessary public services, to . . . [ensure] the quality of life 
of residents and to promote economic development. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think they’ve fulfilled that mandate quite well. 
 

AND WHEREAS the public investment in Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations reflects an historic decision to 
maintain control of necessary public services within 
Saskatchewan to assure that those services are operated in 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that means all people of Saskatchewan, not just a 
select few shareholders, and not in a way that puts another 
entity at odds with the mandate of our Crown corporations. And 
I’ll read one more clause: 
 

AND WHEREAS in order to respect the reasons for 
establishing and maintaining Crown corporations and the 
public interests and rights over their disposition, an Act of 
the Legislature is required to assure that a decision to 
privatize a Crown corporation . . . 

 
I’m going to repeat that: 
 

. . . to assure that a decision to privatize a Crown 
corporation reflects the will and the rights of the people of 
Saskatchewan; 
 
AND WHEREAS the public ought to be fully informed as 
to the terms, costs and benefits of any privatization of a 
Crown corporation; 
 
AND WHEREAS the legislative process is best served by 
a public debate before a decision to privatize a Crown 
corporation is carried out. 

 
And it prescribes those measures to be enacted. As I read out 
before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that oversight within committee, 
that full costing, a total cost-benefit analysis, and the 
opportunity for people of the province of Saskatchewan first of 
all to understand before an election or referendum what exactly 
is being proposed, and then to have their say about it, is in 
jeopardy here. And I think that we cannot pay more attention to 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to go through and look at some of the 
benefits that we have from these Crown corporations and what 
potentially is in jeopardy with the potential sale of any of these 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to flip through 
. . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, as I flip through my notes here. 
 
Again just to recap some of my previous comments. On the 
surface this appears to be a very small change to a rather dry 
Act. I think that we know that this Act, though appearing rather 
dry and with a very long name, actually is one of the more 
important pieces of legislation that we have: that it defines the 

terms for all other legislation; and that this insertion of the word 
“privatize” into that Act is something unusual and that is not 
done in other areas; that there is no one defined definition or 
one definition for privatization as I would suggest the minister 
would have us believe; but that this is the thin edge for 
removing the protection of our Crown corporations from the 
Crown corporation protection Act. 
 
So I think that it is something that we should pay a lot of 
attention to, Mr. Speaker. I know that there are a lot of people 
in this province who are very concerned about this legislation. 
We’ve heard from a lot of them. I suspect that we will hear 
from a lot of them tomorrow on the steps of the legislature. But 
beyond that as well, I think people are beginning to understand 
that the fight against Bill 40 is a very important fight. It’s one 
that we have to undertake now. 
 
And certainly members on this side are committed to doing 
everything that we can and working with our community 
partners to ensure first of all that people understand what is 
before us right now with this legislation, what the potential 
implications are, what the risks are, and to get involved and to 
contact their MLAs, certainly to talk to their neighbours. I mean 
regardless of political affiliation in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, people do value their Crown corporations for the 
reasons that I outlined previously. 
 
And there is a reason why this government continuously 
campaigns as if there is no threat to our Crowns, and then once 
they get into power, continue with their stealthy plans and 
actions to privatize. But we haven’t seen I don’t think, Mr. 
Speaker, a threat like this quite since 2003 perhaps. And I guess 
there is a bit of a financial crisis in this province. I would 
suggest that, you know, oil prices are part of it, but there is a lot 
of blame to be laid at the feet of mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste of this government, and that’s provided the opportunity, a 
crisis. And lo and behold, guess what? We’ve got to come up 
with some money quick. And there we have those Crowns that 
we’ve been eyeing for more than a decade or probably longer 
just sitting there just making money and providing service to 
the people of Saskatchewan and returning money to the GRF, 
just sitting there ripe for the picking, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
very concerning. And I know I’ve gone on a bit about this but I 
don’t think we can overstate the risk to our Crown corporations 
should Bill 40 pass. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And again I know that my colleagues will have a lot to say 
about this. We have a lot of questions, a lot of concerns. We 
will continue to watch the ever-changing spin that this 
government puts on this and then try to see the clear blue sky 
through all of the trial balloons that are floating around up 
there, Mr. Speaker. But make no mistake. This Bill 40 does 
pose a severe and imminent threat to our Crown corporations, 
and we will continue to push back and educate and to work with 
all those folks out there who are opposed to seeing this bill 
passed and the definition of “privatization” fundamentally 
changed, and in turn putting our Crown corporations at risk. So 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Good to join debate, take my place, and say my piece on Bill 
No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. I just want to 
emphasize that for members opposite. It’s pipelines. That’s 
what was said and, you know, hope that doesn’t cause any 
further ricocheting through the points of order or what might 
come, Mr. Speaker. But certainly pipelines amendment Act, 
2016, it’s a very important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would submit now more than ever. 
 
This particular piece of legislation comes four years after 
particularly “. . . damning auditor’s report . . .” and that’s a 
quote from the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. And I guess there’s 
nothing quite like the Sask Party, you know, hurdling into 
action, getting a 2012 auditor’s report that rings the alarm that 
says the regulatory regime, the oversight regime in terms of this 
vital aspect of our economy is not up to scratch. Of course the 
auditor rings the alarm and then four years later, Mr. Speaker, 
the Sask Party of course hurdles into action. 
 
So it’s sort of symbolic in a number of ways, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the laissez-faire attitude of this government when it 
comes to regulations that are not just there, you know, for the 
sake of regulations, Mr. Speaker, but this is how we safeguard 
mother nature in terms of this important economic activity. 
 
And this is important economic activity, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would point out that the Saskatchewan NDP has supported, 
does support, and will support into the future, Mr. Speaker. But 
we’ve always supported that balance that’s got to be there in 
terms of proper regulation, proper oversight, in terms of making 
certain that the risk is mitigated as best can be. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we had an object lesson this past 
summer in what happens when you get it wrong, what happens 
when there are spills which, you know, are too often part of the 
reality of pipeline activity in this province, and again was 
related to the 2012 auditor’s report, you know, sounding the 
alarm on the inadequacy of the government’s steps that had 
been taken, and again the fact that, you know, it wasn’t enough 
that she rang the alarm once in 2012. She rang it again in 2014, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of trying to wake this government up to 
get some action. 
 
And you know, fast forward from 2012, 2014 to this past 
summer and to even, you know, as late as a month ago, Mr. 

Speaker, in the past month and the kind of spills that have taken 
place on this government’s watch, it begs the question in terms 
of, do we have the proper oversight regime in terms of both the 
mainline of the structure but also within the flow lines? Do we 
have the proper . . . You know, there’s a great old line from the 
band D.O.A., Mr. Speaker, that says, like, “talk minus action 
equals zero.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when this government has come forward . . . 
And you know, in the case of this proposed legislation, it looks 
like there are some positive steps to be noted in this piece of 
legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, if you haven’t got the action 
backing up the good legislation, if you haven’t got the 
regulatory muscle to put to the wheel, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
going to amount to much more than the paper that this 
legislation is written on. 
 
And in terms of where we’re at, you know, you don’t need to 
look any further than what happened this summer, Mr. Speaker, 
where, you know . . . And I guess this is where we’ll move from 
D.O.A. to MIA [missing in action] in terms of where this 
government was around, you know, 225 000 litres of oil spilled 
into the North Saskatchewan River, Mr. Speaker, causing 
untold hardship for communities up and down that watershed, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of cities, First Nations, people that rely 
on that watershed, Mr. Speaker, people that rely on this 
government to get the job done, people that rely on this 
government to make sure that, again, the regulatory regime is 
worth the paper it’s written on, that they’ve got the people in 
the field doing the work in terms of inspections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again it’s . . . There’s some positive steps in this legislation. 
But the proof, as ever with this government, will be in what 
happens around actual enforcement, what happens in terms of 
the talk. Will there be action or will it, you know, equal zero? 
 
So in terms of the regulatory oversight and the work of 
inspectors again, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s an interesting 
fact. And my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, 
did a good job of illustrating again the hard-working inspectors 
in Saskatchewan conducting 78 inspections of pipelines while 
in Alberta, 2,000 were concluded in the same period, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know, I’m not a mathematician certainly, but 
2,000 to 78, Mr. Speaker, it’s glaring in terms of the way that 
that jurisdiction has been able to grasp the nettle, to get the job 
done, to put the shoulder to the wheel versus what we see in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And again these are people in the field that are, you know, 
dedicated public servants. They work very hard, not just for the 
paycheque, Mr. Speaker, but certainly because of that sense of a 
calling and in terms of that protective work that is there to be 
done. And, Mr. Speaker, this government, again when the alarm 
bells go off . . . And again we’d seen that in 2012 with the 
Provincial Auditor, again in 2014. You know this government 
doesn’t get the message. They hit the snooze bar instead. It’s 
like, you know, back to bed, Mr. Speaker. We’ll see if, you 
know, see what tomorrow brings. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that approach to the sector doesn’t cut it. It 
doesn’t cut it in terms of the good name of Saskatchewan. It 
doesn’t cut it in terms of the stewardship role that this 
government has been entrusted with by the people and 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

communities and by our environment, Mr. Speaker, and by the 
energy sector itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I think the Premier was out there waving the 
pompoms and boosting the cause of pipelines while this was all 
going on in our backyard, Mr. Speaker. And if you want to get 
out there and make the case for pipelines, you’ve got to be able 
to have a track record that’s more than some kind of bad joke, 
some kind of, you know, ongoing tragedy for tens of thousands 
of people along the North Saskatchewan River. 
 
And then in terms of what happened with the response from the 
government, Mr. Speaker, we were at SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] not too long ago, and 
certainly the communities were acknowledged — and quite 
rightly — for the work they’d done in response to that 
emergency. But, Mr. Speaker, they needed a better partner in 
that work from the provincial government. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
was the provincial government to the fore in that circumstance? 
No, it was more a question of being missing in action and 
showing up too late. 
 
So on a couple of different fronts, Mr. Speaker, we see the track 
record of this government being one of hitting the snooze bar 
when the alarm bells are ringing. And we see them missing in 
action when an emergency, when an ongoing tragedy is 
unfolding, in this case in the summer on the North 
Saskatchewan River, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again we’re interested in this legislation. We think there are 
some positive measures in here around increased penalties for 
polluters, Mr. Speaker, around, you know, the steps that need to 
be taken. 
 
And certainly the member bringing it forward, you know, a 
highly intelligent individual, knows the sector, knows the 
difference between hitting the snooze bar and, you know, 
actually taking an interest, taking an active role in making sure 
that that regulatory responsibility of government is being 
upheld. And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly hope that that, you 
know, the way that they hit the snooze bar in 2012 and again in 
2014 and the way they were missing in action this summer, Mr. 
Speaker, we hope that that has come to an end. 
 
We also hope, Mr. Speaker, that more information is brought to 
the fore in terms of the actual records around whether or not the 
proper inspections are being conducted. And we’ve seen this 
government play, you know . . . And again I’m dating myself, 
Mr. Speaker, but back in the 2007 election, I can remember 
when this government was pledging to be the most open and 
transparent government in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — And if that’s to be the case, Mr. Speaker, and 
not just some kind of ongoing, decade-long bad joke, Mr. 
Speaker, then perhaps the members that are “hear, hearing” the 
proposition over there, maybe they could actually live up to that 
claim. Maybe they could get the records out into the public 
domain that attach to these different incidences, that attach 
certainly to what happened on the North Saskatchewan River 
this summer. 
 

And in terms of action, that record to date, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not one covered in glory. And you know, they have a chance to 
prove me wrong. I’m always . . . I guess the thing about this, 
Mr. Speaker, is I’m always welcoming an opportunity to be 
proven wrong, you know. I’m that kind of hopeful, wide-eyed 
optimist, Mr. Speaker. I’m always open to the Sask Party not 
living down to my expectations. I’m always hoping that they’ll 
somehow, you know, surprise me. 
 
And I guess that’s my hope for the current member that’s 
brought this legislation forward, Mr. Speaker, to get the 
information out there into the public domain, to get the 
regulatory oversight there where it needs to be, to make sure 
that the resources are brought to bear so that those 
hard-working men and women in the energy and mining 
branch, Mr. Speaker, can do the job, that they can figure out a 
better approach in concert with the Ministry of the 
Environment. Again something that that minister should be well 
equipped to perform, Mr. Speaker, in terms of making sure that 
the regulatory regime is effective and efficient, Mr. Speaker. 
And I guess the thing is, that’s not been the record so far, Mr. 
Speaker. And what they should realize is that the stakes are not 
just about talking points in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. This is 
about the livelihoods of men and women in the energy sector. 
This is about the air we breathe, the water we drink, the land 
that we live on here, Mr. Speaker, and how that affects all of us 
and also the wildlife habitat, and again something that the 
member who has brought this legislation forward should be 
very well aware of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, I’m a wide-eyed optimist, Mr. Speaker. I live and 
hope that this government will exceed my expectations, won’t 
live down to my expectations of the way that they’ve hit the 
snooze bar in 2012, again in 2014, and were missing in action 
for, you know, critical parts of what happened this summer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I guess this is the great thing about every waking day, Mr. 
Speaker: you have a chance to be your own best you. And I’d 
urge that government to, you know, get with the program. Make 
some action happen. You know, give us a record that we can 
hold our heads high about, and make sure that it’s not impacting 
our economy, our environment, and the livelihoods of our 
communities, Mr. Speaker, because right now what they’re 
doing is not serving any of those objectives particularly well. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly more of my colleagues 
that want to participate in this debate. This one of course, you 
know, hit the floor of the Assembly back on November 29th, 
the second-last day of the fall sitting. Again, you know, nothing 
like that Sask Party government hurtling into action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we’ll await to see the debate that continues to unfold on 
this. We’ll be interested to see how the . . . Oh well, and I hear 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy hollering from his 
chair. You know it’s interesting that, you know, this is the 
member . . . And I’ve got a lot of hope for him, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve got a lot of hope. You know, I might be sort of wasting my 
optimism but I’ve got hope for him, Mr. Speaker. The guy’s got 
some skills. And it’s not just when it comes to the, you know, 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

the funny imitations. This is a former minister of the 
Environment. This is a Minister of Energy and Resources. He 
should know the sector and he should know the balance that 
needs to be struck when it comes to serving economy and 
environment and making these things happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So of course, you know, he’ll holler from his chair after his 
government took its sweet time answering to the call of the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. Again, not once, not just once 
in 2012, but they called back in 2014 and said, you know, how 
about you get with it, you know. But on they went and we had 
to have what took place this summer take place. 
 
And again too many questions that are still there that have gone 
unanswered, too much information that’s not squarely in the 
public domain where it not only should be, but where this 
government promised it would be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter the debate on Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act. As the minister pointed out in his second 
reading speech, water is essential for the future of our province 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We think about water and we think about the role that it plays in 
our lives, the many different places good quality water is 
important. We think about in our home, the water we use for 
cooking, for drinking, for bathing. We think about farmers, 
ranchers, and some industry who need water to be able to make 
their endeavour work. We think about recreation. We think 
about the opportunity to canoe down a river or water ski or any 
of those things, swimming in our lakes and rivers, Mr. Speaker. 
I think about my own experience, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
opportunity several years ago to canoe the William River into 
Lake Athabasca and it was one of the best experiences of my 
life actually, Mr. Speaker. So recreation is definitely something 
that’s important to the people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We think about all the ways in which good quality water is 
really important. I think it’s important to just mention that many 
of us take for granted the fact that we can turn on our tap and 
clean water flows out. There are many people here in 

Saskatchewan for whom that is not a reality. 
 
We look to reserves, First Nations reserves here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And just referencing a CBC story 
in October of 2015, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A CBC analysis has revealed [that] 65 of the province’s 70 
First Nations have had at least one drinking water advisory 
since 2004. At almost 93 per cent, the number is well 
above the Canadian average of 65 per cent . . . Many First 
Nations have faced multiple advisories, while some, 
including an area on Cumberland House First Nation have 
been under a drinking water advisory or order for more 
than a decade [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So clearly, as the minister said, water is essential for the future 
of our province and there are many, many roles that water plays 
in our life. 
 
So this bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 44, The Water Security 
Agency Amendment Act, does several things, Mr. Speaker. It 
streamlines the process for resolving drainage disputes between 
landowners. I know this is not my area of expertise, Mr. 
Speaker, but in conversations with the member from Athabasca 
and as well as our Agriculture and Environment critic, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, they’ve shared many stories 
about the conflict between landowners and the difficulty 
working out some of the resolutions where there is illegal 
drainage going on, or drainage from one property to the next 
impacting those downstream, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill also gives the Water Security Agency the authority to 
order the closure or alteration of any drainage works 
constructed before 1991. It replaces the old two-step process for 
complaints of illegal drainage by a neighbour with a one-step 
process that the government says will be resolved in 90 days or 
less. 
 
It allows appeals of decisions by the Water Security Agency to 
be heard by the Court of Queen’s Bench rather than the Water 
Appeal Board. It expands the water security authority’s ability 
to enter lands with machinery and carry out work required to 
enforce an order by the Water Security Agency. When a 
landowner fails to comply, it expands the Water Security 
Agency’s ability to recover costs for work carried out to enforce 
an order by the Water Security Agency when the landowner 
fails to comply. It removes mediation of disputes between 
landowners from the mandate of the Water Security Agency. 
 
And I think an important piece here, Mr. Speaker, is that it 
increases the maximum fine under the Act. It increases the 
maximum fine on summary conviction for offences under any 
part of The Water Security Agency Act from not more than 
10,000 and not more than 1,000 for each day or part of a day to 
not exceeding 1 million for each day or part of a day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know from looking back, I think the one thing that stands out 
for me, Mr. Speaker, about this bill, if you look back at some of 
the history around this issue, I mentioned my colleagues from 
Athabasca and Nutana recounting many stories over the years 
that I’ve been an MLA here, Mr. Speaker. Over the last several 
years they’ve told those landowner stories and some of the 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2017 

struggles. 
 
I want to draw your attention to 2012 and when the former 
Environment minister said that, “Saskatchewan plans to crack 
down on illegal drainage activities, says the minister 
responsible for the new Water Security Agency.” And so this 
was back in 2012, Mr. Speaker. He points out that, “Illegal 
drainage of farmland has always been a concern but has become 
a huge problem during the last few years of flooding, 
particularly on the east side of the province.” So this was back 
in 2012, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So looking at the minister’s second reading comments, he talks 
about how there were three solid years of consultation. I’m the 
first person, Mr. Speaker, who believes in fulsome and 
meaningful consultation, real and meaningful consultation so 
you connect with stakeholders, people who are impacted by 
legislation. You listen to them. You take into consideration 
what they’re telling you about issues, and you develop policy 
that reflects those concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So where this is back in 2012, it’s 2017 now, Mr. Speaker. So it 
took the government three years of consultation. Many people 
have said to my colleagues that they were concerned about the 
government dragging their feet. So that was in 2015, the 
government came up with some regulations. 
 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, I want to just take you to the relatively 
new member from Wood River, when he was the president of 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 
said that: 
 

SARM supports organized drainage programs as long as 
everyone is at the table. The issue has to be tackled soon 
. . . [he said.] 
 
He also said stronger penalties work only if there are 
enough people to enforce them. The cost of adding staff to 
check on drainage could outweigh the penalties. 

 
So this is back in 2012, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll talk about 
penalties and enforcement in a moment. But it took them three 
years to move a little bit. So three years of solid consultation 
and then they did the first step in making changes, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s taken them two more. So five years, Mr. Speaker, to get to 
where we are to solve a very complex, admittedly a very 
complex problem, Mr. Speaker. But I know that it’s a very long 
time and people have expressed their concerns. People in the 
agriculture community have expressed their concerns about the 
length of time. 
 
But I just want to draw some comparisons here. As I said, water 
is essential for our province of Saskatchewan. But looking at 
things and looking at consultation process on equal footing 
here, Mr. Speaker, we can look at health care, Mr. Speaker, that 
takes up about half the spending of our budget. 
 
This government, under the guise of transformational change 
. . . and I would argue that transformational change is not 
administrative change, or administrative change does not equate 
to transformational change, Mr. Speaker. So this government, 
back in the fall of last year, the end of summer actually, the end 
of August, announced a consultation process to look at some 

issues around health care, including amalgamation. The 
minister directed a three-member panel to shrink the size of 
health regions. He didn’t leave it open. He didn’t direct the 
panel to do what they needed to do. He said he wanted fewer 
health regions and he gave them about a month, Mr. Speaker, to 
undertake this health care consultation. So one month for a 
budget item that is half of the provincial budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can point to education as well, that basically there’s been 
less than two months of consultation. Mr. Dan Perrins had 
about a month to do his work and then a committee was tasked 
to looking at some of those things, and it was about a 
three-week process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would argue that fulsome consultation is really important, 
and I would have liked to have seen that around education and 
health care. But five years, Mr. Speaker, I think would equate to 
foot-dragging, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to have this bill before 
us and there’ll be lots of debate and discussion about that. But 
again, I would argue that five years is beyond fulsome 
consultation and would result . . . One could say that it was all 
about foot-dragging, Mr. Speaker, on a very important issue 
that’s critical to people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The one piece around fines . . . When the minister made 
reference in his second reading comments, he talked about all of 
the agricultural pieces. But near the end of his second reading 
speech, he highlighted the increase in fine. And as I had 
referenced the member from Wood River’s comments back in 
2012 about . . . I just want to read that into the record again that, 
“He also said stronger penalties work only if there are enough 
people to enforce them. The cost of adding staff to check on 
drainage could outweigh the penalties.” 
 
So my concern here, Mr. Speaker, is that the resources will not 
be there for enforcement. I know thinking . . . I can see around 
my own critic portfolio in health care, Mr. Speaker, we can look 
to public health inspectors and the work that they do, and it’s 
been expressed to me over and over again that there are not 
enough health inspectors. With their growing portfolio, the 
growing work that they’ve had to add to their portfolios, Mr. 
Speaker, they do not have the capacity to do their work in a 
meaningful way. 
 
So I would say that that’s a big flag for us, those fines. It sounds 
like the government has listened to stakeholders and has 
increased those fines to a reasonable level. But I am expressing 
some concern around the government’s ability to provide the 
right resources to ensure that that enforcement is in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So on the whole, I think the opposition is pleased to see this bill 
come forward. There’s lots of questions, and over debate here 
the next little while, we’ll continue to reach out to stakeholders 
and see how they feel, Mr. Speaker. It’s one thing for the 
minister to say that he’s spoken to people but, in the past, we’ve 
had conversations with stakeholders who’ve been referenced by 
ministers who have not been a fulsome part of that debate. 
 
So we’ll reach out in the next little while, Mr. Speaker, to see 
what and how everybody is feeling about this bill and have 
further questions. And I know when this bill eventually gets to 
committee that our Environment critic will have many 



March 7, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

questions for that minister. But with that, for now, I would like 
to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, the water security 
amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:44.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1563 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1564 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Memorial for Glen Day 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1564 
 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Challenge 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1564 
 Melfort Citizen Named Volunteer Champion 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1564 
 Labour Leader Honoured 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 
 Heroes Participate in All Seniors Games 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 
 Professional Association Encourages Recruitment and Retention of Women 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 
 Preschool and Parent Education Program in Esterhazy 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Drinking and Driving Legislation and Members’ Code of Conduct 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
 Public Accounts Committee Meeting and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 
 Intent of Bill No. 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
 Release of Third Quarter Update 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
 Sale of Crown Land 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1568 
 Support for Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 
 Rate of HIV Infections 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 
 Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1570 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1570 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
  Merriman (motion withdrawn) ............................................................................................................................................. 1570 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1571 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1577 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1579 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


