






















































Hansard: March 23, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 63A  THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1849 
 March 23, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
House for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
colleagues in the House for the opportunity to make a very 
special introduction. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to be able to introduce to you and through you someone 
who’s no stranger to members of this Assembly. He is the 
province of Saskatchewan’s chief of protocol, Jason Quilliam, 
and he’s accompanied today by his wife, Candyce, and his son 
Cade. Mr. Speaker, we recognize Jason today as he prepares to 
take an eight-month leave of absence from his government 
duties to serve with the United Nations peacekeeping mission in 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jason has been a member of the Canadian Armed 
Forces and the Canadian Army reserve for nearly 20 years. His 
service includes two tours of duty in Afghanistan, where he was 
a military police officer. Since 2011 Jason has been a member 
of the army reserves in Saskatchewan. He’s presently the officer 
commanding 16 Service Company, a subunit of 38 Service 
Battalion. In that role, he’s responsible for training soldiers for 
combat support operations. And, Mr. Speaker, Jason attends to 
his duties in the reserves one night every week and one 
weekend every month, even as he is serving in an exemplary 
way as the chief of protocol for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Jason’s first peacekeeping mission. He’ll be 
among nine Canadians on the mission serving at forward 
headquarters in the city of Goma as deputy chief of staff for the 
operations coordinator. The mission involves 16,000 troops 
from 50 countries, and it is vitally important. The Democratic 
Republic of the Congo has long been afflicted by conflict and 
by violence, and just a couple of days ago, the United Nations 
warned that the security situation is deteriorating. The 
war-weary part of our world where Jason has volunteered to go 
in an effort to provide . . . to bring peace to that country and to 
those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that Canadians deeply and 
greatly appreciate the service of those best among us who are 
prepared to serve in this way. And it is a matter of great pride 
for every member in this Assembly and for all of Jason’s 
colleagues across the public service and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, that he has made this decision, that he is 
volunteering for this eight-month leave to go to Congo. 

Mr. Speaker, a Greek historian once said the secret of happiness 
is freedom and the secret of freedom is courage. We are grateful 
for Jason’s courage today, and our thoughts are with him and 
Candyce and with Cade. I’d ask all members to welcome this 
family to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier here today 
and to welcome our chief of protocol, Jason Quilliam, to his 
Assembly, along with his family Candyce and Cade, I believe, 
here today. 
 
And on behalf of a grateful opposition, on behalf of a grateful 
province, I join the words of the Premier to thank you for your 
service and sacrifice. This is an extraordinary commitment that 
you are taking on, the leave that you’re embarking on. And the 
mission you’re embarking on is an incredibly important one. 
You’re a proud member for many, many years of the Canadian 
Forces, and the service and sacrifice that you demonstrate is 
something that we’re all thankful for. 
 
It’s also worthy to note that, as you depart and as you take this 
voluntary leave and as you place yourself at risk for the benefit 
of others, there’s an enormous service and sacrifice and an 
enormous weight that is on the shoulders of your family. And 
we thank Candyce and we thank Cade for sharing you with this 
mission. And we wish you health. We wish you security. We 
offer our sincerest thanks for your courage and for your 
commitment, and we recognize the commitment of your entire 
family. 
 
So on behalf of a grateful opposition, a grateful province, we 
wish you safety and best wishes and thanks on this journey. A 
safe return and looking forward to your return again and your 
leadership as chief of protocol. Thank you, Jason. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. This week Saskatchewan and specifically Regina has 
welcomed some of the biggest names in the Canadian Football 
League for CFL Week. Seated in the gallery we have a number 
of accomplished athletes and representatives of the Canadian 
Football League Players Association, the CFLPA. By 
accomplished, I mean every one of these current and former 
athletes seated in the gallery today are Grey Cup champions. 
These gentlemen are here in Regina participating in a number of 
public events with fans and taking part in some important 
meetings and discussions, one of which the government will be 
honoured to host today. 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce some 
of the CFL’s very best, and the president, the vice-president, 
and executive director of the CFLPA. Seated in the gallery is 
Chris Getzlaf. Chris’s is a familiar name to all of us. He is a 
former Saskatchewan Roughrider who is currently playing 
slotback for the Edmonton Eskimos. Chris played a major role 
in the Riders’ Grey Cup championship in 2013, and he was 
named the Grey Cup’s Most Outstanding Canadian that year. 
Born and raised right here in Regina, along with his NHL 
[National Hockey League] hockey-playing brother, Ryan, 
Chris, we’re glad to have you home, and we welcome you here 
today. 
 
Next I’d like to introduce Mike Reilly. Mike is the quarterback 
for the Edmonton Eskimos. In 2015 the Eskimos were the Grey 
Cup champions and Mike was named Grey Cup’s most valuable 
player that year. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce to you, 
seated in the gallery, Mr. Nik Lewis. Nik is a slotback with the 
Montreal Alouettes. He was a two-time Grey Cup champion 
with the Stampeders, winning the cup in 2008 and 2014. 
 
The Premier said to me that it might be a career-limiting move 
to introduce Nik here. He said rather we should maybe have 
him forcibly removed from the Chamber for what he’s done to 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders, but it would take two very big 
security guards or a couple of members to help along to do that, 
so maybe we won’t. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, we have President Jeff Keeping, Vice 
President Keon Raymond, and Executive Director Brian 
Ramsay of the Canadian Football League Players Association. 
On the field, Jeff was an offensive lineman with the Winnipeg 
Blue Bombers, and a Grey Cup champion with the 2012 
Toronto Argonauts. Keon is a former Calgary Stampeder, and 
in fact he and Nik were both Grey Cup champions with the 
Stampeders in 2008 and 2014. And Brian is a former Edmonton 
Eskimo and 2015 Grey Cup champion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Gardiner Park, our own 
Grey Cup champion, and I will be meeting with the players and 
Jeff and Keon and Brian to discuss a player-centred approach to 
education and awareness of concussions in contact sports. Take 
Me Out, Coach, My Head Hurts is an initiative that aims to 
directly engage young athletes and empower them to overcome 
pressures to stay in the game when hurt. Through the 
development of training and workshops, this program will 
provide tools to young players that provide them with 
confidence to be advocates for their own health and safety. I 
look forward to our discussions later today and I applaud the 
work of the Canadian Football League Players Association in 
doing so as far as concussions and awareness for our youth go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to 
join me in welcoming these CFL athletes and members of the 
CFLPA to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly this 
morning. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A very nice 
introduction by the minister. I’d like to join with the minister 
opposite and welcome these CFL players, these leaders within 
their sport to the Saskatchewan legislature, to Rider nation, Mr. 

Speaker, where green is the colour, Mr. Speaker. Maybe a 
career-limiting move, I would agree, in making some of these 
introductions, but there is no shame in introducing the pride of 
Regina, pride of Saskatchewan, Chris Getzlaf, to his Assembly, 
a true champion on all fronts, someone that we’ve certainly all 
cheered for on the field and somebody who’s given back to this 
community and to this province along with his family on many 
other fronts as well. 
 
To, you know, Nik Lewis and to, you know, Mike Reilly, we 
wish you good times here in Saskatchewan here for this brief 
stay. We wish you interceptions and dropped balls and fumbles 
in the months to follow. 
 
It’s really special to have the CFLPA in Regina, in the heart of 
Rider nation, for the meetings that you’re conducting. And it’s 
really important to recognize the important leadership that 
you’re taking, on the field and off the field. And the work 
around concussions is incredibly important. As someone with a 
two-year old boy, you know, we play football. We play hockey. 
We like all these things. I really value what you’re doing as 
well in making sure that we’re approaching sport in the safest 
way that we can. So thank you for being here. 
 
It’s exciting this time of year. You know, the snow’s melting. 
Spring camps are getting ready to be fired up. All across our 
province people are getting geared up for Rider training camp. 
And it’s a pleasure to have you here. We wish you well, except 
for when you’re here on home turf. And thanks for being here 
in our Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you, in your gallery a good friend 
of mine from Saskatoon, Kirby Christensen, has joined us 
today. Kirby is a successful contractor in the city of Saskatoon. 
But more to the point, Mr. Speaker, he’s a mechanic, and so I 
spend an inordinate amount of time in Kirby’s shop working on 
my various cars. Truth be known, Mr. Speaker, it’s usually 
Kirby that’s doing most of the work, but I have learned a lot 
from him over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. So I know 
he’s come to enjoy the proceedings and view the proceedings 
here today, Mr. Speaker, so I’d ask everyone to join me in 
welcoming Kirby to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a couple of guests and friends of mine 
seated in your gallery: the mayor of the city of Lloydminster, 
Mr. Gerald Aalbers, and his lovely and very supportive wife, 
Christine. 
 
Mayor Aalbers was just recently elected as our mayor in the 
November 2016 municipal elections, beating out two other 
candidates. Gerald and Christine and their family have been 
long-time members of the city of Lloydminster and have a great 
understanding of the unique challenges a bi-provincial 
community like Lloydminster encounters. And I am very 
confident, Mr. Speaker, that through his great leadership, 
tenacity for getting things done, and his commitment for doing 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

what is in the best interests of the citizens of Lloydminster, that 
we will continue to show growth and prosperity in our 
community. 
 
On just a little side note, I understand that the Premier and the 
mayor are acquainted from days long ago when they were both 
students in res at the university here, and working jobs in 
Lloydminster . . . or in Regina. So I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming Christine and the mayor to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I am asking for a leave for extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I also 
want to welcome the mayor of Lloydminster here and his wife 
Christine. It’s nice to see you here. I met the mayor at the 
mayor’s meeting that we had a few months ago and we talked 
about some of the challenges that Lloydminster has as a city in 
our province, and a border city. And it’s going to be really good 
and interesting to have those discussions together and work 
together to make sure Lloydminster prospers. So thank you and 
welcome for being here. 
 
[10:15] 
 
I also have a few other guests that I’d like to introduce, Mr. 
Speaker. I have a few friends from Prince Albert here, and the 
first one I’ll introduce is Troy Parenteau. Troy is a wonderful 
teacher. He’s a kindergarten teacher, and he has 40 little ones 
that he takes care of day to day. So I have to believe that he has 
to be one of the most patient people that I know because I know 
I can’t handle more than two at a time. 
 
But also Troy is very passionate about his Métis culture. Troy 
teaches jigging to a variety of youth in Prince Albert, and he 
brings them around to different competitions. He also does 
exceptional beading work, and I have some of his art on display 
in my office. And so he’s very talented and extremely 
motivated, and he’s always available if you need a helping 
hand. And so thank you, Troy for, you know, sharing your 
Métis culture to the kids in Prince Albert. We really appreciate 
that. 
 
I also have Zach Nelson here, Mr. Speaker. Zach is a young 
man with an old soul. And when Zach graduated, his class said 
that he would be the most likely to move into a seniors’ 
complex shortly after graduation. And I believe that’s true, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, because Zach has a love for curling and 
playing cards and baking and of course, politics. And so he fits 
in really well when he goes and visits some of the seniors in the 
seniors’ complex. 
 
But Zach also is very passionate about human rights and 

protecting the most vulnerable, and so he’s a great asset to have 
as a casual worker in my office. And I really appreciate 
everything he does for our community as well. 
 
I also have my constituency assistant here, Mr. Speaker, Rose 
Rothenburger. And she’s a long-time friend and one of the main 
political influences in my life. Mr. Speaker, Rose was the 
constituency assistant for the previous MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Prince Albert Northcote, Eldon 
Lautermilch and Darcy Furber. And she managed to get me 
sucked into the political world by getting me involved with the 
executive way back when and kept me involved. 
 
But Rose is very respected by many in the Prince Albert area, 
Mr. Speaker, and she’s involved with a lot of community 
groups. She’s a very talented writer and a very compassionate, 
caring individual and is often the person that you would call if 
you need a soft shoulder to cry on because she always has the 
perfect words to say. And I think those characteristics is what 
makes her such an amazing constituency assistant. I appreciate 
all the work she does for our office and the people in Prince 
Albert. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last but not least is my partner, Darren. 
Darren is my best friend, and I really appreciate all the support 
he provides for me. It’s really nice to share your life with 
someone that has a lot of similar interests that you have, Mr. 
Speaker. Darren and I are really sports orientated. We love 
hockey. We love baseball, and we love football. And I’m a little 
bit jealous right now that he gets to sit up there with our CFL, 
our idols, you know, and I have to sit down here and look 
above. 
 
But also Darren and I share a lot of passion with regards to 
politics, and he’s always there for a phone call when I need to 
share some of my concerns. But yes, the leader here also 
mentioned that we’re season ticket holders for the Roughriders. 
We make sure we get to every game, and so we certainly enjoy 
going to the CFL games. I welcome them also here, but again I 
wish I could be up there. But anyway, I’m here working. 
 
So I would like to ask that all members of the Assembly 
welcome these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I would 
like to welcome 37 bright and energetic grade 7, 8, 9 students 
from the Churchbridge Public School. Now this is my alma 
mater. They’ve promised me that my name is finally taken off 
the bad boy list in the teachers’ lounge. Accompanying them 
today are two teachers, Ms. Bailey Marshall and Ms. Erika 
Strimbold, two of Saskatchewan’s new 750 teachers that have 
come to the province. EAs [educational assistants] with them 
are Ms. Rita Swanson and Carolyn Debnam, and parent 
chaperone, Ms. Shannon Dul. So I’d like all members to 
welcome Churchbridge Public School to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

want to, along with my colleagues, in thanking and recognizing 
Jason Quilliam in his contribution to our country, to his son 
Cade, and his wife Candyce. 
 
There’s no question that as a son of a World War II veteran, 
we’ve been raised in a home that really stresses the importance 
of recognizing those that serve our country. I had a number of 
family members join the military. So whether it was my older 
brother going to help with the famine in Africa, or a younger 
brother dealing with the conflict in Bosnia, it’s also very 
important to recognize those that serve our country and serve 
countries all throughout the world under the Canadian flag. 
 
So, Jason, I wish you safe journeys. Return to us as quickly as 
you can, but above all else to tell you a great big thank you 
from a grateful nation. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the west gallery I want to acknowledge a group that came from 
Moose Jaw. And they’re here generally every Thursday as part 
of the prayer group that comes here and watches the 
proceedings and extends their best wishes and their prayers on 
behalf of both sides. So I want to acknowledge them and thank 
them for their service, and welcome to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
leave to make it an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, and thank you to 
members for agreeing to an extended introduction. I want to 
take the opportunity to introduce two individuals accompanied 
by the director of visitor services, Lorraine deMontigny, two 
individuals that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I 
am talking about Mr. Marc Buchholz and Ms. Noela Bamford. 
If they could please rise and be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two individuals, there are lots of different 
paths to the legislature as we’re all well aware, but these two 
individuals are here because they went flat out in a bidding war 
at the Regina Symphony fundraiser and won an 
all-expenses-paid trip to the legislature, if you can imagine, Mr. 
Speaker. But all jesting aside, Mr. Speaker, the trip to the 
legislature was part of the heritage package. I believe they’ll be 
over to the Government House as well to see how things are 
working there. They’ll have some interaction with the city of 
Regina. But this is all in aid of support for the Regina 
Symphony Orchestra. 
 
And I’m proud to say Marc is a constituent of mine and a 
registered nurse in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, and an avid 
supporter of the arts community here in the city. And Noela is a 

retired public servant, Mr. Speaker, and since then has been also 
very active in her support of the arts community in the city. And 
I look forward to meeting with them later on and getting their 
take on how things went. Noela, once upon a time, was a 
legislative analyst. I’ll be interested to see her take on the 
proceedings in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But these two individuals are here today because of their 
interest in the legislative process and in our heritage as it relates 
to that in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. But they’re here for 
their support of the arts and for the Regina Symphony Orchestra 
in particular. So I want to welcome Marc and Noela to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take this opportunity to introduce two 
people seated in my gallery that are pillars of the community in 
Saskatoon: Rick Peddle, if you could give us a wave, and Brent 
Hillstead. I’m honoured to have them in the Assembly today, 
and they’re good friends of mine. They are actually past 
presidents of the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon, good friends of 
mine, members of the Rider nation. And if we are having 
troubles, to the Sergeant-at-Arms, in removing the riff-raff that 
sometimes are in the gallery today, I’m sure they’ll help out. 
But please welcome them to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw.  
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present the petitions who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
and people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these citizens believe and know that we have a 
better solution right here in our province, a Saskatchewan-made 
solution, Mr. Speaker. And that’s right down where I’m from, 
down in Estevan at Boundary dam 3. Mr. Speaker, this is a far 
better way to reduce CO2 emissions globally and in our 
province, way better than any carbon tax will ever do. The 
potential for that plant, Mr. Speaker, is removing the equivalent 
of removing 250,000 cars off our roads and our highways by 
the reductions that are already going on in that plant. And with 
the number of coal plants that are being built around the world 
— over 2,000, Mr. Speaker — this certainly can be a global 
solution way more than any imposed carbon tax. Technology 
and innovation is a much better course. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Moose 
Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April of 2014 the minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
The petitioners point out that on that very same day, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” They point out that this government has 
repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells, but 
their actions contradict their words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These ministers, the petitioners point out, are now trying to 
place the responsibility for repairing budget deficits on those 
experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty, and who 
are living from day to day without proper services. And this 
budget yesterday will continue to hammer away at those most 
vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
to take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today under the directive and request 
from the member from Prince Albert Northcote for anyone, 
someone to help in her battle for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. 
 
I’m proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
relates to a second bridge for Prince Albert and, Mr. Speaker, a 
second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is 
today. Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Ask that the Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, 
hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people 
calling for action, and begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we have done so day after day, petition 
after petition, I presented names of people that have signed in 
support of the second bridge for Prince Albert. And these 

people have signed from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on 
this particular page, Mr. Speaker, they’re primarily from Prince 
Albert and Shell Lake, and I so present. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a potential 49 per cent 
Crown corporation sell-off. The undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan who signed this petition would like 
to bring to our attention the following: that the Sask Party’s Bill 
40 creates a new definition for privatization that allows the 
government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum; that in 2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned 297.2 million in dividends to pay for 
schools, roads, and hospitals — those dividends should go to 
the people of Saskatchewan, not private investors; and that our 
Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan people 
across the province. 
 
Under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown 
corporations are exempt from corporate income tax provided 
not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a government 
or province. The Sask Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 
per cent of a Crown to be sold without being considered 
privatized, and therefore this short-sighted legislation risks 
sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to 
the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately stop the 
passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act and 
start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations instead of 
selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Prince 
Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to raise 
a petition regarding pay equity here in Saskatchewan, and the 
undersigned residents want to bring to our attention the 
following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity; and that all women should be paid equitably; and that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. And 
according to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Leroy, and here in Regina. I do so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand today to present to you a petition to increase the funding 
to Prince Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert 
mobile crisis unit has had to close its doors during daytime 
hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. Mr. 
Speaker, the services that mobile crisis provides falls under the 
mandate of a lot of the different ministries here, and they’re not 
requiring a whole lot of money to reopen to 24-hour, 
seven-days-a-week services. And it would be nice if the 
Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of 
Social Services could get together and work out a plan so that 
we could re-establish services within the crisis unit in Prince 
Albert mobile. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. And we know 
when we provide services right at the point of impact that the 
cost of services later down the road is a lot less, so this would 
be a cost-saving measure. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service [like is advertised 
on a lot of the websites that we find on the Internet]. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, like I was saying before, a lot of residents 
across the province are concerned about the cuts to mobile 
crisis in Prince Albert. And this particular petition is signed by 
residents from North Battleford and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition in 
support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Those who have signed this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: to the fact that Saskatchewan has 
the second-highest rate of child sexual abuse in Canada and 

that statistics show that 1 in 3 girls and 1 in 6 boys will be 
sexually abused by the age of 18. Up to 90 per cent of 
perpetrators are known to the victim, and it is estimated that 
95 per cent of these cases will never be reported. Victims of 
childhood sexual abuse are four times more likely to commit 
suicide, and currently there is no comprehensive elementary 
or secondary curriculum regarding the prevention and 
reporting of sexual child abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law, 
which would ensure that a comprehensive health education 
program be developed and implemented which would 
require age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault awareness 
and prevention education in grades pre-K through 12, 
along with training staff on the prevention of child abuse. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition today reside in Regina 
and Emerald Park. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the following to be brought to the 
attention of the legislature: the fact that currently 
Saskatchewan’s change of name Act, 1995 includes the 
following options for change of name by election: the surname 
of the person’s spouse, a hyphenated form of the person’s 
surname and the surname of the person’s spouse, the person’s 
pre-marriage surname, and the person’s birth surname. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that it does not allow for 
residents of Saskatchewan to assume their spouse’s surname 
and retain their own surname as a given or middle name without 
altering their birth record. And so, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan amend Saskatchewan’s current change of 
name Act, 1995 to include the following option for name 
by election: the surname of the person’s spouse with the 
person’s own surname as a given or middle name. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition was brought forward by a constituent 
of mine, Kim Banadyga. She has gathered more than 500 
signatures on this petition from citizens in places including 
Regina, Pilot Butte, Fort Qu’Appelle, Oxbow, Griffin, Silton, 
White City, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Assiniboia, Esterhazy, 
Wawota, Indian Head, Humboldt, Lumsden, Balgonie, Vibank, 
Copper Sands, Balcarres, Bengough, Mossbank, and Kronau. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be also providing a copy of the letter that she 
has written of the petition itself to the Minister of Justice for his 
consideration and prompt action. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having 
the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners 
amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence follows them to work. 
Victims of domestic abuse, Mr. Speaker, should not be further 
victimized at work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due 
to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last week members on this side of the House 
tabled a private member’s bill calling for the implementation of 
this measure along with two other very important measures to 
help support survivors of domestic violence, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re hopeful that the government will support our private 
member’s bill. 
 
Individuals who are signing this petition today come from 
Regina, Indian Head, Maidstone, Battleford, and North 
Battleford. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

New Schools in Martensville 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
today to highlight this government’s commitment to our 
education system with the completion of two new joint-use 
schools in my constituency: Lake Vista in Prairie Spirit School 
Division and Holy Mary in Saskatoon Catholic are the new 
schools in Martensville. They are both state-of-the-art facilities 
and will be home to over 600 students and 90 child care spaces 
when they open this fall. 
 
Martensville has seen amazing growth over the past several 
years; they have actually doubled in size since 2007. Mr. 
Speaker, Martensville is full of young families and children 
who will benefit from increased access to child care and the K 
to 8 school. This new joint-use school will also benefit the 
community as a whole with increased access to fitness studios 
and a community resource centre. These facilities will be 
available to the public after regular school hours, and as Larry 
Pavloff, the Chair of Prairie Spirit School Division said, “These 
learning centres are more than schools. They’re going to be 
hubs of activity for the community as a whole.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our record is one of opening 40 new schools, 
including 21 this year alone, along with 25 major renovations. 
Mr. Speaker, this is vastly different from the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] when, facing tough times, they chose instead 
to close 176 schools. Mr. Speaker, these new schools opening 
this fall in my constituency are evidence of our government’s 
commitment to education and meeting the challenges of growth. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Buffalo Narrows Basketball Team 
Makes Trek to Hoopla 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m so 
very happy and proud to rise in this House to recognize the 
Buffalo Narrows Twin Lakes School Eagles boys’ basketball 
team on a tremendous season and wish them great luck as they 
make the trek this weekend for the provincial high school 
basketball championship tournament. 
 
The road to Hoopla has led 48 teams, representing all 14 of our 
athletic districts, to Regina this weekend where a total of 54 
games will occur over the next three days to determine our 
provincial champions. Mr. Speaker, the Twin Lakes Eagles 
ranked number six in the province, defeated number 
three-ranked Davidson 96 to 84 to win the 1A Boys Regional 
Championship and advance to Hoopla. 
 
The Eagles players range from grades 8 to 12 and they are 
coached by two dedicated coaches, David Wells and Luke 
Kuypers. And under these coaches’ leadership, they upset the 
defending champions from last year from Davidson in overtime 
to earn their berth into the championship. 
 
Coach Wells has been teaching and coaching Buffalo Narrows 
for the past eight years along with Luke Kuypers. He believes 
basketball is a vehicle for bigger things, and as he says: 
 

You just treat basketball as something to get them into a 
group and keep them positive. You’re trying to teach life 
skills, you’re trying to open world views, you’re trying to 
create relationships. 

 
For history and for the record, I’ll read out the roster of these 
accomplished students: Jonah Koebernick, Riley McCallum, 
Parker McCallum, Manileas Felske, Garrett Campbell, Mervin 
Aubichon, Dawson Laliberte, Seth Montgrand, Colin 
McPherson, Conan Kusch, and Shane McCallum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to recognize 
the Buffalo Narrows Twin Lakes basketball team on a 
tremendous season. And good luck this weekend, boys. Our 
hearts are with you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And now on the very 
serious side, March is designated as Colorectal Cancer 
Awareness Month. Colorectal cancer is one of the most 
commonly diagnosed forms of cancer in Canada. That is why 
screening and early detection are so important for both men and 
women between the ages of 50 and 74. 
 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, to say that Saskatchewan’s 
Cancer Agency screening program for colorectal cancer is 
leading the country with a participation rate of 50 per cent. This 
program saves lives, as this cancer is 90 per cent preventable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to continue funding the 
Cancer Agency to ensure that this population-based screening 
program is available throughout the province. Whether 
individuals receive the screening test during this awareness 
month, or at another time of year, we want to encourage them to 
take the very simple test when they receive it in the mail. It can 
be done in the privacy of their home and can bring peace of 
mind, knowing that they’ve taken steps against a disease that 
might otherwise go undetected in its early stages. When 
detected early, the outcome is generally positive for patients 
and their families. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

First Nations Provincial Spelling Bee 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 
today to recognize Saskatchewan’s second annual First Nations 
Provincial Spelling Bee. This bee is the first ever province-wide 
First Nations spelling bee in Canada. It is a wonderful 
opportunity to not only promote literacy, but also to 
demonstrate the amazing talent and academic promise that 
children of Saskatchewan represent. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Last year, the inaugural competition was held in North 
Battleford and was a huge success. This year I’m happy to say 
that the bee is coming to Saskatoon and will be held in my 
community at St. Mary’s Wellness and Education Centre, 
tomorrow, March 24th. 
 
There are 157 First Nations students from approximately 43 
on-reserve and urban schools from all over Saskatchewan, 
ranging in ages from 6 to 14, registered to take part in the 
competition. First-place winners will advance to the national 
competition in Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of this would have been possible without the 
hard work of the First Nations spelling bee committee: Pauline 
Favel, president of the First Nations provincial spelling bee; 
Lillian Denton of Saskatchewan Indian and Gaming Authority; 
Lori McAuley from the Saskatoon Tribal Council; Linda 
Okanee, CPA CMA [chartered professional accountant, 
certified management accountant]; and St. Mary’s community 
coordinator extraordinaire, Cecile Smith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask that all members join me today in 
wishing the students success in their competition, and on 
congratulating the committee on an exciting and educational 
endeavour. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Read Saskatoon Promotes Literacy 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, I 
had the pleasure of attending the Read Saskatoon Lit Up! event, 
along with the Deputy Premier, Attorney General, and the 
member from Saskatoon Westview, where once again I saw that 
literacy is an essential part of one’s life. Literacy skills are 
directly related to someone’s ability to secure a job, the wage 
they will make, and their ability to participate in the 
community. Last year Read Saskatoon reached 3,500 people 
with their programs. 
 
At the event, Read Saskatoon recognized Masesi Masilela. In 
2008 Masesi and her family moved to Canada from South 
Africa. Her son’s preschool teacher introduced her to a free 
two-hour program that was offered by Read Saskatoon. She 
acquired practical skills that she was able to apply at home and 
made it possible to become her children’s first and best teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Masesi’s children’s reading skills improved, 
their self-esteem and attitudes towards learning did too. After 
her children aged out of the programs, she decided to stay on as 
a volunteer to help equip others to grow in their literacy skills to 
ultimately have a better life. Masesi’s is one of many stories of 
lives being made better by increased literacy. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all members of this House to join me in thanking the 250 
volunteer literacy tutors at Read Saskatoon who are helping 
everyone reach their full potential. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Canadian Football League Fan Week  
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report 
to the House, as mentioned in introductions already, that Regina 
is playing host to the first-ever Canadian Football League Fan 
Week at Evraz place. This event is a chance for the CFL to 
showcase, during the off-season, current CFL players, pay 
tribute to past legends, as well as feature future stars at the 
annual combine this weekend. CFL Week is focused on the 
fans, giving them an opportunity to mix and mingle with their 
favourite players, put their skills to the test while learning more 
about the game. 
 
I had the pleasure of attending the Canadian Football Hall of 
Fame reception last night at the new Mosaic stadium, and it was 
introducing the new Hall of Fame inductees. And I’ll briefly go 
over them: the builders were Stan Schwartz; and from the U of 
S [University of Saskatchewan] Huskies, we all know Brian 
Towriss in this House. The players, a very impressive list: 
Anthony Calvillo, Kelvin Anderson, Mike O’Shea, and Geroy 
Simon. 
 
Of course I believe Saskatchewan is the obvious place to host 
this inaugural event. No secret that Rider Nation is the greatest 
and most loyal fan base in all of Canada, and it’s great to see 
many of those fans, and maybe even some future CFL players, 
in the fan zone having a great time practising field goals, 
throwing accuracy, testing their speed, and all those sorts of 
skills. The highlight for many, I’m sure, is getting a picture with 
the Grey Cup trophy. 
 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming CFL 
Week to Regina and wish the league the best on this event this 
week coming up and of course the upcoming season, we’re all 
looking forward to it. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Shows Population Growth 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
share with members of this Assembly some great news from 
Statistics Canada released this morning. Our province’s 
population once again showed growth in the last quarter of 
2016, growing by almost 3,000 people and the province 
growing by more than 17,000 last year. Mr. Speaker, as of 
January 1st this year, our population is 1,158,339. Both the 
quarterly and annual population gains were the third highest 
among the Canadian provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to use the words of the member from 
Athabasca to assure you that I didn’t, quote, make that part up, 
as the member opposite apparently did. 
 
Our province’s population and job growth show that despite the 
budget challenges that we are addressing, our economy remains 
strong and resilient. These real numbers show that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and raise a family. 
Mr. Speaker, growth is our record, while on that side, the NDP 
recorded precedented decline. When the NDP were in 
government, our population declined 23,000 people from ’97 to 
2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is moving forward, and our 
government is working hard to keep Saskatchewan the best 
place to run a business and raise a family. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, before we get to some of 
the very serious concerns and questions about the deceitful, 
indecent, and mean-spirited budget of the Sask Party, I want to 
follow up on an interesting response of the Premier yesterday 
on another matter when I asked him when he first — asked him 
again, because of course he’s dodged answering this question 
time and time again — when he first learned that the original 
seller of the land involved in the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal was the landlord to the minister, the then minister 
of the GTH. The Premier finally found his feet on this matter, 
but no answer. 
 
Now of course this was discussed in cabinet, and he would have 
been there. And of course the seller, the business relationship of 
the former minister, made $6 million before flipping the land to 
another Sask Party supporter who made $5 million. 
 
But the Premier said yesterday that he had already answered 
this question. And of course that hasn’t been on the floor of this 
Assembly — I’ve asked him it time and time again. Maybe that 
was with the RCMP. I’m not sure where. But he hasn’t shared it 

with Saskatchewan people. So direct to the Premier: when did 
he find out that the seller of the land had a direct relationship 
with the minister responsible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the auditor has addressed all of these 
matters. The auditor has looked into this matter in great detail 
and issued a very thorough report predicated on her research 
and her talking with all of the individuals involved, of her 
examining all of the documents which she felt that she needed 
access to examine. 
 
The auditor made a number of recommendations coming out of 
that very thorough report — 10 in fact, Mr. Speaker. We accept 
those recommendations. We’re implementing or have 
implemented all of those recommendations. The auditor 
commented at the conclusion of her report, as she said on an 
open-line radio show with respect to this matter: 
 

. . . in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red 
flags. Because this is land transactions, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of 
interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course 
of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Budget 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Strange, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s 
refusal to give a straight answer on that question is really 
troubling, Mr. Speaker. It should be pretty simple. It’s rather 
unbelievable and it’s unacceptable. 
 
You know, yesterday the Premier refused to let the Finance 
minister defend himself and the failures in his last budget. But I 
wonder if the Premier is so eager to defend the budget presented 
yesterday. This is the Premier who, time and time and time 
again, long before the last election, through the last election and 
up until just a few weeks ago, promised that he would never 
raise taxes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, from children’s clothes to construction 
renovations projects — the epitome of a job-killing tax — to 
fishing licences, all the way to a case of beer, they’re raising 
taxes. On top of that, they’re actually jacking up the PST 
[provincial sales tax] a percentage point, which means taxes on 
everyday items are jumping 20 per cent — a billion-dollar tax 
hike from a Premier that said he’d never raise taxes. Will the 
Premier at the very least admit that he’s broken his word? Why 
wasn’t he straight with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s fact-check time 
again for the interim Leader of the Opposition. He was in this 
Assembly when the former Finance minister, Ken Krawetz, 
delivered a budget wherein he indicated that at some point 
down the road we’d have to raise taxes, specifically EPT 
[education property tax]. I was here. I voted for the budget 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

where those statements were made. So for him now to portray 
some sort of commitment that frankly did not exist, certainly 
during the last election, because we expressly said we would 
have to increase taxes, is just more of the same. It’s more of the 
same that we have come to expect from the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget was characterized by a number of 
difficult decisions. I want to say that none of the decisions we 
took were as difficult as what faced a number of public 
servants, valued public servants, who went to work yesterday 
morning and received a notice that the government would be 
changing direction, winding down some services. And our 
thoughts are with those employees. 
 
I would also point out to my hon. friend that in 2000, with 
respect to the tax issue, that in 2007 under the NDP, a person 
making $40,000 paid $3,688, Mr. Speaker. This year, even after 
the PST changes, even after all the changes, that same 
individual will have paid $2,939, down 20 per cent even after 
these changes. 
 
A family of four with a combined taxable income of 50,000 will 
save 77 per cent in taxes even after these changes. Even after 
these changes, 77 per cent lower taxes paid by that family than 
when members opposite were in government, Mr. Speaker. We 
stand by our tax reduction record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, remarkable. The Premier, 
who said he’d never raise taxes, is increasing taxes by a billion 
dollars. He can spin this any way he likes, but that’s the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, and the Premier said going into this budget that 
there’d be a shift, I think is what he described. Well there’s a 
shift all right, Mr. Speaker. There’s a shift to breaks for the 
wealthiest, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of everyone else. And 
there’s shiftiness in this budget everywhere you see, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, those who make out pretty well in this budget are 
the wealthiest, Mr. Speaker, the wealthy and well connected to 
that Premier, with a tax cut, if you can imagine, for the highest 
wage earners, an effective cut of 6.5 per cent — a full reduction 
of one point of their tax bracket. This is inexplicable. And it’s 
as inexplicable as the cut to the corporate income tax at this 
point in time, a time where the Premier’s taking a pound of 
flesh from Saskatchewan families, a break and a gift to the 
corporations of Saskatchewan of an 8 per cent cut in their taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. How can the Premier justify these unneeded gifts 
to the wealthiest and most connected at a time that he’s 
breaking his word, and that he’s pounding Saskatchewan people 
and families with tax after tax after tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I need to correct the record, Mr. Speaker. The 
commitment that he is attributing to me with respect to taxes 
was not made. Moreover, I hope the member will be fair 
enough to admit . . . Because he was here in this Legislative 

Assembly; I think he was the Finance critic when the Sask Party 
Finance minister of the day indicated we were going to have to 
raise EPT. We signalled that that change was coming. It didn’t 
come the year after that. We’ve made a change with respect to 
this year’s budget. Those are the facts. And I hope he’s still fair 
enough, I hope he’s still fair enough in this place to agree that 
that was the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that today in the province 
of Saskatchewan 17 per cent of Saskatchewan people pay 50 
per cent of the income taxes, Mr. Speaker, and so we need to be 
mindful of low-income people. That’s why we’ve dropped 
112,000 low-income people off the provincial tax rolls. That’s 
why we’ve increased the low-income tax credit to protect 
against some of the PST changes even in this budget. That’s 
why we will lower taxes for all brackets of income under this 
plan going forward, so that we have the lowest or the third 
lowest income taxes for families when this plan is fully 
implemented. 
 
But we also have to recognize that if 17 per cent of the 
population is paying 50 per cent of the taxes, we need to be 
competitive for them too. We need to make sure that they stay 
in the province, that they are paying those taxes in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, part of our plan is to have the most 
competitive taxes for manufacturing and processing. That 
comes from lowering the corporate income tax rate. When you 
lower it by a point, you lower the manufacturing and processing 
tax as well. And when our plan is fully implemented, we will 
have the lowest manufacturing and processing tax in the 
Dominion of Canada as part of our effort to continue to 
diversify Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is indecent for the 
Premier to be cutting taxes for the wealthiest in Saskatchewan 
while he’s pounding Saskatchewan people and businesses on 
front after front. It’s out of touch with Saskatchewan people; 
it’s bad fiscal policy, and it’s just not fair. How can the Premier 
justify hiking a tax, introducing a tax, a 6 per cent increase on 
children’s clothes and children’s shoes, for everyone, collecting 
a whole total of $50 million while he gives away hundreds of 
millions of dollars to the wealthiest in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of first being 
elected to this Assembly in 1999, and at that time the NDP 
government of the day had looked at this question with respect 
to taxes and what’s the best tax to lower, Mr. Speaker, in order 
to create the right environment. And that NDP report 
recommended to the government of the day that there be a shift 
in taxation. A shift . . . Well the members opposite don’t want 
to hear the answer. I’m telling them that the government of the 
day, this government, agrees with the report that their 
government received in ’99, that it’s good economic policy. He 
just questioned the fiscal policy of the government. 
 
It’s always good economic policy; it’s good fiscal policy to 
move, to shift taxes towards consumption, away from income, 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

away from income taxes for families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been doing that over the last number of 
years to the point that even with the changes announced 
yesterday, in 2007 under the NDP government, a family of four 
with 75,000 combined income tax paid $6,096 in provincial 
income tax and PST. After this plan is fully implemented, 
actually just even in the first year, that same family will pay 
$2,000 less in taxes than they did when members opposite, 
through high taxes and bad policy, were driving a generation of 
Saskatchewan people out of the province. That represents, even 
with the changes yesterday, for that family, PST and income 
tax, a reduction of 31 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s become abundantly 
clear that we don’t just have a deficit of billions of dollars under 
the Sask Party; we have a deficit of decency, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s pretty clear with answers like that and spin like that, it starts 
to make sense why we’re in this mess. You know, what 
corporation, what corporation would base their decision to stay 
or leave Saskatchewan based on 1 per cent when we’re 
currently in line with our neighbours? Come on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They say it’s about supposed job creation. Well the vast 
majority of new jobs are created by small businesses and 
entrepreneurs across Saskatchewan. But the only thing the Sask 
Party is giving small businesses is tax increases — more tax 
increases through the PST hike, the massive PST expansion 
including on construction labour, the epitome of a job-killing 
tax, and the elimination of exemptions. Why is the Premier 
punishing hard-working, homegrown job creators, the small 
businesses of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the premise of 
the member’s question is, why are you trying so hard to be 
better than Alberta? That basically was the premise of his 
question. He said we’re about the same as Alberta. By the way, 
we’re not the same as British Columbia who we compete with 
for investment and jobs. But his point is, why don’t you want to 
. . . we’re about the same as Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, on this side of the House, 
we’d like to be more competitive than the province of Alberta. 
They’ve raised their income taxes. They’ve raised their 
corporate income taxes. And they have introduced a massive 
carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going down that road. We’ll 
undertake this shift, but Saskatchewan families will still pay 
less than they did when members opposite had the chance to do 
more than talk, when members opposite had the chance to act 
on the tax front, Mr. Speaker, and their taxes that they imposed 
on those families’ income and PST were much higher. 
 
I would also ask my hon. friend if he’s ever considered the fact 
that many of the farms today, many of the farms in our province 
today that have been helping to drive economic growth and 
create the Saskatchewan advantage, are incorporated. They’re 
incorporated. And some of them are fairly significant, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s an important signal to agriculture, to 
manufacturing and processing, to all of those companies across 

Canada that are interested in a healthy investment climate, that 
this province isn’t satisfied just tying another jurisdiction. We 
want to be the most competitive. We want to see our population 
continue to grow as it is now. We want to continue to lead the 
country in job creation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it defies common sense. 
It’s a bad fiscal policy, and it’s certainly not fair for that 
Premier to try to defend tax cuts, tax breaks for the wealthiest 
and most connected, Mr. Speaker, at a time where he’s taking a 
pound of flesh from Saskatchewan people and where he’s 
running a massive deficit once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, maybe those half a million dollars are so stuck in his 
pocket from big corporate money, Mr. Speaker, through his 
inappropriate . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the members with the verbiage used. 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s a question about who’s pulling this 
Premier’s strings, Mr. Speaker. But clearly he’s forgotten who 
he’s serving. 
 
I want to quote the vice-president of prairie and agri-business, 
Marilyn Braun-Pollon, from the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business]. She said she wanted to be positive 
about the budget, but she can’t, Mr. Speaker, because it is “. . . 
brutal from a small business perspective.” Brutal from a small 
business perspective. She tweeted, “We fear a $908 million tax 
hike will make a bad situation worse.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us why the Sask Party is 
making a bad situation worse instead of getting us on to the 
road to economic recovery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the road to 
economic recovery is well under way. Mr. Speaker, consider 
. . . Well the members opposite are laughing. The last job report 
that came out days ago had your province — that you should be 
proud of — leading the country with 8,000 new jobs created. In 
statistic after statistic, whether it’s manufacturing, whether it’s 
retail sales, we are leading the country right now. We want to 
continue that. We want to ensure that this province continues to 
be competitive. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve unveiled not just a budget 
for one year, but a plan. And if that plan calls on us to shift 
away from reliance on resource revenue and also to shift 
towards consumption taxes, away from income taxes . . . And 
you know, the member can point to the CFIB and they don’t 
like the budget. My understanding is the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce very much liked the budget and they represent, they 
represent businesses right in the member’s constituency. My 
understanding is that the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
had positive things to say about the budget and its long-term 
plan. 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to ensure that, unlike other 
jurisdictions, we’ve got a plan to get to balance. And while we 
move to balance, we will remain and become even more 
competitive so we continue to lead in job creation, Mr. Speaker, 
so that we can continue to have people moving to the province, 
which is a far cry from what happened when members opposite 
were in office. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a plan. A plan is what the 
Sask Party, almost a decade into government, are apparently 
bringing Saskatchewan people. Every year they come forward 
and say they’ve got a plan. They say the budget’s balanced, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course you see the reality. And now with this 
supposed plan from the Sask Party as deficit as it is — it 
includes 8 out of 12 deficits, Mr. Speaker — and it doesn’t help 
support the job creation that we need. 
 
Their own numbers show that $258 million are lost year to year 
here in corporate tax revenues. And what makes matters worse 
is the Sask Party’s giving away tens of millions of dollars more 
on this front while they’re taking a pound of flesh from 
Saskatchewan people, throwing hundreds of people out of 
work, cutting the things that matter to hard-working people and 
families all across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Sask Party really become that arrogant? 
Are they really that out of touch? Mr. Speaker, I don’t probably 
expect the Premier to answer that question. So I guess a very 
direct one: who asked him for the 8 per cent cut to the corporate 
tax rate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the number he just attributed 
to corporate income tax, well it’s wrong. That’s the reduction, 
that’s the reduction in personal income tax. That’s money back 
in the pockets of Saskatchewan families, of low-income people, 
of middle-income people, and yes, of high-income people — 
across-the-board tax relief, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the 
member to read the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Moreover he wants to talk about . . . he wanted to talk about 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say this, that obviously 
there is a revenue challenge that we’re facing in the province. 
And we often hear members talk about, whatever happened to 
the money that we inherited in 2007? I have the documents 
from the NDP’s last budget, 2007-2008. Here’s the NDP’s last 
budget. They reported, they reported a $75 million General 
Revenue Fund surplus but a $700 million summary financial 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they handed to future 
government on the summary basis, $700 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other point. They always talk about their rainy 
day fund they left behind. Here’s what they did with the rainy 
day fund: they took $510 million out of the rainy day fund to 
balance the budget because it was an election year, leaving only 
$378 million worth of balance, Mr. Speaker, in that fund. If 
they want to talk about rainy day funds, we’re happy to do it all 
day long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — If we could balance the budget on, you 
know, yelling and spin, Mr. Speaker, we’d be in pretty good 
shape in the province of Saskatchewan. This is just not 
believable. It’s not credible, and it’s their budget. 
 
In the leaflets that they actually published to promote their 
mean-spirited, deceitful budget, they’re saying that they are 
investing in their priorities. Investing in their priorities. That’s 
what it says, Mr. Speaker. They gave a tax break to the 
wealthiest, Mr. Speaker, but they’re selling off STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] after promising of 
course that that wasn’t on the table. 
 
Seniors, workers, and families throughout the province rely on 
this bus service to get from place to place, to ship packages 
which supports businesses and farms all across our province, 
and to access health care. It’s a lifeline to people all across our 
province. And of course that Premier promised, looked people 
in the whites of their eyes and said he wouldn’t sell it off, but 
he’s doing just that. How can the Premier justify making the 
wealthiest a priority over seniors and rural Saskatchewan 
families seeking health care by selling off STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not selling STC. 
This is not a privatization. Well the members are laughing. 
There’s not a commercial interest here to privatize. And we 
don’t think this is funny, unlike members opposite. We don’t 
think it’s a laughing matter because we know that the lives of 
250 or so valued public servants changed significantly, and not 
for the better, yesterday as a result of a decision that we took. 
And so we didn’t come to the decision easily, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would point out for members opposite that over the years 
we have seen ridership decline and decline and decline to the 
point where the previous per-passenger — I think around 2010 
— the per-passenger subsidy from taxpayers to the STC, to the 
bus company, was about $35 per passenger, $25 a passenger. I 
think at that level, I think at that level, Mr. Speaker, we would 
have had a different discussion, maybe even a different 
decision. But here’s what’s been happening. As riderships 
decline and costs have increased, that per-passenger subsidy is 
well up over $90, almost $100 per passenger, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at some point you have to ask the question, is that the core 
function of government, to subsidize to $90 a passenger for a 
bus company? Or is it rather health care and education and 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker? And so we’ve made our decision, 
and it was not an easy decision to make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that even this morning the minister’s office has 
received calls from other bus company operators in the country 
— one in particular, I understand — that are inquiring about 
routes. We’ve indicated there’s not a sale here. But certainly, 
certainly we have the Highway Traffic Board that determines 
running routes in the province, and I’m sure if other operators, 
as happened in the past when the NDP cancelled routes, if other 
private sector operators are wanting to take over those lines for 
either freight or passengers, they would be welcome to do so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier wants to get up and talk 
about the core function of government. A core function of a 
Premier is to be straight with Saskatchewan people. This is a 
Premier who didn’t say boo about this in the run-up to the 
election, through the election, or beyond. He looked in the 
whites of the eyes of Saskatchewan people. Hand over heart, he 
pledged that he wouldn’t sell off the Crown corporations. This 
is deceitful and it’s damaging, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that the 
Premier’s word just isn’t worth much. To the Premier: does he 
have no shame? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the reality of the 
province’s situation, as we have already discussed, is that for 
now, the third year resource revenue . . . Well the Leader of the 
Opposition asked a pretty serious question and made some 
serious allegations about me and members on this side of the 
House. I hope he would have the respect and decency to listen 
to the answer, even if he doesn’t agree with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be into our third year of resource 
revenues down by over a billion dollars. It’s pretty clear that 
this is the new norm, that resource revenue for the province of 
Saskatchewan is going to . . . and for other provinces that 
depend on natural resources, that the new norm is that we have 
lower revenues. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So we have to do two things. We have to look at the revenue 
situation, and yes, there are revenue increases in the budget, 
some significant ones to be sure. But we also have to control 
spending and make some difficult decisions around 
expenditures, around existing programs that we have, around 
services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can share with members a fact that I’m sure 
they’re aware of — unfortunately the service was not being 
utilized. The bus service would have required 85 to $100 
million in more investment over the next five years. Mr. 
Speaker, if we have those kinds of dollars, we’re going focus 
them in health care and education, social services and 
infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, that will be the priorities of the 
government. 
 
And we regret obviously the fact that this has affected, in a very 
bad way, the employees of that company who were valued. But 
it’s one of the tough decisions in this budget that we think will 
keep us in good stead, that will get us to balance in three years, 
and that will keep the province strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a deceitful budget on 
front after front. Mr. Speaker, it’s callous and it’s mean-spirited. 
We have a Premier that wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan 
people in the run-up to an election and ever since, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality, when you look at the budget, last year alone this 
province increased debt by $3 billion. If you look at what this 
government has done, they’ve increased debt since 2013. In just 
five years, they’ve doubled the debt all the way to $18 billion. 

Of course you didn’t see any of that featuring on the billboards 
in the last election, Mr. Speaker. You didn’t see this Premier 
being straight with people about his sell-off schemes. You 
didn’t see him being straight with his callous plan to shift 
benefits to the wealthiest at the expense of the rest of us, Mr. 
Speaker, and he didn’t put forward his schemes on the cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. And I guess at the heart of it, Saskatchewan people 
expect their Premier to be straight with them. 
 
My question to the Premier: was he afraid that Saskatchewan 
people would have held him to account? Was he afraid that if 
they saw the costs of Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste that they would have held him to account? Was it that if 
they saw their schemes and their actual plan and their deficit of 
values that they would have held him to account? Why wasn’t 
this Premier straight with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest 
to the member that he should be straight with the members of 
this House in question period in his preambles, that his facts 
should be accurate, that his characterizations, which are very 
serious, should be accurate. Mr. Speaker, he will know that this 
government has paid off — and obviously with these deficits 
we’re now eating into it — not completely, but we’ve paid off 
$3 billion in operating debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] news 
Edmonton just did a report. They looked at the national 
situation. And guess, Mr. Speaker, which province has the 
lowest operating debt per capita in all of Canada, even lower 
than our neighbours in Alberta owing to some decisions that 
their counterparts in that province has made? Mr. Speaker, it’s 
the province of Saskatchewan — the lowest operating debt in 
Canada even as we’ve gone through three years of very difficult 
times with respect to revenue. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, this province has the second-best, the 
second-best debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio in 
Canada, the second-best. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s earned credit 
rating upgrades. We’ve been able to achieve this even though 
we’ve faced the headwinds of low . . . Well the member shakes 
his head. These are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Operating debt that was inherited from members opposite has 
been reduced. And even in this budget, even in this budget with 
the deficit, the operating debt of the province is down 15 per 
cent. 
 
Well they don’t like this answer, Mr. Speaker. Theirs is a record 
of more debt. Theirs is a record, Mr. Speaker, of people leaving 
the province. Theirs is the worst job creation record in all of the 
country when they left office. And all of that has turned around 
and, Mr. Speaker, our work in this budget is to ensure that that 
turnaround continues. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll listen to the point of order from the 
Government House Leader. 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On four 
times in question period, at the clock at 24:30, 5:24, 2:05, and 
0:15, the interim leader of the NDP used the phrase “deceitful.” 
And I’ll refer you to Beauchesne’s, debates, March 22nd, ’77, 
page 4257, where the word “deceived” was ruled out of order. 
They also ruled the word “deliberately deceived” in August 5th, 
1960, page 7640. And I’d ask that the member withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you that the 
Leader of the Opposition put his remarks very much in 
accordance with the rules of this Assembly and within the 
practices and traditions that are outlined by the great people like 
Beauchesne’s and Bourinot’s and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also well understood that there’s no such thing 
as a list of words or phrases that can or cannot be used. But it 
also depends very much upon the usage, Mr. Speaker, and if the 
Leader of the Opposition is referring to a deceitful budget, that 
that is very much within the accepted use of these terms, Mr. 
Speaker, and not involving what the member across is alleging. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d invite you to review the record and return to 
the House with a judgment as such. But, Mr. Speaker, in that 
judgment, I’d urge you to find the member’s point to be not 
well taken. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe I’m able and willing to rule on this 
point of order today, and I do find it in order. And I believe the 
Leader of the Opposition’s verbiage used today does not add to 
the decorum, and I would ask that he withdraw and apologize 
for his remarks today. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with due respect, I will not 
apologize for a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I caution the Leader of the Opposition that 
there are sanctions that the Speaker has when a member would 
refuse to withdraw and apologize for remarks. I’d give the 
opportunity to stand and withdraw and apologize for his 
remarks or they will be the next step taken by the Speaker. 
 
So I’d recognize the Leader of the Opposition right now, please. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I can’t apologize for this deceptive 
budget and the deceit of this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Trent Wotherspoon, I hereby name you 
for disregarding the authority of the Chair, and pursuant to the 
rule 57(2), the member is suspended from the services of the 
Assembly for the remainder of the sitting day. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Order, order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
planning to address further comments on yesterday’s budget 
that was introduced. But before I do that I would like to 
introduce a couple of guests in our Assembly, with leave of the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Unfortunately the Chamber was loud during 
the member’s motion. I would ask her to repeat her motion 
please. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
request leave to introduce guests in the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of our intrepid leader, I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce his constituency assistant, Gloria 
Patrick, and her daughter Kaitlyn here in the Assembly today. I 
think they just saw a remarkable demonstration of courage, and 
I think it’s important for them to be able to witness that. So on 
behalf of the Assembly, I’d like to welcome these guests to 
their Assembly. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At this 
point I would like to continue with my comments on the budget 
motion. And as part of my comments today I will introduce a 
motion at the end of my comments to make an amendment to 
the budget. 
 
But I thought, you know, I had enough to say yesterday on an 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

interim basis and obviously there’s a lot more to be said about 
this budget. But this morning I think I would like to talk about 
what I’m hearing from people that I know, from my 
constituents and from people that I’ve made connections with 
through my critic duties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot of people that are really, really upset about this 
budget. I think we’ve all seen the news cycle over the last few 
hours and we understand how this budget is starting to trickle 
down into people’s consciousness and they’re becoming very 
aware of the serious impact of this budget on them. 
 
And first of all I just want to talk a little bit about what some of 
our leaders in the province are saying about this budget. So first 
and foremost we have the mayors. We have the mayor of 
Saskatoon and the mayor of Regina who’ve weighed in on the 
serious impacts that this budget has caused for them. 
 
For example, we have a quote from Saskatoon mayor Charlie 
Clark, and here’s his quote: “We had no idea this was coming 
and it’s a huge financial impact. It’s unprecedented for the city 
to take a one-time hit like this.” 
 
Now in terms of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the nature of the point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — [Inaudible] . . . long tradition in this 
House that members know that they are not supposed to 
comment on the Speaker’s ruling. The member from Nutana 
commented on an act of courage of her leader being asked to 
leave this Assembly and being named. Mr. Speaker, I would see 
that as commenting on the Speaker’s ruling in the general 
public and I would encourage you to review Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll give the opportunity to the Opposition 
House Leader to make comment on the point of order. 
 
I recognize the member from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
apologize for my error in that rule, so apologize to the House. 
I’ll carry on with my comments, if I can, or do you have 
anything else to say? No? Okay. Then I’ll just carry on with my 
comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the mayor of Saskatoon weighing in on this budget. 
And I mean these are important issues that are facing the city, 
facing the city of Regina, facing all the urban centres, but this 
one small item that they slid into the budget where SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy are now being allowed to not pay taxes or 
grants in lieu of taxes for the property that they occupy within 
urban areas — well within the whole province for sure — Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a $23 million hit on urban municipalities and 
rural municipalities. I think in particular though, we know of 
the $23 million hit, more than half of that goes to our two major 
cities, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s one thing for the government to make these kinds of 
changes when they consult in advance with urban 
municipalities to find out how it’s going to impact their 
budgeting and how it’s going to impact their planning. But to 
throw this at them on budget day without any forewarning, Mr. 
Speaker, has put both of our major cities in Saskatchewan in a 
very, very difficult situation. So that’s the kind of 
irresponsibility that our leader was talking about earlier, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the kind of callous disregard for the impacts of this 
budget on the people that are the leaders in our province and the 
cities that are a large part of our economic engine and a large 
part of the fabric of our province. 
 
We have Regina Mayor Michael Fougere who also talked about 
this. And one of the quotes he gave in terms of the budget was 
that “You peel back the onion and you see other things . . . We 
have some significant issues to deal with.” 
 
And of course we know that Regina is impacted similarly with 
this removal of this grant that the cities rely on for property 
taxes. These utilities use this property as much as any other 
person uses property. Residential people use property. 
Businesses use property. And here we have our Crown 
corporations now no longer participating in that property tax 
scheme by being allowed to not be required to pay these 
grants-in-lieu. 
 
We have the Meewasin Valley Authority CEO [chief executive 
officer], Lloyd Isaak, weighing in on this. What did Mr. Isaak 
say? He said this is a “very difficult day” for Meewasin. “A 
$409,000 hit to our budget is a very substantial cut.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know we’ve had these discussions in 
this House before. We know that the province is a tripartite 
member of a three-part team that recognizes the value of the 
Meewasin Valley Authority for the people, foremost of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatoon. This is an 
ecological jewel. This is a park that provides a lot of service for 
the people that come to visit, but it’s also a very important 
ecological waterway. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And the work that the Meewasin does to protect the ecological 
value is being callously disregarded with this cut and this 
failure on the part of this government to accept their 
responsibilities for the importance of this particular valley 
authority. It’s an internationally recognized, highly achieving 
valley authority, Mr. Speaker, that’s seen as a model across the 
world. But the callous disregard that we see from this 
government is one that I think they will regret unless they 
finally realize that they have some responsibilities here and act 
accordingly. 
 
It’s interesting hearing from Vice-President Marilyn 
Braun-Pollon of the prairie and agri-business section of the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business. And her quote is 
this; I’ll share this with the Assembly: “It is brutal from a small 
business perspective . . .” 
 
And I’m just going to stop at this point, Mr. Speaker, and share 
with you some comments that I got this morning from one of 
my constituents who runs a business in Saskatoon in relation to 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

furnaces and air conditioning systems and the like. He is so 
upset, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure I can actually articulate well 
enough the concern that he has about the changes to the PST 
when it comes to construction. He has all kinds of quotes. I 
tried to write them down as best I could. 
 
But one of the things that really struck me that he said is “This 
change to the exemptions for the PST will put a zipper on the 
wallets of the public.” And I don’t think that he could be more 
. . . that he couldn’t capture it any better, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
shutter on the construction industry in Saskatoon and I believe 
across the province. 
 
He says, further to that, he says, “My business is going to be 
hammered.” He knows that business is going to fall off 
significantly because of this decision, because homeowners . . . 
because renos, people doing new furnaces and new air 
conditioning units or any other kind of home renos are going to 
have to think hard and seriously about paying 6 per cent extra 
on top of what they’ve already budgeted for these. 
 
He says a few years ago when there was a grant for 
homeowners to improve their furnaces and their heating 
systems in their homes, after that grant was removed he said 
there was a two- to three-month shockwave that went through 
his entire industry, and that there was some months during that 
time when he would only be working one or one and a half days 
because of the impact of that program. He says the impacts on 
this program are going to be considerable. 
 
He says, and this is a quote, “This will drive business 
underground.” This is going to drive the underground cash 
economy, Mr. Speaker, in ways that this government has not 
even contemplated. And in his view it is also going to endanger 
public safety. 
 
And these guys never thought about any of that. This is going to 
endanger public safety. We’re going to see the inspection side 
plummet because people are going to be doing this outside of 
the normal regulatory scheme. We’re going to see a fall in the 
number of permits. And we’re going to see people’s lives being 
put at risk because they’re being driven to the underground 
economy to do these kinds of repairs to their homes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is what he has to say about this government. He says, “To 
call yourself a business-friendly government and have no 
concept of how a business runs [he says] is shocking. Because 
[he says] this government has no idea how the collection of PST 
works.” 
 
In fact, he says he sometimes thinks that businesses in 
Saskatchewan are nothing more than a capture system for 
taxation because the burden is on the business owner to do the 
capture of the taxes. The burden is on the business owner to 
make sure that those taxes are forwarded to the government. 
And we also see this government removing any commissions 
for the collection of this tax so business people not only have to 
do the collection. They not only have to remit those taxes to the 
government. They’re doing that for free, Mr. Speaker, on their 
own time. 
 
He says this is going to create a vacuum in the construction 

industry. It’s going to elevate costs for everyone associated with 
it, he said, and on the administrative side alone it’s ill 
conceived. He said nobody knows what is going on. He says 
home builders . . . He’s called the home builders’ association; 
they don’t know what’s going on. He’s called Finance. He can’t 
get an answer from the Ministry of Finance. He’s called the 
contractors’ association. No one has any information on how 
the heck this is supposed to work come April 1st when he is 
supposed to start charging PST on his contracts, and then at the 
same time, how he’s supposed to not pay PST when he goes to 
Home Depot to pick up a valve clip. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, the thoughtlessness with which this is 
being imposed is going to cause extreme hardship, just the 
process itself, let alone the serious impact it’s going to have on 
independent businesses here in the province. 
 
So that’s just some of his comments. I didn’t capture them all 
unfortunately. But I do want to share some comments that I’ve 
heard from other people, and I will take to Facebook for a 
couple of comments that I do want to share, Mr. Speaker. This 
is from a woman that lives in the Rosetown, Shellbrook riding. 
I’m just going to pull up her quote, Mr. Speaker. She has a rural 
perspective, I think, that’s worth sharing with the Assembly in 
terms of the impact of this on rural folks. Too many comments 
afterwards, lots of comments. I know, it’s hard to keep up. I had 
it queued up, but then it bumped it down, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
too many people . . . Oh boy, there’s another good one. I’m just 
going to look up her name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this person lives in the rural areas. She is a public worker, 
public service, or works for the public service . . . Here we are, 
yesterday’s provincial budget, I’ll just put this into the record: 
 

Yesterday’s provincial budget was disheartening. Yes, as a 
rural resident this budget will negatively affect my family. 
Yes, as a public sector worker I’m expected to have my 
wage cut by almost two week’s pay even though it isn’t a 
high wage to begin with and I generally put in about an 
extra 25 per cent volunteer hours a week for my job 
already. Yes, as a librarian I realize there was a direct 
attack on Saskatchewan libraries with no understanding 
about the valuable role libraries play in communities across 
this province. We are much more than books. Yes, as a 
resident of the province. I will now have to pay more taxes. 
 
Yet it is not for myself I am disheartened. Today I can’t 
help but worry about the province’s elderly, the people 
who will need health care, workers whose pay will be cut 
but don’t have a second income in their home to help meet 
their basic needs, students, victims of domestic violence, 
who weren’t even given a thought although Saskatchewan 
leads the country in this area. 
 
People who rely on STC. It wasn’t that long ago that I did. 
And because of where I live, all the rural residents who are 
expected to do more with less. Things only happen in rural 
communities because of dedicated volunteers who 
generally volunteer for many things. These folks are 
already over-burdened. 
 
The government likes to talk about keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. They do not seem to realize that a community’s real 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

strength comes from its people being healthy, educated, 
and respected. 

 
That’s a powerful statement, Mr. Speaker. And these are the 
kinds of things I’m hearing from people that I’m connected to. 
Here’s another email that I got this morning, a couple of 
observations on the budget from a rural perspective: 
 

This government fought against a carbon tax because it 
would make farmers uncompetitive. The option existed to 
refund carbon taxes to export industries through gross 
margin triggers or other means which would have 
maintained the effectiveness for the environment while 
leaving our agriculture sector whole. How is it better to put 
on a gas tax for farmers and get no recognition now under 
the federal expectations? 

 
Good question, Mr. Speaker. This individual goes on to say: 
 

STC was the only courier company who could deliver parts 
and other packages to our farm community, as couriers do 
not have rural depots and do not deliver to post office 
boxes. How is rural Saskatchewan to receive the excellent 
parcel service in the future? Is Saskatchewan the only 
jurisdiction in the world to completely eliminate public 
transit in a time period where we are rapidly learning the 
importance of CO2 emissions and damaging the 
environment for our children and grandchildren? 

 
His third point: 
 

Does this government really think that consultations with 
cattle producers on the future of community pastures is 
best done during calving and seeding? This is a 
government which claims to have rural roots. Have they 
forgotten the seasonal load of mixed farmers involved in 
our pasture programs? Have they been in office that long? 

 
Mr. Speaker, those again are some very powerful comments 
that I think reflect the feeling of people in the rural areas. This 
is another email I got this morning from . . . Oh, I think it was a 
text. Sorry, there’s too many social medias going on here. This 
is an email from somebody who was talking about the ending of 
the Saskatchewan pasture program, and he was saying his 
opinion is why are they cancelling this program. And this is 
what this individual says: 
 

The same reason PFRA pasture program was cancelled. It 
did not fit with the conservative political philosophy that 
private ownership would lead to the best and highest use of 
that land — financial use, that is. A narrow perspective that 
ignored actual data that lands were already revenue neutral 
or sometimes revenue generating and not a cost. A narrow 
perspective that also ignored values to society other than 
money like nature appreciation, carbon sequestration, 
watershed protection, wildlife habitat, etc. Narrow and 
short-sighted perspective. Like the PFRA lands, these were 
already once in private hands decades ago, and ended up 
coming back into public hands because of major market 
failures, tax arrears, and land abandonment. 
 
Stupidity is being repeated by doing the same thing again 
and expecting a different result. In the short term a small 

number of investors will make money reselling the land 
when times are good. In the long term it will cost the 
taxpayers greatly when market failures require public 
funds to rescue the new owners. Stupid. Did I mention it 
was stupid? 

 
So that was from Facebook as well, Mr. Speaker. And I do have 
someone from Meadow Lake who has weighed in on the library 
issue. His wife is a librarian here in Saskatchewan, and I just 
want to find his email. Here it is. This is what he sent in to CBC 
Radio today for Blue Sky, but he was wanting to share it with 
me as well. And this is what he said: 
 

In the time of tough economics where the stated aim of the 
government is to get people working, slashing the 
provincial libraries has got to be the most 
counterproductive move imaginable. 
 
Many listeners may not realize the extent of services that 
libraries provide. For people who are struggling to find 
employment, to further their education, to improve their 
literacy skills, and to access the many services that are now 
exclusively web-based, the local library is an irreplaceable 
and essential resource. 
 
The government will save several million dollars by 
cutting our libraries off at the knees. This amount of 
money is but a drop in the budgetary bucket, and the 
savings will not make a noticeable dent in the deficit. 
However the harm done to the public by the loss of our 
libraries will be unforgiveable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also heard from seniors in my office. They 
are very worried about the cuts and fearful about what it means 
for them. 
 
So those are just some of the comments I’ve received generally, 
so far, in the last few hours from folks that are concerned. I 
know that there are other people who have weighed in. 
Obviously the Western Canada for restaurants have weighed in 
on this. The quote there is, “The government has decided to kill 
food tax fairness.” So our restaurant business is going to be 
severely hit. 
 
Universities. We have University of Regina President Vianne 
Timmons saying: 
 

It’s a huge number. It’s millions and millions of dollars. 
So it will mean that we will lose positions — absolutely, 
there will be positions lost. Services for students 
potentially lost. We will have to look at everything we do. 
It will be a tough, tough year for us, and tough to manage 
this. 

 
From University of Saskatchewan President Peter Stoicheff, he 
said, “I can’t side step the fact that a minus five [per cent in 
funding] is probably the largest single budget cut we’ve ever 
had in our history,” Mr. Speaker. And we’ve certainly had 
tough times in this province’s history, so it’s interesting that he 
would single that out. 
 
Pat Maze, president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
says, “We’re already at bare bones. There’s no way to escape it. 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

There will be cuts in the classroom.” 
 
And then of course, this STC customers like Cara Severson 
says, “You guys don’t know what you’re doing to small 
communities. Think about the little people.” 
 
And finally from the poorest of the poor, the Friendship Inn, we 
have the executive director of Saskatoon’s Friendship Inn, 
Sandra Stack saying, “Your life on Earth is fragile and now to 
say that your life afterwards is not worthy of anything, not even 
worthy of a funeral service, that’s not very fair.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more quotes for sure. I guess one more to 
share is from Peter Gilmer who’s an advocate for the Regina 
Anti-Poverty Ministry, a powerful advocate for poverty folk, 
people hurt by poverty here in Saskatchewan. And this is what 
he said, “They are going to hurt lower- and middle-income 
people the most and that is not the route they should be looking 
at in terms of revenue generation.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that others want to speak to the budget 
as well, but I think we need to take a close look at the motion 
that was tabled yesterday. This budget does not serve the people 
of Saskatchewan. This budget does not meet the requirements 
of decency and fairness. This budget is, as our leader has said, 
it’s a deficit, not only in money, but it’s also a deficit in 
decency. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And so I’m going to move the following motion, and it will be 
seconded by my colleague. The motion reads this: 
 

That all words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be added: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget of 
broken promises, callous cuts, and tax hikes that makes 
Saskatchewan families pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll take the motion as read. The member 
from Saskatoon Nutana has moved an amended motion. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 
into the budget speech this year, and I first want to thank my 
colleague, the Finance critic from Saskatoon Nutana, for 
outstanding job and providing the analysis and standing up, 
standing up. It’s not easy when you have to speak really truth to 
power and saying, this is not right. This is not right. And she 
has done an incredible job and will do in the days ahead. 
 
I want to thank our leader for doing the same, relentlessly 
speaking what’s right and calling out the government for their 
deficiencies in what they have said to the people of 
Saskatchewan on one hand, and then on the other hand 
changing their tune. And we wonder why, we wonder why, and 
we’ll talk a lot about that, like who is actually paying the tune. 
 

I also want to thank our staff, and I want to thank our public 
servants right across government for this very difficult time. 
They’re preparing a budget. They’re working in their ministries, 
and they all know that the shoe . . . something was going to be 
happening yesterday. And of course they do that in a 
professional way because, in the end of the day, they’re 
working for the people of Saskatchewan, and they do a very 
good job of that. 
 
And even if it means like in the case of the cleaners in our 
buildings here, they will clean until the end of June. They will 
do the job that they’ve always done. They will do it as 
professionally as they can even though they have a hard time, I 
imagine, with the reality of what’s going to be happening with 
their positions. Whether it’s the cleaners, people at STC, they 
have done such an incredible job and will. And I just want to 
say, and I think all the members on this side of the House will 
say a big thank you to them. 
 
On the other hand, you have a government on the other side 
who does not act that way, does not act at all like that, has 
forgotten who they’re working for. And we have some real 
concerns about that, real concerns because it becomes clearer, 
clearer every day . . . And you know, yesterday was the best day 
of budget because they get to put the spin. They get to put the 
numbers in the best light possible. But as it starts to roll out and 
starts to unravel, starts to unravel, and the numbers start to add 
up. We start to understand how bad this budget is, what terrible 
managers they are of provincial resources in the economy here, 
in terms of the provincial government. And so we have some 
grave, grave concerns. 
 
And I am very proud and honoured to second the motion that 
our Finance critic, the member from Nutana, has put forward. 
But I do want to talk about some of the things that they have put 
forward, and we have some grave concerns, you know. And 
right off the bat, as I said, we talk about who is paying the tune. 
Who is paying the tune? 
 
This is the government here that just has dug in their heels 
about updating, modernizing our political donations laws. We 
see it right across Canada, even in the, you know what some 
people call it, the wild west of BC [British Columbia]. And I 
think Saskatchewan should be included in that. We see the 
Premier, Christy Clark, even willing to say maybe we need to 
take another look at this. 
 
Maybe we need to take a look at big business and union 
contributions to our political parties because we have to make 
sure — and if there’s ever an example today, it’s clearly our 
budget — whose priorities are they really working for? We see 
that the tax cut, they’d like to say it’s for everyone, for 
everyone. But we know the top bracket, the top bracket is worth 
$38 million. And I just want to put that, as you say, put a pin in 
it: remember $38 million we’re giving to the top tax bracket, 
and why? And why are we doing that? Why are we doing that? 
 
When we think about some of the cuts this government has 
made that don’t even come close to that $38 million annually, 
annually, we can talk about STC that the government, the 
Premier paints in the worst possible position of some 85 to now 
today we hear it’s 100 million. Tomorrow, on Monday, we’ll 
probably hear it’s 120 million. They keep adding this up, and 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

the spend gets more and more. But if you do that, that’s maybe 
$17 million a year, we understand, and a better number 
probably is 11 or $12 million a year. So you compare that $38 
million tax cut to the top bracket to $11 million for keeping 
STC going, where are your priorities? Where are your 
priorities? 
 
And I’ll keep referring to that. I’ll keep referring to that because 
throughout this you really do have to say — and they will say 
and the Minister of Finance will say — these are tough choices. 
These are really difficult. It’s about your priorities. It’s about 
your priorities, and who you’re giving the tax breaks to and 
why. We have some real questions about that. 
 
So the Sask Party is making Saskatchewan families pay for the 
government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. And truly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve seen over the years, where we’ve 
talked about the smart meters, whether we can talk about CCS 
[carbon capture and storage] or bypass or the GTH, the list is 
long. The list is long and it’s real. 
 
And it’s real, and I know, you know, the member from Moose 
Jaw likes to deny all of that. But it’s long and it’s true — 
skyrocketing debt, massive tax hikes. And here we have, it is 
massive tax hikes. You saw on the cover of the Leader-Post and 
the StarPhoenix, yes, the tax hikes that are happening. And the 
cuts and lack of strategic investments leave too many behind in 
our province and does nothing, nothing to build hope in this 
future. 
 
And I want to say, and I think this says it all, as my colleague 
from Nutana says, “Every page of this budget . . .” And I quote 
her: “Every page of this budget shows another broken promise, 
a tax hike, or a cut to Saskatchewan families trying to get 
ahead.” 
 
Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 40,000 people out 
of work, and I find it, I find it callous that this government here 
will get up and brag and brag. And last Thursday they were 
busy congratulating themselves, patting themselves on the back, 
on job creation numbers. 
 
We are happy for everybody who has found a job in this 
province, no doubt about it. But there are too many people, too 
many people looking for work. And at the end they will say, 
well we’ve got more work to do. We’ve heard that for 10 long 
years — more work to do. Well when will you get down to 
work and do your job? When will you get down to work and do 
your job? There’s more people looking for work today than 
when you took over as the government, and you know that to be 
true. They know that to be true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But what do they do instead is they pat themselves on the back 
and self-congratulate themselves and have a big laugh, have a 
big laugh. And the ministers in the front row will 
self-congratulate themselves about their numbers that they have 
spun and say, what a great job we have done. But that’s little 
cold comfort to people who are going to the food bank this 
afternoon and thinking about the increase in the PST and all of 
that, the cuts in the ABE, the adult basic education that’s been 
cut. It’s very cold comfort, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So they promised . . . This is what the Sask Party said. This is 

what they said to the people of Saskatchewan, that they would 
not raise taxes. And here they have. A billion dollars in tax 
increases and fee increases on the middle class and job creators, 
the people who make this province work. They’re raising taxes. 
They promised to pay down the debt. But now we know the 
debt will be over $18 billion — $18 billion. And I want to hear 
them talk about that number in their canned speeches when they 
get up to speak. Will they talk about that? It’s double 
Saskatchewan’s total debt from 2013. 
 
And again let’s remember what I put up there, $38 million tax 
cut to the wealthiest people in Saskatchewan. Thirty-eight 
million dollars, why? Why do we need to have that, Mr. 
Speaker? You know, this is a really important question. And 
we’ve added, of course, the PST up by a per cent and all of that, 
you know. 
 
I do want to say, you know, last year, last year we talked about 
the heritage, the language schools, and I presented many 
petitions about that and asked for a small increase of . . . 
actually that being reinstated. I think it was less than $200,000. 
It was a bit of a canary in the coal mine because we knew the 
other shoe was going to be dropped. This was the first thing that 
was going to come. But here you have such a . . . You know, 
really showed what was going to be happening. 
 
But here’s what Patrick Maze, the president of the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] says, “We are already at 
the bare bones. There’s no way to escape it. There will be cuts 
in the classroom.” This is what he’s saying because he’s in the 
classroom. He knows what’s going on. Now those folks over 
there are so far removed from reality here, they really don’t 
know what’s going on. That’s what’s going to be happening. 
And they can spin it. They can spin it, and they can shout all 
they want. They can shout all they want, but this is reality. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit as Labour critic. It’s important 
that I get on the record a little about labour. We are waiting for 
the Workers’ Comp report. We want to see that there’s actually 
action happening from there, especially around WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] where they had all these refunds, some 
over $400 million last year given back. But what do we see 
happening now? 
 
There are a couple of big issues out there that we need to see 
action. One is around post-traumatic stress disorder. We were 
very happy last year to see in the fall the government move at 
the behest of my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale to move 
on action on that. They said it was a new day over at WCB, that 
people would be looking at that, and the benefit of the doubt 
would be going to the workers. They would not have to go 
through the hoops that they once had to do. But we’ve seen 
little change, little change in that situation. We know of many 
cases where people are actually facing extreme mental health 
challenges, and this government promised changes to that. 
 
Here we have first responders, first responders, people who are 
putting themselves in the line of duty, in the face of danger, to 
help us — whether they’re firefighters or police or first 
responders — and this government needs to step up to the plate 
on PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder]. And we are looking 
for that. We’re looking for that. 
 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

The other area that we need to see movement on, and it was 
interesting because the member from Nutana, when she was 
reading Facebook comments, talked about this, and this is 
around domestic violence. Here we have . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Did the member from Moose Jaw want to chirp 
in on domestic violence? 
 
Oh. Okay, thank you. I think this is a very serious matter, Mr. 
Deputy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, now we have 
Martensville, Martensville wanting to chirp in on domestic 
violence. Oh come on, let’s hear what you have to say about 
that because I hear resounding silence over there on something 
that’s hugely important in our society. And we need to step up, 
and not one word in the budget, not one word in the budget. 
And Martensville pointing her finger to the Deputy Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I’m talking to members opposite, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is hugely important, hugely 
important. Not one word, not . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members to come 
. . . I’d ask the members to come to order. All members will 
have a chance to enter into the debate. Currently the member 
from Saskatoon Centre has the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a huge 
important issue, and we need to see leadership from this 
government, not just words. So we’re looking forward to that in 
the next days ahead. Not weeks or months, but days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is hugely ironical, the mess that we 
find ourselves . . . this government has created, that they’re 
expecting the cleaners, our cleaners, to clean it up. This is 
incredible. The cabinet will not take responsibility for the mess 
that they’ve created in 10 years, some of the best years that 
we’ve ever had in this province in terms of resource revenue 
windfalls. They were windfalls, but they treated them as if they 
were ordinary years and we should build our budgets on it. This 
is a mess that this government created, and they failed to take 
responsibility for that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s many pieces I want to speak to. One 
is STC, I think is a huge . . . plays a huge role here in 
Saskatchewan. We’re just starting to see the comments come in, 
talking about how important STC is to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, they chose. They chose. The members over there all 
voted in favour — they must have done it in caucus and cabinet 
— that they would rather have a $38 million cut to the top 1 per 
cent or the top bracket of income tax, 38 million . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . No, this is what it is: 38 million to the top 
bracket or cut STC. 
 
[12:00] 
 
They decided, and that was going to be between 11 million, in 
worst case 17 million. What did they choose to do? They chose 
to cut the income tax of the top bracket of income earners in 
Saskatchewan. Shame, shame on them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to speak about Meewasin, taking 

away the statutory funding for that. That is incredible. That is a 
big mistake from those folks over there. They know they have a 
huge role, just like they did in Moose Jaw and with the urban 
parks across Saskatchewan where they have a role to play, 
because in each one of those land areas there’s Crown land, and 
each one of those parks has a river running through it. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know that river, that water 
belongs to the province. Who is supposed to be the steward of 
that water? Of course it’s the province. And they’re stepping 
away from it, when we had the visionaries in the ’60s and ’70s 
saying, we’ve got to solve this problem. That’s our 
responsibility. We’ve got to do it through a partnership. We’re 
not going to do it through a charity model of maybe this year 
we’ll give them 500,000; maybe next year it’ll be 200,000; 
maybe it’ll be 700,000. No. 
 
Cutting the statutory funding is completely wrong, and they 
need to step up to the plate and accept their responsibility as 
stewards of the provincial waterways and of the Crown land 
that’s within the city of Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and the other 
areas. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about the library cuts, you know, 
and I’ve read the comments on Facebook. And it’s simply, who 
cuts libraries? Who cuts libraries? Really? Again, here is a 
situation. Remember the $38 million, the tax cuts to the top 
bracket versus cutting libraries. Really, really, is this what this 
is all about right now that we’ve come to? 
 
And the attack on young families, and we’ll go on that. And I 
want to just take a minute. I know my time is running short, but 
I am really looking forward to hearing my colleague speak 
about social services. But it’s near and dear to my heart because 
I’ve watched this over the last 10 years. And I want to talk 
about two particular areas in that. One is around the housing 
supplement that is this year scheduled to be, according to the 
book, $51.285 million, $51 million. Last year’s estimate was 
$37 million. That’s an increase of $14 million, almost over 30 
per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you were here 10 years ago when that 
program was launched. Do you remember how much it was 
then, in the 2007-8 budget? The folks over there? $5.6 million. 
It’s almost increased 10 times, 10 times — $51 million. Ten 
years ago it was $5.6 million. Now I want to be clear: don’t cut 
this program, very important program. But this really shows the 
lack of management of this government. 
 
We’ve called for analysis of who gets the $51 million. And I’ve 
said this story many times. They will say over there, well of 
course the tenant gets it. But we know the tenant 
instantaneously gives it to the landlord. Who are the landlords? 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I see, they say, that’s how it 
works. There you go. It’s all done. Who are the landlords who 
are getting $51 million? Have they ever asked the question? 
Maybe we should figure out who’s getting the $51 million. 
 
Now if you remember we talked at the beginning about who’s 
paying the tune over there. How many of these landlords have 
made donations? How many of these out-of-province . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know. I don’t know. I have 
said it outside and I’ve said it in committee, and I will say it 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

anywhere because these guys don’t know. They don’t know 
who’s getting the $51 million. 
 
Is it Boardwalk in Calgary who makes a nice donation to these 
folks? We don’t know because they don’t know. They don’t 
want to know. Who is getting the $51 million? And this is the 
kind of leadership we have from over there. And they say, say it 
outside. What am I going to say outside? They don’t know what 
they’re doing. Of course I’ll say that outside. You don’t know 
what you’re doing. You don’t know what you’re doing. That’s 
quite simply the state of affairs for that side of the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other one that I want to talk about is child care parent 
subsidies. In 2008, 2007-2008, there was $16 million set aside 
for that. The actual spending was pretty close, 15.9, the actual 
spending. But what do they have planned this year for child 
care parent subsidies? I look down here, 12.9. They’re 
eliminating $3 million from child care parent subsidies. Now 
we didn’t hear about that yesterday, did we? You know, they’re 
not talking about that, helping young families, because there’s 
less subsidies — $3 million off of $16 million. That’s a huge 
cut. That’s a huge cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions about this budget, 
and we start to see it unravel as we pore through this more and 
more, but here are just two examples, two examples within 
social services. But the most, I think, the most appalling — but 
it is the most indicative of the people over there — to lift a 
million dollars from funeral expenses for people on social 
services. Nobody wants to be on social assistance, and if you 
have to die in poverty, how sad is that? That is incredibly sad. If 
you’re dying and you’re . . . And here it is. Four hundred 
funerals that they won’t pay for, for a cost of a million dollars. 
 
But again remember that $38 million they’ve voted for, for the 
top bracket, $38 million, not even close to a million dollars. But 
this is the kind of mean, vindictive people that are running our 
government on that side who refuse to take any responsibility 
for the state of affairs. But not to pay for funeral expenses, how 
cold is that? It almost looks like out of a Dickens book, doesn’t 
it? Have we got to that? Have we got to that in Saskatchewan, 
you know? A million dollars, but we’re cutting taxes for the 
richest, the very richest in the province. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my honour to second the 
motion of the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my honour 
and my pleasure to rise and profess my unqualified support for 
the motion now before the Assembly, a motion which 
recognizes the efforts of the Minister of Finance and the many 
officials who have played a part in crafting such a sound plan 
that we now see before us. 
 
Before I continue, Mr. Speaker, I hope you’ll indulge me as I 
make a few more personal remarks. I’ll begin where I should, 
by thanking my wife Candace and my daughter Emma. Without 
their unqualified support and daily efforts, I would not be here. 

I’d also like to thank publicly my father Lorne for keeping 
things running smoothly at the farm. Mr. Speaker, without the 
unconditional support of our families, none of us who have the 
privilege to serve in this House would be able to be here. 
 
More broadly, I’d like to once again thank the good people of 
Moosomin constituency. They have put their faith in me and I 
vow to repay that debt with my service and loyalty. Mr. 
Speaker, Moosomin is a great example of the new vibrant, 
dynamic, and growing Saskatchewan. Even with the current 
downturn in resource revenue, Moosomin is moving forward. In 
my constituency you will see mine expansion by PCS [Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.], new crop input facilities, 
world-class manufacturing, a proposed new potash solution 
mine on the horizon, and the promise of a strengthening oil 
sector. All of this activity is welcomed and the sign of a bright 
future. 
 
However, none of this economic activity replaces or supersedes 
the backbone of Moosomin constituency, which is agriculture. 
What you see today in my constituency is the product of what 
happens when innovation and entrepreneurship are allowed to 
thrive. Activities in Moosomin today lend proof to the 
time-honoured proposition that government does best when it 
gets out of the way. Government does best when it supports 
innovation and promotes opportunity, instead of stifling that 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carl von Clausewitz came from the land of my 
ancestors. He was a Prussian military officer in the early 1800s. 
He was a military tactician, a political theorist, and a noted 
author. Most importantly, he was a profound realist. Clausewitz 
wrote about the qualities of mind needed to emerge unscathed 
from the unforeseen circumstances that life might throw at us. 
This has been a topic that has been on the minds of many in our 
province given recent events. 
 
The first quality of mind needed, Clausewitz said, was intellect. 
He writes, “. . . even in the darkest hour, [that the mind] retains 
some glimmerings of the inner light which leads to truth.” The 
second quality needed, said Clausewitz, was courage, courage 
to follow that light wherever it may lead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House we saw something 
extremely rare. We saw both of these qualities, intellect and 
courage, intertwined in working simultaneously for the 
betterment of the people of our province. 
 
Yesterday my friend and colleague, the Minister of Finance, 
looked the Saskatchewan citizens squarely in the eye. The 
minister presented a complete, frank, and transparent account of 
the economic conditions in our province. And while some chose 
to focus on the considerable challenges that lie ahead, the 
minister wisely focused on the tremendous accomplishments 
that have taken place since 2007 and his confidence in the 
future. 
 
Saskatchewan has emerged as a have province, a province so 
alive with opportunity that our children are no longer forced to 
leave to find a job. It’s an economy where people are 
encouraged to work hard and allowed to retain more of the 
fruits of their labour. It’s an economy that lies in stark contrast 
to the NDP years where the people of Saskatchewan wandered 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

in the margins. We have gone from economic wilderness to the 
centre of action. 
 
None of this diminishes the cold, hard reality that resource 
revenues have fallen by more than a billion dollars a year. To 
put this in unadorned and stark language, in the fiscal year of 
2008-2009, non-renewable resource income made up about a 
third of the total revenues or 32 per cent. This budget year, 
resource revenue is lower than we’ve ever seen it before at 10 
per cent of total. This billion dollar shortfall has depleted the 
rainy day fund. And while there are promising signs of recovery 
on the horizon, it may take us a bit longer than expected before 
the government revenues also begin to rise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is where our government and our Minister of 
Finance are demonstrating true leadership. He could’ve chosen 
a path demonstrated a few short days ago by our neighbouring 
province to the west. Our Minister of Finance could’ve chosen 
to ignore this problem and allow the deficit to grow endlessly, 
but that’s not leadership. That’s not following the glimmer of 
light that leads to the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some governments don’t seem capable of making 
difficult choices, perhaps it’s indifference. It might be lack of 
discipline or the feeling that someone else will deal with these 
important challenges down the road. But again, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not leadership. That’s not the way we deal with things in 
the new Saskatchewan. We do what our Minister of Finance has 
done. We look the people of Saskatchewan squarely in the eye 
and outline a plan that’s fair and transparent. We outline a plan 
that is measured and effective. We outline a plan that is 
responsible and fiscally prudent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the plan we saw yesterday in the budget. 
The deficit of this year, Mr. Speaker, is forecast to be $685 
million. It will decrease in 2018-2019 to a deficit of $304 
million. Saskatchewan’s budget will come into balance in the 
following fiscal year with a small surplus. We will continue to 
be in surplus from that point. 
 
Saskatchewan’s fiscal plan will follow that glimmer of light to 
the truth. This budget has given the Saskatchewan people the 
truth. It has also given them a plan to meet our challenges. This 
budget is a plan with a clear road map to returning to balance. 
This plan outlined in the budget, Mr. Speaker, is not business as 
usual. It is a blueprint for change. It will move Saskatchewan 
from a jurisdiction with a heavy reliance on resource revenue to 
a system that is more predictable, more reliable, and more able 
to encourage growth and opportunity. This is a profound 
structural shift, a shift born of necessity, but one produced by 
intellect and courage. This is the challenge, Mr. Speaker, that 
the minister has presented to the people of Saskatchewan. This 
is the challenge that he knows we have the will and the fortitude 
to meet and surpass. 
 
And the plan presented in this budget is one that doesn’t 
undermine the programs, services, and infrastructure that the 
people of Saskatchewan have worked hard for and which they 
value. It’s a plan which controls and reduces spending in a 
measured and reasonable way while being responsive to the 
needs of Saskatchewan’s people. It’s a plan, Mr. Speaker, that 
restructures and modernizes our tax base and ensures that our 
economy remains strong. It’s a plan that for the first time has a 

built-in contingency of $300 million. It’s responsible and 
prudent to plan for the unexpected. It’s a plan that provides our 
province with revenue stability. It’s a plan with a clear end goal 
— a balanced budget. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy may have some challenges, Mr. 
Speaker, but the diversity that our government has built into the 
system continues to shield us from some of the worst impacts of 
the resource downturn. Mr. Speaker, we don’t deny that this 
shortfall has occurred. We don’t deny that something has to be 
done with it. But again our diversity will make the job of 
meeting the challenge more possible and less painful. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Take Alberta, for instance. The province of Alberta relies on oil 
and gas production for over one quarter or 26.2 per cent of their 
budget. In Newfoundland and Labrador, they expect it to cover 
18.1 per cent of revenue. In Saskatchewan, we have the lowest 
dependence on oil and gas production, expecting it to only 
make up 14.9 per cent of our revenues. And one of the drivers 
of this diversity, Mr. Speaker, is our continuing growth in 
exports. 
 
For this, Mr. Speaker, we can justifiably honour and give thanks 
to the efforts of the Premier of Saskatchewan — his trips to 
Japan, his trips to China, his trips to the Philippines and 
Singapore. With enthusiasm and relentless energy, our Premier 
has gone around the world telling the Saskatchewan story. He 
has with his presence demonstrated Saskatchewan’s desire to 
become a major international player. He has profiled 
Saskatchewan as a supplier of high-quality food, fertilizer, and 
reliable energy. The Premier’s efforts lie in stark contrast to the 
years of NDP indifference to the world outside our borders. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s efforts have made a substantial 
difference as demonstrated by these numbers. In the last 10 
years, oil production is up 34 per cent. Uranium is up 99 per 
cent. Wheat is up 141 per cent; potash production up 153 per 
cent; peas up 217 per cent. And it gets better, Mr. Speaker — 
canola up 467 per cent; canola oil up 864 per cent; and lentils. 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years, the production of 
Saskatchewan lentils is up 992 per cent. Saskatchewan now 
supplies 90 per cent of the lentils and 60 per cent of the peas 
being prepared in the kitchens of India, the second-most 
populous country in the world. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if you have a bowl of Cheerios for 
breakfast, you’re likely eating Saskatchewan oats. If you spend 
your vacation in Seattle, Washington and decide to take in a 
Mariners baseball game, have a hot dog. They’re supplied by a 
Saskatchewan company. Don’t forget the mustard. It was likely 
made with Saskatchewan mustard seed. If you’re lucky enough 
to visit China, don’t forget to stop at Shanghai Disneyland. 
Cookies there are made with Saskatchewan flax. 
 
There are now more than 300 food companies operating in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, generating more than $4 billion in 
revenues and employing around 5,000 people. For all of this 
abundance, Mr. Speaker, we can thank the hard-working farm 
families of Saskatchewan. We could also thank the tireless 
efforts of our Premier who has made our province a force to be 
reckoned with in the international food markets. 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

We are also leading the nation in manufacturing sales, Mr. 
Speaker. The latest numbers say that these sales have increased 
12.2 per cent over last year, and that’s nearly six times the 
national average. 
 
The diversity that has been built into the Saskatchewan 
economy has helped, at least in part, to cushion the blow in the 
drop in renewable resource revenue. I cringe to think of what 
would have happened if this challenge had been faced in our 
province during the dark, dreary days of the NDP. 
 
Farm equipment manufacturing is another major contributor to 
the diversity and prosperity of the Saskatchewan economy. Mr. 
Speaker, Morris manufacturing in Saskatoon and Yorkton, 
Bourgault Industries in St. Brieux, SeedMaster, Emerald Park, 
Brandt Industries in Regina are just a few examples of our 
burgeoning farm implement manufacturing sector. 
 
In my travels opening markets and working with businesses in 
Europe and Asia before I entered this House, Mr. Speaker, it 
always gave me a thrill to see farm implements that were made 
right here in Saskatchewan, like Seed Hawk made in Langbank 
in Moosomin constituency, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
products made by Saskatchewan people with Saskatchewan 
know-how and innovation. 
 
The success of our farm implement sector and other 
Saskatchewan manufacturing enterprises is due in no little part 
to our province’s competitive manufacturing and processing tax 
which will now be, as a result of this budget, the lowest in 
Canada. This means more jobs created, an increased tax base, 
and more opportunities to get Saskatchewan products and ideas 
to the world. 
 
We will be and continue to be the most competitive jurisdiction 
in Canada for manufacturing and processing sectors. These 
incentives just add to the focal points of diversity our 
government has built into our economy over the past decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan. This is a province full of 
hard-working, ambitious, and inventive people. All they ever 
needed was the proper encouragement. All they ever needed 
was a few building blocks to allow them to get on with the job, 
unburdened with unnecessary administrative interference. These 
are the people who have helped us build a system that will 
ensure Saskatchewan will meet the challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building on other strengths in our province 
as well. Even in these challenging times, we are still creating 
jobs. In the month of February, Stats Canada is telling us that 
there were 15,300 jobs created in all of Canada. Can you guess 
how many of these jobs were created in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? If I said over half, you’d likely think I was kidding, 
but the numbers don’t lie. There it is, in black and white: 8,000 
new jobs in Saskatchewan in February. More than half of the 
new jobs in Canada in the month of February, Mr. Speaker, 
were created right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December we hit another milestone. For the 
first time in Saskatchewan history, the average weekly wage hit 
and went over $1,000. Plus more of that money will stay with 
the wage earner, given our personal income tax regime which is 
the most competitive in the country. 

Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan was recently 
named the best place in Canada, and the fourth-best place in the 
world to invest in petroleum exploration, and the best place in 
the world to invest in mining? In Canada, we led oil exploration 
and activity in 2016, and we’re well on our way to continuing 
that trend in 2017. Calgary-based Crescent Point Energy has 
decided to put its faith in Saskatchewan to a tune of 80 per cent 
of its budget, fully $1.16 billion this year. 
 
And before I fail to mention it, Mr. Speaker, we are steadfastly 
opposed to a federally mandated carbon tax. And it points to 
another area that demonstrates the strength and vitality of our 
province which will help us meet the challenges coming our 
way. 
 
For 10 years now, Mr. Speaker, in every quarter of every year 
of the last decade, Saskatchewan’s population has grown. This 
hasn’t benefited cities alone. Every municipality in our province 
has shared in this unprecedented growth. Cities, towns, villages, 
rural municipalities have all shown population increases. We 
are now home to nearly 163,000 more new residents. That 
would be like adding five Moose Jaws to our population, 10 
Yorktons, or, Mr. Speaker, 47 Moosomins . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Exactly. Roughly 60,000 of these new residents 
are in our Saskatchewan workforce . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . It is. More than we need. 
 
Given all this, Mr. Speaker, you would expect to hear some 
optimism from the members opposite. You’d expect to hear at 
least some grudging respect for the significant accomplishments 
we’ve made since 2007. Strangely, that never happens. I find it 
odd, Mr. Speaker. I find it odd that members opposite would 
have such a limited recollection of recent events. Lost in the 
mists of time is the fact that 20 years ago Saskatchewan was 
paying over a billion dollars annually in interest payments on 
debt, NDP operating debt, Mr. Speaker. It’s an interesting case 
of politically selective amnesia. 
 
I find it hard to believe our province could even bear those large 
debt financing repayments. Hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the anemic NDP economy at that time. It was far 
less robust and diversified than the economy we see today, far 
less robust . . . and the growing concern that was fashioned by 
our citizens in our province during our years in government. 
Mr. Speaker, our government paid down the operating debt by a 
third — $2.2 billion, a fact never mentioned by the members 
opposite. Forgotten by the NDP is the reduction in the interest 
burden carried by the people of Saskatchewan. That debt 
payment burden has dropped from over a billion dollars 
annually under the NDP to $292 million now. That’s less than a 
third of what it was when that party was in power. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a AAA credit 
rating. And today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 
second-lowest debt-to-GDP ratio in Canada. Despite the 
challenges we now face, our government has continued to 
provide tax relief to the people of Saskatchewan: $6 billion in 
total. Our government has invested $20 billion in infrastructure 
improvements, which I will talk about later. 
 
And before we have to listen to the NDP’s predictions of doom 
and gloom, Mr. Speaker, before we cast our eyes upward to 
beware of the falling sky, before all of that, Mr. Speaker, let’s 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

remember that right here in Saskatchewan in 2017, 
Saskatchewan individuals and families will continue to benefit 
from the growing economy our party has helped create. 
 
If we look, for example, Mr. Speaker, at the city of Regina, if 
we look across all income levels, we find that our provincial 
taxes compare very favourably with the rest of Canada. 
Saskatchewan’s provincial tax is either second or third lowest 
of the 10 cities surveyed in all of Canada. The second or third 
lowest, Mr. Speaker, and when you factor in utilities we’re still 
second or third lowest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more I look at the budget document, the more 
I feel this budget is a model of Saskatchewan values. In my 
youth, growing up on a farm in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I, 
like most farm boys, had chores to do before and after school. 
My parents never hesitated to remind their children that the 
food on our table was there in large part due to the calluses on 
our hands. It was under their guidance that I learned my first 
lessons in responsibility. 
 
Responsibility, Mr. Speaker, it’s a core Saskatchewan value. 
And our government is taking responsibility for the challenge 
that we have to meet — not next decade, not next year, but right 
now. And we’re asking the people of Saskatchewan to bear 
some of that responsibility. 
 
This budget will do this by shifting from a dependence on 
resource revenues to more emphasis on taxing consumption. 
The variety of changes in that area of taxation will be largely 
offset by lowering personal and business income tax rates and 
introducing new-growth tax incentives such as I pointed out, the 
lowest manufacturing and processing tax rate in Canada. 
 
It’s important to note that if you take income tax paid by 
Saskatchewan individuals and families and add it to the amount 
of the increase to the PST, the total tax of individuals and 
families will still be less than it was in 2007 under the NDP. 
And our government will not ask others to do what they 
wouldn’t do themselves. We would never ask the public sector 
to take a 3.5 per cent decrease in wages if we weren’t willing to 
do it ourselves. 
 
When the Saskatchewan Party came to power in 2007, we were 
faced with an infrastructure deficit that we immediately started 
to address. It is a responsibility that we continue to take 
seriously. This budget continues that commitment by 
designating $3.7 billion to be invested in Saskatchewan’s 
infrastructure. This includes, Mr. Speaker, a commercial Crown 
corporations investment of $2.1 billion: $1.3 billion will be 
invested by SaskPower to renew distribution and transmission 
systems; $292 million will be spent by SaskEnergy to meet the 
demands of the province’s growing customer base. This budget 
also includes $81 million that will be used by SaskWater to deal 
with aging infrastructure and the requirements of a growing 
population. And $1.6 billion is being invested by executive 
ministries and agencies for other important infrastructure 
initiatives like highway construction and improvement and 
municipal infrastructure. 
 
Which brings us to another core Saskatchewan value, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s closely tied with responsibility, and that’s 
compassion. I have to commend the Minister of Finance for not 

choosing the easy targets to make up the shortfall in the 
province’s resource revenues. Nearly three-quarters of our 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is made up of spending at the ministries of 
Health, Social Services, and Education. 
 
Health care will always be one of the cornerstones in our 
government’s commitment to the welfare of Saskatchewan’s 
people. Therefore, even in these challenging times, health care 
will receive a boost of point seven per cent in this budget. 
 
Saskatchewan has the second-lowest wait times from doctor to 
specialist and the lowest wait times from specialist to treatment. 
And do I need to mention the 3,000 more nurses and the 750 
more doctors now practising here? And the Ministry of Health 
will do their part by amalgamating the 12 health regions under a 
single health authority by the end of 2017. Much of the 
expected savings will be in administration costs. 
 
Social Services will enjoy a 9.1 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
Funding for child and family programs, disability initiatives, 
and income assistance programs, among many others, will still 
be covered. And while the budget includes a 1.2 per cent 
decrease to education funding, let’s keep in mind that in the last 
decade the total spending on education by the Saskatchewan 
Party government has more than doubled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we get up in the morning ready 
to put in a hard day’s work. When we are faced with 
challenging times, we don’t look for simplistic solutions. The 
easy answer has never been our fallback. We have all shared the 
benefits of an economy built by Saskatchewan people with the 
encouragement of our government, an economy that takes us 
from the wilderness of being a have-not province under the 
NDP to being the vibrant and progressive province that we have 
seen. Mr. Speaker, this keeps attracting people to its promise. 
 
We have had a shortfall in non-renewable resource revenues of 
over a billion dollars for three years, Mr. Speaker, and the 
challenge is clear. And we will meet that challenge. 
Saskatchewan people want to know, is there a plan. And this 
budget shows them very clearly that there is a plan. They know 
that our government will continue to invest in programs, 
services, and infrastructure projects that are valued by the 
Saskatchewan people because this government has built a solid 
foundation of base funding that has grown over the past 10 
years. We will roll up our sleeves. We will share in the work of 
getting this province back to a balanced budget, just as we have 
shared in the times of plenty. 
 
[12:30] 
 
This government has helped its citizens build an economy that 
will prove resilient to the shocks of uncertain revenue sources. 
We will meet the challenge that has been presented to us with 
conviction and resolve that has characterized Saskatchewan 
people throughout its history. Shifting to a tax system based on 
consumption and away from an economy based heavily on 
resource revenue, while reducing personal and business taxes 
and increasing incentives, will help us stabilize the underlying 
tax structure of our province. 
 
This government will not meander down the road to endless 
deficit. We have no time for selfies. We will act now. This 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

government will react responsibly and to meet the challenge, 
and we will ask our citizens to take a share of that 
responsibility. This government will take action on the deficit 
today, not tomorrow, not leaving it for someone else to deal 
with. This government will not postpone the day of reckoning. 
We will not leave a black hole of debt for our children to deal 
with. As the Minister of Finance has outlined in his budget, we 
have a plan, and we will meet the challenge. 
 
There are two qualities of mind needed to emerge unscathed 
from the unforeseen circumstances that life throws at us. The 
first quality is intellect — the ability to see, even in the darkest 
hours, the glimmerings of the inner light that leads to truth. The 
second quality is courage — the courage to follow this light 
wherever it may lead. 
 
I saw these two qualities on display yesterday during the 
remarks by our Finance minister. I saw them in abundance. And 
for this reason, Mr. Speaker, it will be an honour and a privilege 
to support the motion: 
 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
And I do not support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to stand in my place and speak to the budget. 
First I’d like to thank a number of people. First of all I’d like to 
thank my constituents who, you know, it was very humbling to 
have the support that I received. Of course being on the team 
with the Premier was a big part of it, but I just want to thank my 
constituents one more time for returning me to this legislature. 
 
To my wife, Cindy, who’s an educational assistant at Biggar 
Central 2000 school, and I recognize my son, Marshall, who 
works in the service industry in Saskatoon, and my daughter, 
Alex, who is completing a degree in social work at the U of S as 
well. My daughter, Lacey, is on maternity leave right now from 
Nature Saskatchewan. Her and her partner, Nick, made me a 
proud grandpa last June. They had a little girl, and they named 
the baby Amara. Six pounds, two ounces, so I’m very proud to 
be a grandpa. Nick has a five-year old daughter from another 
relationship, Surayya. So she also calls me grandpa as well, so 
that’s good with me. 
 
I want to also thank my constituent assistant, Janet Hanson, 
who’s been with me for five years now, and also to my casual 
constituency assistant, Desiree Hinse. And I’ve spoken about 
Desiree in the past. She has a little three-year-old boy, and little 
Zane also calls me grandpa. So I’m blessed with lots of 
grandchildren. 
 
As government caucus Chair, I want to take this opportunity to 
thank John, the chief of staff, and all the staff in the caucus 
room for the great work that they do for me and obviously for 
all of caucus and the help that they give us. 
 
The budget came down, as we know, and as the Premier said, 
it’s a plan. It’s not a one-year document. It’s a plan over three 

years to get to balanced budget. And I think that’s very 
important as we move forward to recognize that and keep that 
in sight, because of the deficit that we were going to run if we 
did not do something about it, which was caused by, you know, 
a drastic reduction in resource revenue. And so this plan’s going 
to unfold over the next three years to a balanced budget. 
 
I think I really want to start out with some facts about taxes in 
this budget which are very relevant and important that people 
know these numbers and what’s happening. Saskatchewan has 
— still has, even though we raised the PST by one point — still 
has the lowest PST rate of any province with a provincial sales 
tax. 
 
A family of four in Saskatchewan pays no income tax on their 
first $50,495 of income and has the highest tax-free threshold in 
Canada. And as a result of this budget, Saskatchewan 
individuals and families will pay among the lowest income 
taxes in Canada, ranging from the lowest to the third lowest for 
most, depending on the level of income. Even with this PST 
increase, every Saskatchewan resident on every level of income 
will still be paying significantly less in income tax and PST 
combined than they did in 2007 under the NDP. 
 
A single person with $40,000 income will still pay $749 less 
than in 2007, a 20 per cent reduction. A family of four with 
$50,000 income will still pay $2,366 less than in 2007, a 77 per 
cent reduction. A family of four with $75,000 income will still 
pay 1,886 less than in 2007, a 31 per cent reduction. A family 
of four with $100,000 income will still pay $1,951 less than 
2007, a 20 per cent reduction. 
 
When the tax changes announced in the budget are fully 
implemented, Saskatchewan will have the lowest corporate tax 
rate, the lowest taxes on manufacturing and processing, and 
nation-leading research and development incentives, giving our 
province a tremendous advantage attracting new investment, 
jobs, and opportunities to Saskatchewan. 
 
When this budget is fully implemented, Saskatchewan will be 
the only province in Canada with no carbon tax of any kind, and 
that’s something we are very proud to know and to oppose a 
carbon tax in this resource-rich province. 
 
Getting into some of the individual items in the budget, I want 
to start out with Highways and Infrastructure because in 
Biggar-Sask Valley constituency, there’s a number of the main 
arteries cross through or near Biggar-Sask Valley. And the NDP 
opposition love to say, well where did all the money go? Well I 
want to point out where the money went, just inside 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
You know, across this province, the major arteries are in pretty 
good shape. Thin membrane highways continue to be a 
challenge. We have over 5000 kilometres of thin membrane 
highways, and you know, just as we know with budgetary 
pressures, you just can’t fix everything as soon as we’d like, but 
the major arteries that cross near or through Biggar-Sask Valley 
— Highways 16, 4, 14, 12, and 11 — and they’re in pretty good 
shape. I have to . . . You know constituents tell me that all the 
time. 
 
Now last year our government put a lot of money into thin 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

membrane highways, and Biggar-Sask Valley had 
improvements on No. 376 from Asquith to Maymont and parts 
of Highway 51 near Biggar. It was incredible to have people 
phone the office and thank the government for the work we did 
on those thin membrane highways, and so we really appreciated 
that. And you know, as I said before, we’ll continue in the 
future to improve highways and put money towards thin 
membranes as we deal with this budget deficit. 
 
But I want to go into some of the highlights of the Highways 
and Infrastructure budget. $1.1 billion in 2017-18 for the 
Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure budget will see work 
continue on major projects and 990 kilometres of provincial 
highways across Saskatchewan over the coming year. This 
year’s budget includes 343 million to start on or continue 
construction across the province, as well as $500 million for the 
Regina bypass. 
 
And the other highlights in the Highways and Infrastructure 
budget are major projects to improve safety and increase 
capacity on some of Saskatchewan’s busiest highways. Going 
to continue work on new overpasses at Warman and 
Martensville. And there’s an example of, you know, the 
province is so well connected. My constituency, parts of it is 
north of Warman and Martensville, and it’s not only going to 
help the people of Warman and Martensville, but all the many 
people that drive from my constituency to work in Saskatoon or 
travel for business. 
 
Going to continue work on twinning Highway 7 between 
Saskatoon and Delisle, work on twinning Highway 39 between 
Estevan and Bienfait, construction of two sets of passing lanes 
on Highway 5 between Saskatoon and Humboldt, and further 
planning for future twinning and passing lanes on Highway 6, 
39 from Estevan to Regina, and begin planning for passing 
lanes on Highway No. 4 north of North Battleford and Highway 
7 from Rosetown to the Alberta border. 
 
One hundred and fifty kilometres of rural highway upgrades 
include Highway 4 south of Cadillac, Highway 51 near 
Kelfield, and Highway 80 north of Esterhazy, Highway 322 
north of Silton. Repairing and upgrading 990 kilometres of 
provincial highways including 150 kilometres of rural highway 
upgrades, 300 kilometres of repaving, 140 kilometres of 
sealing, and 400 kilometres of other treatments. 
 
Investing more than $53 million to build, operate, and maintain 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan, 30 major 
bridge rehabilitation and replacement, as well as numerous 
culvert projects across the province, and more than $20 million 
for urban and rural municipal road projects and airports — 
funding that is over and above revenue-sharing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s where some of the money went, as the 
NDP like to point fingers and make accusations, that has gone 
into the future and also in the past. The major investment in 
highways and infrastructure is so vital to our economy which 
continues to grow. And it’s taken our government this long to 
start to get back to the point where the highways are in fairly 
decent shape. 
 
When we came into government, there was very little done on 
highways. Saskatchewan really was, well quite frankly, a 

laughingstock to many people who travelled across the province 
when the NDP were in power. It was just a terrible situation of 
highways and roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, in a big part of 
Biggar-Sask Valley, many constituents are in agriculture. It’s 
very important to the provincial economy and very important to 
Biggar-Sask Valley. And the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget 
for 2017-18 is $388.6 million which continues to support 
Saskatchewan’s strong agriculture industry. Business risk 
management programs will be fully funded with an investment 
of 264.1 million, an increase of almost 4 per cent. Funding of 
71.2 million is going to be provided for strategic initiatives 
under the federal-provincial Growing Forward 2 agreement. 
The budget continues the province’s investment in agriculture 
research with 26.8 million. For crop insurance premiums, the 
program delivery, 172.2 million is being provided. 
 
And the budget includes the decision to end Saskatchewan 
pastures program and consult in the future management of this 
land. This will be the last year for the Saskatchewan pastures 
program operating in its entirety. Public and stakeholder 
engagement, along with First Nations and Métis communities, 
consultations on how the affected pasture land should be 
managed in the future will start in the coming days. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a difficult fall. I believe 
this is the record number of acres that have been left out over 
winter. So there’s challenges. But I believe our Agriculture 
minister and our government have put in place, you know, the 
safety nets and crop insurance that will help our producers 
through this rough spot and continue the, really the exceptional 
farming economy that we’ve had for many years, and the 
importance, as I had mentioned, of agriculture to the economy 
and to the constituents of Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, health care is always 
high on the list. Our budget, that’s the largest expenditure of our 
budget, is in health. So we’re doing a number of things there. In 
this budget we’re investing $5.2 billion in core health services. 
And this budget has increased $38.6 million or point seven per 
cent from the previous budget, more than 51 per cent increase 
since 2007. 
 
That’s an amazing number when you think about . . . That is 
how much the health budget has increased — 51 per cent since 
2007. So health is always and it will continue to be, you know, 
a high priority for the government and, you know, which 
obviously put pressures on the budget. 
 
Now we’re not . . . We’re keying on some, you know, 
fundamental areas or hot spots, if you like. The budget is going 
to increase to the regional health authorities by 1.2 per cent over 
last year. That’s 57.9 per cent more than the regional health 
authorities were allocated in 2007. So this money is going to 
include a $12 million investment to address over-capacity 
pressures which, you know, we recognize, and emergency 
department wait times in Regina and Saskatoon. So despite the 
pressures on the budget, we’re focusing and keying on those 
hotspots or areas like emergency department wait times. Also 
24.4 million in funding to address service pressures and 



March 23, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

operating costs. 
 
We continue to commit funding in the tune of $250,000 to the 
Canadian National Institute for the Blind; providing $750,000 
to the HPV [human papilloma virus] vaccination program for 
boys. And this is important. We’ve been providing this vaccine 
to girls for some time, and now we’re going to provide it to 
boys. 
 
And a number of other commitments. You know, our budget is 
firming the province’s commitment to the children’s hospital of 
Saskatchewan. Investments including $5.5 million for the 
children’s hospital, which will also receive $8 million for 
information technological needs and 4.4 million in operating 
funds; the Leader Integrated Facility will receive $6.7 million. 
And 3.5 million will fund electrical renewal projects at Regina 
General and Pasqua hospitals. Our commitment to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is strong as always. They will 
receive $170 million — a $3.3 million increase in funding to 
provide cancer treatment to more patients. 
 
And we’ll establish an autism working group that will be tasked 
with creating a Saskatchewan model for individualized funding. 
The working group is expected to complete its work by late fall 
2017. It includes parents, service providers, and advocates for 
the autism community. 
 
The province will phase out or reduce some provincial 
programs and services to help ensure it can continue to provide 
essential core services to residents. Residents will be able to 
access services through the private system, and in most cases, 
coverage for low-income individuals will continue to be 
provided by the government. 
 
Special care home or long-term care fees will increase for some 
residents, based on income. Approximately 50 per cent of the 
residents will not be affected by the change and will continue to 
pay the minimum monthly fee. The province will continue to 
subsidize 83 per cent of the overall long-term care. 
 
And so again, the NDP opposition want to know where the 
money goes. That’s where it’s going in this budget. We 
continue to support the essential services that government 
provides. 
 
But in the past, Mr. Speaker, they’ve said, well, where did the 
money go? Well, I invite the Health critic from the NDP to 
come to Biggar and tour the new long-term care home that’s 
been open now for a couple of years, and also the renovation of 
the hospital, which is, the new long-term care home is attached 
to. I welcome her to come and tour the facility and then I 
challenge her to stand out in front of that facility and complain 
about where the money went, because the people of Biggar, the 
elderly, greatly appreciate the new long-term care home. The 
hospital, we have two doctors; a third is on its way, and so I 
think the people of Biggar would have some issues with the 
opposition and the member’s comments about where the money 
went. 
 
In education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has released 
the final report from the advisory panel on the education 
governance renewal. The government is accepting the findings 
in the report, including keeping elected boards, no major school 

division boundary changes, keeping the focus on education 
sector strategic plan, making legislative changes to clarify roles 
within the sector and create efficiencies, and improve 
engagement with First Nations and Métis residents. 
 
There was a strong support during the consultation for local 
elected trustees, and for maintaining the current public school 
division boundaries. There was also a clear message heard to 
control spending in the education sector. Therefore, the 
government plans to introduce amendments to The Education 
Act that will create a framework for shared services like 
procurement, transportation, payroll, salary range for school 
division administrators and elected trustees. 
 
I think that paragraph is very important. So it’s going to be very 
interesting to see, as the amendments are rolled out, the very 
important work that the Minister of Education has done on this 
file. There’s numerous things that’s included in the budget. Just 
a few of them: Saskatchewan’s 28 school divisions will receive 
$1.86 billion in school operating fund, which includes the 
revenue collected from the education property taxes. This is 
down $22 million from the previous budget. It represents a 1.2 
per cent reduction year over year. Yes, it’s a reduction, but I 
believe that with this budget and the change in amendments to 
The Education Act, we’re going to find considerable savings 
that will be used to put towards front-line services — teachers 
and things that are so important to the education of our children. 
 
Overall, the budget provides $2.02 billion for education, a 6.7 
per cent decrease in funding compared to last year. Much of the 
decrease is due to a $262 million reduction in funds required to 
construct 18 new schools in Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, 
Martensville, which are scheduled for completion in 2017. 
Once again, to the opposition’s complaints about where the 
money went, well that’s where the money went. It went into 
schools as well. 
 
And there are a number of things that are going to continue 
under construction in the future, so this is a very important 
budget. The one item is $55.8 million for child care funding. 
889 new spaces will be created, including 810 spaces at the 18 
new joint-use schools in Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and 
Martensville, bringing the total number of new spaces created 
in the past 10 years to more than 6,000. That’s very important. 
 
The one item that I’m very proud of, that is essential, is the 
budget for Social Services. You know, we continue to support 
Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable people with an increase of $73 
million, or a 6.9 per cent increase to the Social Services budget. 
This increase brings the ministry’s budget to $1.125 billion, the 
largest ever Social Services budget in history. 
 
So that’s so important that, you know, this funding is there for 
people that are, you know, the most vulnerable in our society. 
Children and family programs budget will increase by 13.4 
million to 256.3 million. Disability programs will see an 
increase of $2.3 million, and $25 million for transitional 
employment allowance to 61.5, and 15.9 million for the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities, 10.5 million for 
Saskatchewan assistance programs, and $14 million for the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement, just to name some of 
the things that Social Services do. 
 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2017 

Funding has also increased for the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, personal care home benefit, and seniors’ income 
plan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, just got a few more minutes. I want to speak to 
the shutting down of STC. And you know it’s a service that’s 
probably more important to the rural constituencies in rural 
Saskatchewan, but the projected deficit or subsidy to STC over 
the next five years is $85 million and the reason because really 
few people ever use STC. The route from Saskatoon that goes 
through Biggar, out to Unity and back, it’s a kind of average 
ridership of like one and a half people. 
 
Freight, there’s a lot of freight being hauled by STC, but a lot of 
businesses are not using STC. There’s the courier system, 
Canada Post, or priority post that is widely used and, you know, 
it’s even with STC and the other couriers. It’s fostered a private 
business who offers a unique service. They will go in and pick 
up parts or supplies, whatever, for businesses in Biggar and 
they’ll go right to the business in Saskatoon, generally, and 
bring that stuff back to Biggar. So I suspect with the shutting 
down of STC, that business will expand, and it’s going to be 
great opportunities for other businesses to expand and take up 
some of the role, especially in the freight side of STC. 
 
As far as ridership, I mean it’s just not a lot of people using the 
bus service and so in these times of restraint, I think it’s only 
appropriate that STC be shut down. 
 
I’d like to speak a little bit about municipal infrastructure. We 
have continued to give the municipalities 1 per cent of the PST 
for revenue sharing, and that’s something we heard loud and 
clear from the towns and villages and cities. Urban revenue 
sharing for all cities, towns, villages, and resort villages will 
amount to $165.7 million in 2017-18. Revenue sharing for rural 
municipalities, which includes urbanized hamlets, will total 
$72.8 million. Northern municipalities will receive 19.2 million. 
Saskatoon, the province’s largest city, will receive 46.4 million. 
And Regina will receive 40.5 million in municipal revenue 
sharing. So I think that’s very important that our budget 
recognizes that. 
 
I only have about one minute and I’d just like to wrap up my 
comments by saying that this is a plan for the future. This 
budget is going to be, the plan’s going to be over three years. 
And I just want to be very clear that I totally support the motion 
by our Finance minister and I will not be supporting the 
amendment by the official opposition. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the time of a normal 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday, 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1849 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1849, 1850 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1849 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1850 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1850 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1851 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1851 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1851 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1852 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1852 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1852 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1852 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1852 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1853 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1853 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1853 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1854 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1854 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1854 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1854 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Schools in Martensville 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1855 
 Buffalo Narrows Basketball Team Makes Trek to Hoopla  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1855 
 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1855 
 First Nations Provincial Spelling Bee 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1856 
 Read Saskatoon Promotes Literacy 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1856 
 Canadian Football League Fan Week  
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1856 
 Saskatchewan Shows Population Growth 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 
 Provincial Budget 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1862 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1862 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 
  Merriman (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................... 1863 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1866 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1873 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




