






















































Hansard: March 20, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 60B  MONDAY, MARCH 20, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1775 
 March 20, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I call this Assembly to 
order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
once again I take my place to continue on with the debate 
around Bill 40 as it relates to privatization. And it should be 
noted, Mr. Speaker, that there are many, many giants that have 
graced the halls of this particular democratic institution that we 
now call the Legislative Assembly. And one of the gentlemen 
that did grace these halls, Mr. Speaker, and served a long time 
was the former premier, Allan Blakeney. 
 
Now Mr. Blakeney had a lot of achievements in his life, but 
being premier of Saskatchewan I’m certain was one of his 
greatest achievements. And Mr. Blakeney was well respected. 
He was really highly educated, and he really defended what I 
believe were essential points as it pertains to the value of the 
Crowns. And some of his comments and some of his writings 
around the value of the Crowns still resonate to this day. 
 
Now I remember as a young child meeting Mr. Blakeney, and 
the fact that you sat in the same room with him and you realized 
how intelligent this man was. And over time Saskatchewan 
became known as a mecca for really highly respected and 
highly qualified and highly certified civil servants. As people 
would know, when you have a man of Mr. Blakeney’s stature 
asking you to come and work for his government, for the people 
of Saskatchewan, when he served as premier of this province, 
Mr. Speaker, his name attracted many, many great bureaucrats 
and many great civil servants that served Saskatchewan for 
years and years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even as a young child I can tell you, or a 
young man, that even sitting in the same room with Mr. 
Blakeney, you can obviously see this man was very intelligent. 
And I believe that he was a Rhodes Scholar, which is of course 
an achievement unto itself. 
 
That being said, Mr. Blakeney, as I said, attracted a lot of 
highly skilled bureaucrats, a lot of highly skilled civil servants 
here to Saskatchewan to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And 
I can tell you to this day that some of his work in developing 
the professional civil servants in the province of Saskatchewan 

has benefited many people in the government for years and 
years and years. And some of those civil servants, Mr. Speaker, 
that continue to serve in their capacity, I know that they have 
quietly and professionally admired Mr. Blakeney for his ability, 
certainly admired him for his service to Saskatchewan, but also 
respected him for his intelligence and his policy development 
ability. And Mr. Speaker, I can say with certainty that there was 
a lot of intellectual admiration for Mr. Blakeney from a number 
of his peers that served in our civil service. 
 
That being said, I wanted to quote a page, a couple pages here 
of what Mr. Blakeney wrote as it refers to the Crowns. And, 
Mr. Speaker, even though the book is dated somewhat, it really 
applies to today’s debate around Bill 40. And it’s amazing, 
almost as if he foresaw that sooner or later the conservatives 
would try and sell off the Crowns and that some of the points 
that he raised is that the same old argument that the 
conservatives have that they’d certainly bring back. 
 
So I want to read just a page and a half of what he basically has 
to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

In the past it has been a real challenge to take electric 
power, natural gas, quality telephone service, and bus 
service to the corners of this far-flung and thinly populated 
province. And governments of all stripes have 
cross-subsidized  have used the profits from big 
customers of power and gas, from long-distance telephone 
users, from profitable intercity bus routes  to take service 
to remote areas. 
 
In the utility field probably no major service covered a 
smaller proportion of its costs than natural gas to . . . 
[farmers] introduced by the Devine government. So it is 
not a left-right argument. All governments did it, although 
I like to think that some may have been more prudent than 
others. 
 
Now, because large customers of gas and power are or may 
be developing other options — and long-distance 
telephone users already have them — this practice will 
have to be reassessed. Alternatively, the subsidies that used 
to come from other utility customers will have to come 
from the general taxpayers. 

 
People generally feel that if, say, a natural-gas subsidy is to 
be offered for some gas customers, then the subsidy should 
come from other gas customers. If this “sense of the fitness 
of things” continues, then we’ll have to find ways to keep 
the utilities whole. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he also spoke about the whole debate 
around Bill 40, and I quote: 
 

If the corporations were privatized this would be achieved. 
The short question is: Can it be achieved under public 
ownership? Can we make the distributional decisions 
necessary for the financial health of the utilities? 

 
Mr. Speaker, he was making a reference to the 
cross-subsidization of larger companies helping a number of 
smaller companies and smaller users of these different services 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

to make sure that they continue being supportive of all those 
that subscribe from these various services. 
 
And then he mentions the word “privatization.” And I quote: 
 

A word on privatization. I state the obvious: we do not 
need ideologically driven privatization. I have referred to 
the Margaret Thatcher initiatives which spread billions 
among the fortunate. Even SaskTel got $114 million. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to add another part of the letter which 
I find is really important, or the writings of Mr. Blakeney. And 
here’s what he said about what the Sask Party wants to do under 
Bill 40. They propose to pay down the debt with the proceeds of 
the sale of SaskTel — 49 per cent, 51 per cent; it’s a sale is a 
sale is a sale. And here’s what Mr. Blakeney says about that: 
 

The argument is sometimes made: Crowns should be sold 
in order to pay down debt. Now that is a nonsensical 
argument if the Crown corporation is covering all the 
service charges of the capital it is using and making a 
further contribution to provincial coffers. As all the current 
Crowns (except STC) are or could easily be doing. 
 
The argument must be [made] that some Crown 
corporations would sell at much more than their book 
value. Now why would a buyer pay a premium? Answer: 
because the buyer expects to get more money either by 
raising rates, by slashing costs, or by some combination of 
these. 

 
Now raising rates does absolutely nothing for the 
Saskatchewan people. If they wished to use this method to 
pay down the debt, Saskatchewan people could do so . . . 
by, say, raising national gas rates. It’s a question of 
whether, and to what extent, utility users should pay more 
in rates in order to pay down debt to the benefit of the 
taxpayers. It is a burden-sharing question which can, and 
should, be addressed regardless of who owns a utility. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in his conclusion, the former premier of the 
province — a Rhodes Scholar, a man that was credited for 
strengthening our civil servants while he worked in this 
particular building, and a man that many people still admire to 
this day — his conclusions on the Crowns, and I quote: 
 

I address the question of the future of the current Crowns. 
My thesis is simple. They have served. They have served 
well. They should be kept unless the contrary arguments 
are made — made convincingly and with facts and figures. 
If the arguments for divestiture are convincing and 
documented, then by all means we should divest. 
 
But not before determining whose interest their 
continuation would serve and whose interest privatization 
of existing corporations would serve. I would urge that 
Saskatchewan people assess the situation case by case. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Blakeney obviously had the foresight to 
know that the conservatives would never go away, that they 
would continue haunting Saskatchewan’s political landscape 
until they are able to sell off the Crown corporations. That is 
their calling, Mr. Speaker. That is what they’re here to do, and 

we must never ever lose sight of that particular challenge. 
 
So as we look at the Crowns, at what the people of 
Saskatchewan have steadfastly always maintained, Crowns are 
something that the people of Saskatchewan wish to maintain. 
And here as example, Mr. Speaker — I’m going to forward 
some of the examples — if you look online, Mr. Speaker, they 
are available at any library that speaks about the Crowns in 
general and how we can look at the evaluation and analysis of 
the various Crowns that serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if you summarize what has been happening to date, Mr. 
Speaker, and some of the discussions we’ve had, we have had a 
number of arguments placed before the courts and placed before 
the Assembly as well, in a sense of saying, here’s what the 
whole argument around the privatization agenda is all about. 
And in the court of public opinion, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people 
in Saskatchewan steadfastly know deep within their own being 
that keeping these Crowns Saskatchewan-owned, 
Saskatchewan-owned by the people in this province, they are all 
the shareholders, Mr. Speaker. They really value the sense of 
ownership. There’s no question about that in my mind, and I 
think many people throughout the province would agree. 
 
They understand, as I’ve articulated, the fact that there’s 
investments that the Crowns have made back into the people of 
Saskatchewan by way of dividends, Mr. Speaker. I have 
identified that in the last 10 years $3 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
$3 billion has been returned from the Crown sector right into 
the Sask Party coffers, which they have squandered, Mr. 
Speaker, which they have wasted and of course, Mr. Speaker, 
which they have not spent very wisely and maintained very 
wisely. 
 
So the Crowns put $3 billion back into the provincial coffers in 
the last 10 years. They have created a number of jobs, a number 
of high-quality jobs. They have attracted professional people 
from all throughout the world, Mr. Speaker, and more 
importantly they’ve done an admirable job of really providing 
services throughout the world, Mr. Speaker. I make reference 
again to the Chunnel, in which SaskTel technology is being 
used there. And if you can see, Mr. Speaker, we do have a lot of 
our professional people that work for the Crowns all throughout 
the world. They have many ideas and many options and 
certainly many, many skills that the rest of the world needs that 
SaskTel has been really, quite frankly, proud and very capable 
of showcasing as a Crown corporation that operates within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we also spoke, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that the debt that 
the province is currently in, Mr. Speaker, is a direct result of 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker, of the 
Saskatchewan Party. So the question is, we are already paying 
for their mismanagement through our power bills. We’re 
already seeing the waste through the bypass is now at 
$2 billion, and I mentioned the carbon capture project, the smart 
meter. 
 
We’ve already seen the history of how they’re trying to sell off 
everything, every Crown that’s not nailed down, Mr. Speaker. 
They have sold as many Crowns as they can and everything 
from the liquor stores to the land titles branch — anything that’s 
not been sold or bolted down, Mr. Speaker. That party and the 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

previous ministers have sold everything that they possibly can. 
And yet after selling all those Crowns, after selling all those 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker, we’re still in this massive deficit. 
 
So the question people have got to ask is, why are we selling 
everything and we’re still in debt? How does that work? Well 
that’s the message we have around Bill 40. It’s quite frankly 
that the Sask Party can’t manage. They cannot figure out that if 
you have more expenses than revenues and then you get up and 
the Minister of Finance says, oh we have a revenue problem. 
Well no doubt you’ve got a revenue problem. You know, 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, like they just haven’t figured that out. 
 
So I think at the end of the day, at the end of the day, 
Saskatchewan people have a choice. They have a party within 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] that believe that you’ve got 
to prudently manage the finances of the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think that’s fair and first and foremost what 
people think about. 
 
And secondly, is that we also want to make sure that we keep 
the Crowns. We understand the Crowns are a vital part of our 
economy. They’re an important mainstay of jobs and 
technology and investment, and kind of the list goes on and on 
as to what value that the Crowns have. 
 
We obviously understand as well, as you look across the way, 
Mr. Speaker, the debt that the Sask Party has loaded on to the 
people of Saskatchewan is a huge debt. We have a lot of work 
ahead of us. And I’m sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, but quite 
frankly the debt being left behind by the outgoing Premier and 
the outgoing Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, is going to take years and 
years and years to clean up. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And history has a funny way of repeating itself, Mr. Speaker. 
They have a funny way of actually . . . In the 1980s when Grant 
Devine was the premier, it took us about 14 of the 16 years we 
were in office just to clean up the last Tory mess, Mr. Speaker. 
And now the Sask Party’s creating another mess under a 
different name and, Mr. Speaker, the job is given to the NDP 
government to clean up that mess as well. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we certainly will, but there’s going to be some parameters that 
will be set. One of them is going to be that there will be no sale 
of any Crowns, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s pretty 
straightforward because Crowns do generate a lot of revenues. 
They generate a lot of revenues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can hear chirping from the background. 
And I would encourage the backbenchers that are sitting there, 
and their job is to follow their leader, remember it’s nice to 
have faith, but it can’t be blind faith. So open your eyes and 
start studying some of the documentation in front of you. Don’t 
just clap when you’re told to clap and don’t just nod your head 
when you’re told to nod your head. Figure it out because these 
Crowns are highly valuable to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
any effort to devalue them, any effort to displace their 
importance, any effort to try and sell these Crown corporations, 
Mr. Speaker, is really a discouraging indication for the future of 
our Crowns. 
 
And for a party, a governing party, to do some of the things 

they did to our Crown, Mr. Speaker, it’s a crying shame that 
people aren’t getting the message as much as they should, that 
the Sask Party do indeed have every intention of selling off 
these Crowns as best and as quickly as they possibly can. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would say this as it pertains to the court 
cases and what the issues are. What I suggested earlier before 
the supper break was the fact that I think the Saskatchewan 
Party and the handlers of the privatization agenda, number one, 
is that they don’t really care about the future of Saskatchewan, 
because they don’t. If they’re selling valuable entities, 
money-generating entities, to their friends, then they don’t care 
about the people of Saskatchewan. They care about their own 
friends, Mr. Speaker. And these are some of the people that 
have been in charge of our Crowns before. And we see this 
happening steadily on a regular basis, where their friends get a 
special deal from them and the rest of the people of 
Saskatchewan will just have to suffer the consequences. That’s 
the first point that I’ll certainly make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the second point is that as soon as their work is done in 
terms of trying to sell off the Crowns or putting the Crowns in 
this huge cesspool of debt, Mr. Speaker, then what’s going to 
happen is they’re going to head out of Dodge. They’re going to 
head out of Dodge pretty fast, Mr. Speaker. And then all of a 
sudden the people of Saskatchewan will be left with a huge 
debt, no Crowns, and P3s [public-private partnership] that we 
have to pay for for many, many years. That’s what I predict is 
going to happen to Saskatchewan, compliments of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. And I say, 
shame on them. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to show . . . are 
starting to pay attention to what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
And as I predicted, there’s going to be a lot of folks that are 
going to be leaving from those ranks, Mr. Speaker. They have 
no intention of hanging around. They’re going to be gone soon, 
Mr. Speaker, and we have to clean up the mess. 
 
So I would say this. I would say this, is that at the very least I 
think the Saskatchewan Party owe the people of Saskatchewan 
an opportunity to have an election on the future of the Crowns. 
Not half-hearted bills of this sort, Bill 40, that talks about 
interpretations, Mr. Speaker. They ought to have the right, the 
Saskatchewan people, to have an election on these issues, 
something that the Saskatchewan Party have not afforded them 
in any way, shape, or form.  
 
So if they had courage and conviction — which we’ve seen 
evidence that they don’t on many fronts, Mr. Speaker, at least 
for the future of our Crown corporations — then we should 
have an election on this matter. We’re ready to go on that, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Saskatchewan Party will hum and they’ll haw 
and then the backbench will follow blindly. When they’re told 
to clap, they’ll clap, Mr. Speaker, and when they’re told to yell 
for the highest bidder, they’ll be yelling for the highest bidder, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would point out that there is a lot of concern from the 
people throughout the province on this particular bill. We have 
a lot of our colleagues that want to get up and speak to the bill. 
And the people that are listening to this at home, I would say 
this: that your Crowns, your Crowns are under attack by the 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

Saskatchewan Party government. They are so deep in debt that 
they want to justify to you that if we sold these Crowns, we’d 
be able to pay off that debt. Not so. 
 
The Crowns have given us $3 billion in the last 10 years. The 
SaskTel, the SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], the 
SaskPower, they have generated jobs. They have generated 
service. They have generated profit. And they are a credit to the 
Saskatchewan people, unlike the Saskatchewan Party who hid 
their last deficit and who hid their agenda around the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. And all we see from the Sask Party is 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And that’s why when it comes to the Crowns they should have 
the courage, including the Premier, should have the courage to 
call an election over this because they didn’t have the courage 
last time to call an election on the finances of the province. 
Now we see evidence that they knew and they hid the true state 
of our finances, and we say, shame on them. Shame on them 
because the people of Saskatchewan ought to have known the 
full state of our finances before going the polls. And cleverly, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party hid that. They covered it 
up. They didn’t share it. And we know that every single 
member of Cabinet and their caucus knew how bad the finances 
were and they refused to release that, Mr. Speaker, because it 
would have been a different dynamic in the Assembly today 
and the seat makeup would have been radically different as 
well. 
 
So there’s no question in my mind that as we embark on this 
journey, as we move forward, the NDP are quite frankly 
straightforward when it comes to the issue about their Crowns. 
We want to get rid of the Sask Party government once and for 
all, and we don’t trust them with the Crowns. The quicker we 
get rid of them, the more protection we can afford the Crown 
corporations of this land. So it’s important for the people back 
home to get the message. 
 
Look at your power bill. You will see the power bill is creeping 
up every month. Why? Because those members across the way 
put a carbon capture tax on your bill. And yet they turn around 
and have the audacity to argue about the federal Liberals putting 
in this carbon fee to everybody’s bill. Well they’re doing the 
exact same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they’re not done yet. The Saskatchewan Party’s not done. 
They now want to privatize some of the Crowns so you can 
send more of your taxpayers’ dollars to Ottawa, because all of 
sudden there’s 49 per cent of our Crowns sold, and all of a 
sudden the federal tax kicks in and more money gets to leave 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s beyond belief, and it is certainly beyond me, why the 
people of Saskatchewan would even think of trusting the Sask 
Party with our Crowns. It is beyond me and beyond belief when 
you sit here and day after day they get up and present this 
petition on the carbon pricing scheme being implemented by 
Ottawa, and yet they turn around and they tax you on your 
power bill, and that’s called a carbon capture tax, Mr. Speaker. 
And they stand in the Assembly every day when they stand up 
and present their petition. 
 
So to each one of them that do that every day, we wait for that. 

One of them gets up every day and presents his petition. On this 
side of the House we laugh our heads off because we know how 
foolish that is and we know how full of hot air that is, in the 
sense of their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said earlier this day, that when it comes to the carbon 
credits, the cash they’re getting back from Ottawa, guess who’ll 
be collecting that money, Mr. Speaker? The Premier and the 
Finance minister will be there with their hands out taking that 
carbon credit money from Ottawa. And yet they stand up here 
each day saying, well we’re opposed to that tax, we’re opposed 
to that. Well they won’t send it back, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 
philosophically opposed to that tax, then stop standing up and 
presenting petitions at the start of each day because you 
fundamentally are going to take the money anyway. 
 
So there’s no principle there. There’s no principle whatsoever, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we should not trust them. So they 
hid the finances and they’ll take the cash. They’ll take the cash. 
Mark my words. They’ll take the cash when it comes to the 
carbon pricing option being presented by the federal 
government. They will take the cash. And there’s nobody 
saying a bloody word over there, Mr. Speaker, because it’s true. 
When Mr. Trudeau comes around the corner with a cheque in 
his hand, they’ll all be hugging him and they’ll take the cash. 
 
Yet they stand here and they pretend to be fighting against the 
carbon tax, as they call it. They’ll take the cash . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member from Cannington is chirping from 
his seat, Mr. Speaker. Is he saying he’s not going to take the 
cash? Sir, you will take the cash. You know it and I know it. 
You will not turn that down . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 
won’t take it. You’ll take the cash. You’ll take the cash. You 
watch, you’ll take the cash. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Crowns, as quick as they 
are to take the cash from Trudeau, they’ll take the cash from the 
private sector on the sale of the Crowns because they need the 
cash, Mr. Speaker. So whatever people out there may think, the 
Saskatchewan Party plans on privatizing our Crowns. 
 
We are asking the people of Saskatchewan to do one thing: 
contact their backbench and tell their backbench to get a 
backbone and start speaking up for the Crowns and speaking up 
for their constituents and saying no to the sale of our Crowns 
because we need the Crowns for years and years to come. I 
would ask the people of Saskatchewan to do that. And if the 
backbench don’t have a backbone, Mr. Speaker, then let’s have 
an election and let’s have the people of Saskatchewan decide 
whether these Crowns should be sold or not. And none of this 
half-hearted measure of trying to do an interpretation of 
privatization. Let’s have an election. 
 
Do you support the Crowns staying in Saskatchewan, 
ownership in Saskatchewan’s hands and the Saskatchewan 
people owning these Crowns, or do you believe that the Sask 
Party’s plan to sell them off to their corporate buddies is a 
better plan for the future of our province? You ask that question 
on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker, you will get a resounding yes, we 
want to keep the Crowns for the future of our children, 
grandchildren, for our economy, and for the many, many 
reasons that the Crowns have been so successful over the years. 
And they’ve articulated that time and time again. 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

So it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to know this. 
And that’s one of the reasons why me and my colleagues will 
continue fighting Bill 40 because as long as these bills come 
forward, as long as the bills come forward, then we will never, 
ever accept the Sask Party’s position that they have no 
intentions of selling these Crowns because why is this bill still 
before the Assembly? Because they do have a plan. 
 
They do have a plan, and they’re hoping to hoodwink 
Saskatchewan people again. And I’ll encourage them to stand 
up, stand with us, and let’s fight back because we’re tired of 
seeing our Crowns sold off to their corporate buddies while the 
rest of us, all we get is wage reductions and the cost of living 
getting higher and higher in the province. And people simply 
cannot continue affording four more years of the Sask Party 
government. So on this front, you’ve got the courage, let’s have 
an election on it. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise and participate in the debate around Bill 40 once again. I 
am going to talk a bit about the definition of privatization and 
how that pertains in this legislation. But I do want to first talk a 
little bit about a later part of the bill, the one that is speaking to 
the designation around Queen’s Counsel and King’s Counsel 
and the references to “king” and “queen,” or in particular 
“queen,” Mr. Speaker, as it pertains in the legislation. 
 
And what Bill 40 seeks to do, Mr. Speaker, is to account for the 
fact that our Queen, frankly, is getting quite old, and I hate to 
say that about anybody. But because of her age, we need to 
account for the reality of the situation and because her heirs are 
male, most likely the individual that proceeds our Queen will be 
a king, Mr. Speaker, which actually creates a situation that we 
haven’t had to deal with for a very, very, very long time. I’m 
not too up on the history of exactly how long ago it was, but I’ll 
just say it’s been quite a while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have in our legislation and because we are a 
Commonwealth jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of 
references to the Queen both, like I said, in our legislation and 
in our standard practice. So Bill 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, will seek to amend section 30 of The 
Interpretation Act to account for the fact that likely the Queen’s 
successor will be a king. 
 
So it says, and I’ll read it: 
 

“(6) If the reigning sovereign is a Queen, a reference in 
any enactment to ‘the King’, ‘the King’s’, ‘His Majesty’, 
‘His Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of King’s Bench’ or ‘The 
King’s Bench Act’, unless the context otherwise requires, is 
to be interpreted to mean respectively ‘the Queen’, ‘the 
Queen’s’, ‘Her Majesty’, ‘Her Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of 
Queen’s Bench’ or ‘The Queen’s Bench Act’.” 

 
[19:30] 
 
And then subsection 7, of course, allows for the converse to be 
so, and I’ll read that as well: 
 

“If the reigning sovereign is a king, a reference in any 
enactment to ‘the Queen’, ‘the Queen’s’, ‘Her Majesty’, 
‘Her Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of Queen’s Bench’ or ‘The 
Queen’s Bench Act’, unless the context otherwise requires, 
is to be interpreted to mean respectively ‘the King’, ‘the 
King’s’, ‘His Majesty’, ‘His Majesty’s’, ‘the Court of 
King’s Bench’ or ‘The King’s Bench Act’”. 

 
So of course right now we have a Queen’s Bench; we have 
Queen’s Counsel. But upon the demise of the Queen, we need 
to make sure that we have a smooth transition legislatively to 
her successor. I’m assuming that because the Sask Party chose 
to open up The Interpretation Act which, as I had said and 
colleagues have said before me, is actually a rare move, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a piece of legislation that is considered hallowed 
ground, Mr. Speaker, legally because of its importance in terms 
of interpreting legislation that they thought this would be ample 
time or appropriate time to add these references. 
 
Further, The Interpretation Amendment Act will repeal what 
exists as section 37 now in The Interpretation Act and enact 
new section 37. And I’ll read that because it also contains 
similar language and is serving the same purpose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So section 37(1) states: 
 

37(1) In the English version of an Act, the enacting clause 
may be in the following form to indicate the authority by 
virtue of which the Act is passed: 
 

(a) if the reigning sovereign is a Queen: 
 

‘Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows:’; and 
 

(b) If the reigning sovereign is a King: 
 

‘His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows:’. 
 

(2) In the French version of an Act, the enacting clause 
may by in the following form to indicate the authority by 
virtue of which the Act is passed: 

 
And then there is some French language in here which I don’t 
think anybody wants me to try to pronounce. And then I’ll 
just skip to (3): 
 

(3) The enacting clause of an Act follows any preamble. 
 
So like I said, it’s seeking to ensure that legislatively we have 
our ducks in a row, Mr. Speaker, upon the demise of the Queen. 
 
And it got me to thinking a little bit, Mr. Speaker, because I 
know in the legal world we have designations called Queen’s 
Counsel, so I’m assuming that this change will allow for the 
automatic designation to switch to . . . the designation to 
automatically switch from Queen’s Counsel to King’s Counsel. 
And I’m assuming that anyone, any individual who has a 
Queen’s Counsel designation will switch automatically to a 
King’s Counsel designation. 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

And it’s an important discussion to have, Mr. Speaker, because 
it is an important designation in the legal world, Mr. Speaker. 
Individuals who are granted what is now currently considered a 
Queen’s Counsel designation are accorded a bit of a higher 
status, I suppose would be the best way to describe it. In the 
legal world you wear a different colour of robe . . . or not a 
different colour, you wear a different fabric of robe; it’s a silk 
robe. And typically you are accorded deference in line, frankly, 
Mr. Speaker. When you’re arguing in chambers and there’s a 
long chambers list and there are several lawyers who are 
waiting their turn to speak, usually those with QC [Queen’s 
Counsel] designations get to go first. 
 
And the designation is interesting. Its actual, the definition I 
suppose it would be called, is, it’s considered that you’re an 
eminent lawyer who is appointed by the Queen to be one of Her 
Majesty’s counsel, learned in the law. It’s recognized as an 
honorific, as I said, Mr. Speaker. Individuals who are bestowed 
with this designation are usually done so in a merit-based . . . 
And based on what I’ve read, there’s been a bit of controversy 
throughout the years about the designation and whether or not 
it’s seen as one that’s a bit politically charged or one where you 
have to have some political connections to be able to get it. But 
for the most part, most jurisdictions have — who are still 
appointing these designations — have done what they can to 
keep essentially the politics out of it, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
in Saskatchewan in the legal world, we’ve done what we can to 
do the same. 
 
Membership exists in various Commonwealth jurisdictions 
around the world. Well in some jurisdictions the name’s been 
replaced to get rid of what is considered an archaic, in some 
jurisdictions, term using . . . in reference to the monarchy, Mr. 
Speaker. And they’ve replaced it with designations such as 
senior counsel or senior advocate, Mr. Speaker. It’s a status 
that’s recognized by the courts and, like I said, members have 
the privilege of sitting within the bar of court, although that 
varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. It 
completely depends on what is the standard practice in that 
particular jurisdiction. 
 
And it’s important to talk about with respect to this legislation 
because Saskatchewan is still a jurisdiction that appoints a 
Queen’s Counsel designation. So I’m sure some members of the 
profession might be interested to know what will happen to 
their designations should the Queen pass away, Mr. Speaker, 
which is what this legislation is contemplating, this portion of 
the legislation is contemplating, Mr. Speaker. It’s doing what it 
can to make sure that that designation or that title of Queen will 
flow into King. should there be a king, Mr. Speaker, who 
replaces the Queen instead of another queen, which seems like 
it’s most likely right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Queen’s Counsel designation has an interesting history. 
The first Queen’s Counsel was actually given to Sir Francis 
Bacon in 1597, and then was formerly styled King’s Counsel in 
1603, which I thought was a little bit interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
At the time there was a senior sergeant-at-law designation that 
was given out but with formalization of the King’s Counsel 
designation and the use of the King’s Counsel designation 
becoming more common, it superseded the sergeant-at-law 
designation and essentially rendered that designation moot or 
obsolete as it became considered to be a designation in higher 

esteem, Mr. Speaker. The Attorney General and Solicitor 
General had also succeeded King’s sergeants as leaders of the 
bar back in the Tudor times but that again was rendered 
obsolete by the King’s Counsel designation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although this was done back in 1597 it actually wasn’t an 
eminent designation until the early 1830s. There was very few 
in number. I know there’s quite a few more in existence today 
so there’d be more individuals, more members of the bar who 
would be interested in how this designation would flow from 
the Queen’s Counsel designation into the King’s Counsel 
designation as this legislation is, I think, seeking to do. 
 
Back in the early 1830s it became of greater professional 
importance to become a QC and individuals sought to advocate 
against each other to get this designation once it seemed to be in 
higher esteem. It accorded itself a higher level of prominence or 
eminence amongst the individuals who were granted the 
designation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said and as you can tell, back in 1597 . . . or back in 1830 
the designation was a King’s Counsel designation because there 
was a king at the time. And now because there’s a queen, 
there’s a Queen’s Counsel designation. So as you can tell the 
title traditionally depends on the sex of the sovereign at the 
time. 
 
So again it’s very important for us to realize that although 
Queen Elizabeth II has had a very long reign, it’s likely that in 
my lifetime, I think it’s fair to say that without, you know . . . 
all respect to Queen Elizabeth II, that it’s likely we may see 
some King’s Counsel designations in my time, which is quite 
interesting because there is . . . I doubt that there are any. If 
there are, there are very few people who are appointed as 
King’s Counsel who survive today. So it’s just interesting 
seeing that historical play and that interchange between the two 
names based on the sovereign who’s ruling of the day. 
 
So it’s assuming that again, like I said, that the Queen has male 
heirs, that more likely than not it will be a male heir who will 
take the Crown after her, which is why the legislation is 
contemplating that change. 
 
There’s been some modern reforms like I had mentioned, Mr. 
Speaker, to account for some of the concerns that have been 
raised about the Queen’s Counsel designation, about how it can 
be seen as political in nature. 
 
One of those, like I said, from Saskatchewan, has created 
basically a committee to make the decision as to who is given 
the Queen’s Counsel. And it consists of the Saskatchewan 
Justice minister and Attorney General, the Chief Justice of the 
Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan, or the Chief Justice of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. I believe that they alternate. One year 
it’s the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal and the next year 
it’s the Chief Justice of Queen’s Bench and the past presidents 
of the Saskatchewan Branch of the Canadian Bar Association 
and the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 
 
Which is a bit funny, Mr. Speaker — not funny strange, but a 
bit humorous because those presidents, the president of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Bar Association and the 
president of the Law Society of Saskatchewan, those are very 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

onerous volunteer positions that take up a lawyer’s time. When 
a lawyer serves in those positions, it can account for a large 
portion of their time, Mr. Speaker. And like I said, it’s without 
pay, and then when they move on after their year is done, they 
move on to past president. You sort of think that your volunteer 
duties are done, but you get added to plenty of additional 
committees, and I guess the Queen’s Counsel designation 
committee is one of those. 
 
I believe in 2016 the government appointed 15 lawyers as 
Queen’s Counsel and it’s the provincial cabinet who appoints 
those lawyers. There’s certain eligibility requirements, Mr. 
Speaker, for appointment. First a lawyer must reside in 
Saskatchewan and must have been called to the bar of any 
province of Canada, the Northwest Territories, or the United 
Kingdom.  
 
And I can’t quite remember off of the top of my head, but I had 
a friend of mine who’s a lawyer complain to me the other day 
about the requirements for the Q.C. designation. I believe you 
also have to be 10 years called too, at least, to get that 
designation, Mr. Speaker. But a friend of mine who’s a lawyer 
was complaining the other day about the designation. I think it 
had something to do with the wording being a little bit archaic 
in terms of the locations of where you have to be called to the 
bar. I think the United Kingdom — and I can’t quite remember 
the details of it, but something about the United Kingdom 
reference being a little bit, a little bit archaic — but that’s a bit 
beyond the scope of what this legislation is attempting to do. 
But maybe that would be something that the Minister of Justice 
would look into, since he seems to be enjoying opening up 
legislation and making quite large changes. He might as well 
make some changes as well that are common sense. 
 
There are some jurisdictions, like I’ve said, that have abolished 
the Queen’s Counsel designation, typically because they are 
moving away from their history as having a connection to the 
monarchy, Mr. Speaker. Some of the individuals, some of the 
countries who have done that are, for example, South Africa, 
Kenya, Trinidad and Tobago and Guyana. Instead of having the 
Queen’s Counsel designation, they have replaced it so they still 
do have a designation that seeks to provide a certain secondary 
level of standing for lawyers or a certain recognition of lawyers 
who are more eminent in the profession. And they call their 
equivalent senior counsel, Mr. Speaker. And similarly Nigeria, 
India, and Bangladesh have changed their Queen’s Counsel 
designation to senior advocate and Sri Lanka actually has 
changed it to president’s counsel. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Now what I thought was interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, is that 
not every province still grants Queen’s Counsel designations. In 
fact there are a few, I believe, who have stopped doing it; 
however there are still quite a few who do. The provinces who 
are still appointing Queen’s Counsel designations are Alberta, 
British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland 
and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, 
Quebec, like I said, Saskatchewan, as we well know now. But 
there are a few who don’t, Mr. Speaker, and there is a bit of a 
constitutional battle that has gone on in the past between the 
federal government and some provinces over who actually has 
the authority to grant a Queen’s Counsel designation, whether 

or not it’s the federal government or the provincial government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I did read somewhere this evening that although the federal 
government still feels like they have the right to make that 
designation, they obviously allow provinces to do it. That’s why 
we have a committee in Saskatchewan to make that designation 
that consists of only individuals who are in Saskatchewan, and 
it’s not necessarily, it doesn’t have to go through the federal 
government to gain any type of approval. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, one of the other changes that 
occurs once an individual gets a Queen’s Counsel designation is 
their dress, their ceremonial dress. So if they’re arguing 
something in the Court of Appeal or they have a trial matter for 
example, Mr. Speaker, typically lawyers will — it’s called 
gowning up — they’ll wear robes. Thankfully we don’t have to 
wear wigs anymore in Canada, but we do still wear our robes. 
And the actual material of the robes change, although that’s 
something that probably nobody, literally nobody else notices 
or cares about. I can tell you that lawyers do for some reason. 
Sometimes it’s a bit of a funny profession. We’re a little bit, 
we’re a little bit traditional, to say the least. Sometimes I think 
we’re very traditional in this aspect. The legal profession is one 
that’s incredibly traditional as well. So it’s really interesting, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
We’ve been talking a lot about the beginning part of this bill 
and rightfully so. It’s a very important, pretty massive change 
that’s going to happen in our province, and it’s a pretty serious 
change that’s going happen in our province. But I did want to 
take a little bit of time this evening to talk about the other 
portions of the bill because I know we haven’t had a whole lot 
of time to speak about them, and they are important. Not nearly 
as important as completely changing the definition of privatize 
and completely changing the structures of all of Saskatchewan’s 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker, but I thought it was important to speak a 
little bit about the other two sections of the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s a reason why we haven’t been talking about that 
portion of the bill, Mr. Speaker, and that’s because this 
definition of privatize, what’ll effectively change the definition 
to one that nobody else in the province would consider to be an 
appropriate definition of privatize, is more important for us to 
be discussing. 
 
And it’s frustrating, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had many speakers 
talking about this bill. We’ve explained to the Sask Party all of 
the concerns that we have about this bill. We’ve heard nothing 
back from the Sask Party about any of our concerns. There’s 
been no assurances that we’re out to lunch, frankly. If anything, 
the more we learn about it, the more we realize that our 
concerns are valid, with respect, for example, the Canada 
Revenue Agency definition of privatize. 
 
And why, and we’ve asked time and time again, why on earth 
would you pick a definition that’s so starkly different from the 
CRA’s [Canada Revenue Agency] definition of privatize, where 
the Sask Party’s going to create a situation where, once 10 per 
cent of our Crowns are sold or privatized, we will lose all of the 
tax dollars that right now we’re exempted from paying. It will 
all go to the federal government, which is pretty rich 
considering we have a Premier who likes to stand up on Twitter 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

and talk about how he’s the protector of the Saskatchewan 
people and making sure that we don’t have to pay extra money 
to Ottawa, while at the same time creating legislation that’s 
going to do just that very thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s frustrating that that’s what’s happening. It’s frustrating 
that the Premier and the Minister of Justice refuses to listen to 
our concerns. And they’re not just the concerns of the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. They’re the concerns of thousands of 
people that we’ve heard from time and time again. We have 
thousands of signatures on a petition. We had hundreds of 
people out in front of the legislature a couple of weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker, speaking out against this bill. And we’ve been 
speaking to people, door knocking throughout this province, 
and have heard nothing but concern over this legislation. And I 
can tell you that my colleagues can attest to that. 
 
And I know we were all out in Meewasin making sure that we 
had an extra individual come to our side of the legislature for 
this sitting, and we’re very happy that that’s how that 
by-election unfolded. But while we were all out door knocking, 
that was one of the biggest concerns we heard was not just 
concerns about GTH [Global Transportation Hub] and the 
bypass — but we heard about those quite often, Mr. Speaker — 
but also concerns about what this government was doing with 
respect to Bill 40 and why the government, why the Sask Party 
thought it was appropriate to completely overhaul the definition 
of privatize, completely change the structure of our Crowns, 
and completely circumvent the Crown corporations ownership 
protection Act, Mr. Speaker, which is completely against 
anything or has been omitted from everything that they’ve said 
during the election, Mr. Speaker. They seem to have forgotten 
that, this plank point, when they were running in their campaign 
in 2016, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So much to the surprise of the people of Saskatchewan, this 
legislation was tabled. And when the Minister of Justice tabled 
this legislation, he told us there’s nothing to worry about. It’s 
just changing a definition. It’s not a big deal, but that it’s this. 
He’s just doing what the World Bank organization’s definition 
is. He’s just matching that. 
 
However when we’ve asked him time and time again, well 
could you provide us maybe that definition that you keep 
talking about? Nothing. We haven’t gotten a single thing, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve looked. Boy, you know this definition if it’s 
so common, boy, it must be easy to find. And we’ve looked and 
looked and looked, but it’s very bizarre. We still haven’t found 
it, Mr. Speaker. We can’t seem to find it. So we’re still waiting 
with bated breath for this supposed definition that is apparently 
so common that Saskatchewan needed it, but we can’t seem to 
find it nor has it been provided to us, Mr. Speaker, nor could 
anyone find it in any other Commonwealth jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so you know, I’m all for Saskatchewan being a 
leader in many different things. We have been leaders in the 
past, and that’s one of the things that’s so great about this 
province is because of, I think, because of our history and 
because of our past, we have created situations that have made 
us leaders, medicare being one of them, Mr. Speaker. But I 
don’t think changing the definition of privatize was ever one 
that the people of Saskatchewan really wanted to be seen as a, I 
don’t know if leader is the right word, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

funny that the Minister of Justice keeps saying time and time 
again that there’s nothing to see here because all that we’re 
doing is matching the World Bank definition of privatize, yet 
we can’t seem to find it nor do they seem too inclined to 
provide it to us. 
 
That’s one of the many frustrating things with respect to this 
bill, Mr. Speaker. Like I’ve said, like my colleagues have said, 
the Sask Party, when they ran in the election, they made no 
indication that this was in their game plan. In fact they were 
quite adamant about talking about going back to the people 
before we did any privatizing or, you know, not doing anything 
without a referendum. But what they failed to mention was that 
they were just going to change the requirement so they didn’t 
have to have a referendum, Mr. Speaker, which is what this 
legislation is doing, which is completely not straight with the 
people of Saskatchewan. And that’s the frustrating thing about 
this. 
 
They were too afraid to take this to the people in 2016 and 
actually run a campaign on it. They’re too afraid to do it again. 
They’re too afraid to run any type of, any type of consultation 
on this even though we’ve been trying to present the concerns 
that we’ve been hearing, Mr. Speaker. It’s frustrating the Sask 
Party does not have a mandate for this whatsoever. 
 
And so with that, I want to table a motion today, this evening, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Move a motion. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Move a motion, Mr. Speaker. And the motion 
states: 
 

That all the words after “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 

 
this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 40, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 because: 
 
the bill creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up 
to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum; and further 
 
that the bill risks sending millions dollars of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than to the people of 
Saskatchewan, because under section 149 of The Income 
Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from 
corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 per cent of 
the shares are held by a government or a province. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move that motion this evening. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved a motion, amendment motion, and I’ll take the motion as 
read. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased that my colleague has passed this motion because I 
think it’s very necessary and important to be able to have a 
couple of opportunities to comment further on this bill. But also 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

I think the notion of the motion — I kind of like the sound of 
that — the notion of the motion is to highlight two of the more 
serious problems with this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As my colleague has moved, we know that the intent behind 
this bill is to avoid the referendum process, which is really 
unfortunate and I think questionable at best in terms of what the 
motives of this government are. But the second piece, of course, 
and the most important piece I think in terms of what has 
happened with the bill itself, is that this government did not do 
its homework when it relates to the Income Tax Act of Canada, 
particularly section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, 
where we know that Crown corporations are exempt from 
corporate income tax unless 90 per cent of the shares are held 
by a government or province. 
 
So we have a real problem here with this particular bill. But I 
think these two items that we’re moving under the motion now 
are really important aspects of debate, and I think it’s important 
for my colleagues to have an opportunity to rise and speak to 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:00] 
 
One of the things I think that’s most upsetting about this 
particular bill is the end run that it does on this type of 
legislation. And I want to share a few comments that I’ve pulled 
out, out of some articles that relate to interpretation laws and 
their role in statute interpretation and their role with the 
judiciary. And I think if you follow me on that, Mr. Speaker, 
you will see immediately that this bill is actually clearly — I 
don’t want to use a bad word here, Mr. Speaker — but it’s 
clearly a misinterpretation of what . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not being straight. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Not being straight. Maybe that’s it. I was 
going to use a different kind of word but thanks to my 
colleagues for saving me on that. Because it’s twisting what the 
purpose of interpretation Acts are, and I think that’s the real 
shame that we see in this bill. 
 
So the first piece I want to start with is from Ireland, actually, in 
December of 2000. They did some amendments to and a 
revision of their interpretation Act in Ireland. And the Law 
Reform Commission of Ireland published a paper called Report 
on Statutory Drafting and Interpretation: Plain Language and 
the Law. So this is an article that I located online, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s from the Law Reform Commission of Ireland. In terms 
of that article, they give a good explanation of what the role of 
an interpretation Act is and what the role of interpretation is 
when it comes to statute law. So I’m going to share with you, 
Mr. Speaker, some of the wisdom of the Law Reform 
Commission of Ireland. 
 
So the first . . . This is in chapter 1, “Statutory Interpretation.” 
And they talk about the common law rules of interpretation and 
where did interpretation laws come from. So I’ll quote from the 
article: 
 

Undoubtedly, legislative drafting and statutory 
interpretation are activities which have been deeply 

marked by their historical origins. The history of statute 
law-making and the manner in which it was received by 
the courts demonstrate that statute law, a rarity until the 
mid-nineteenth century, was seen as an incursion, if not an 
assault, upon ‘our lady the common law’. One illustration 
of this attitude was the so-called ‘mischief’ rule (which 
developed in the 16th Century) which assumed that statute 
law would only be called into play to rectify some error 
which had occurred in the development of the common 
law. Another was the ‘golden’ rule, which applied in 
situations in which a literal approach would lead to an 
absurd meaning. In other words, the normal approach was 
to give words in a statute their ordinary meaning, except 
where that would produce an inconsistency or an absurdity. 

 
The labels ‘golden rule’ and ‘mischief rule’ were used to 
describe approaches to interpretation which focused on the 
aim of a statute. However, these two rules are limited in 
their scope; and in the courtroom, as opposed to the lecture 
room, they have been mentioned increasingly fitfully. By 
now, it would seem better to subsume them into the more 
comprehensive and more accurate concept of a ‘purpose 
rule’ of interpretation. This was acknowledged by Denham 
J in DPP (Ivers) v. Murphy, where she spoke of the 
mischief rule, in particular, having been subsumed into a 
more modern purposive rule. 
 
In the remainder of this Report we shall frequently use the 
terms ‘literal’ and ‘purposive’ rules of interpretation. In 
using this jargon, we are referring to two ends of a 
spectrum, one concerned with the meaning of particular 
words and phrases and the other with the overall result 
which the legislature may wish to achieve. 
 
Other relevant rules in this context are the common law 
maxims, such as the noscitur a sociis (‘a word or phrase is 
known by its associates’) and ejusdem generis (‘of the 
same kind’) rules. 

 
I’ll just stop there for a second, Mr. Speaker. Those are very 
popular common law rules that are used frequently when we’re 
interpreting the common law. So the first phrase, noscitur a 
sociis, is “a word or phrase known by its associates.” So this is 
a word that can be interpreted or understood in terms of what it 
is associated with. And then ejusdem generis is “of the same 
kind.” So this is the case where there are similar words and so it 
helps for the interpretation of that particular phrase. 
 
Now I’ll go on to quote from the article: 
 

These maxims are applications of the principle that words 
in a statute should be interpreted according to their context. 
The first of these rules provides that words should be 
construed in the light of other words that surround them. 
The second means that where general words follow a list of 
persons or things which are all of the same type, for 
example where all are domestic animals, or food stuffs, the 
general words which follow are to be construed as 
implying only persons or things of the same general kind 
as the other items listed. 
 
These maxims are fairly narrow in scope and we should 
like to emphasise that any proposals made here are not 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

intended to affect these rules, which may be regarded as 
particular instances of a broad purposive approach. In fact, 
we believe that these rules demonstrate that the common 
law has always recognised that words do not always have a 
fixed meaning irrespective of their context, and that 
sometimes it is necessary to interpret words by reference to 
their context. In short, there have always been exceptions 
to the literal rule, where common sense requires it. 
 
Another family of rules, commonly described as ‘rules of 
interpretation’, have as their objective the injection of a 
particular policy into statute law. Examples include the 
presumptions against retrospective or extraterritorial effect 
and the presumptions in favour of compatibility with 
European and International law. 
 
A final set of rules may be regarded as simple deductions 
from formal logic. One example is the notion that where 
there is a contradiction between two provisions, a general 
statutory provision must give way to a more specific one 
(generalia specialibus non derogant). The other rule of this 
type is that, where a provision expressly covers one 
situation and does not mention another cognate case, it is 
to be taken not to catch the cognate case (expressio unius 
est exclusio alterius). Our recommendations do not effect 
either of these rules of interpretation. 

 
And I’m happy that the Minister of Justice is agreeing with me, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s beyond . . . I’ll carry on here now. This is 
where we get into the use of the interpretations and 
interpretation Acts. So they go on to say: 
 

It is beyond dispute that rules of statutory interpretation are 
rather special. This is true not only because of their central 
importance in ascertaining the content of the law, but also 
because they are of a different character from the 
substantive rules of law on a particular subject. Professor 
Hart had a name for rules of interpretation; he called them 
‘rules of recognition’, distinguishing them from 
substantive legal rules such as, for example, the rule 
banning speeding. ‘Rules of recognition’ were rules that 
guided a court in identifying the correct substantive rule on 
a particular point and interpreting it. However, it does not 
seem to us that it follows, either from their special 
character or from the history just summarised, that the 
rules of statutory interpretation must be sourced 
exclusively in the common law. When all is said and done, 
we are focusing here on statutory law — the handiwork of 
the legislature . . . It is quite reasonable to suppose, 
therefore, that if the legislature should wish to inject a 
change of policy into the manner in which its laws are 
interpreted and applied, it should be free to do so. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this case it was the revamping of the 
interpretation law of Ireland. They go on to say: 
 

Two points of central importance appear to stand out from 
the Report which follows: 
 

(a) different judges have adopted divergent attitudes to 
interpretation, and 

 
(b) the difference, broadly speaking, has been that some 

judges have taken a more literal, and others are a more 
purposive, approach. 

 
As regards (a) above, this point is not unique to statutory 
interpretation; judges differ in their approaches to other 
areas of law. However, it is probably fair to say that the 
present area has been richer than any other, in what maybe 
called ‘judicial a-la-cartism’. There are various reasons for 
this, including the large variety of rules which have 
developed in this area because of its long history. An 
element of result-oriented reasoning has probably also 
been present. In an case, we consider it undesirable that 
different judges should follow different rules. Clearly, the 
ideal to be pursued in law should be that a particular legal 
question will always be resolved in the same way, 
irrespective of which judge hears the case. Of course, this 
deal is not always achievable in practice. However, the law 
should be designed in such a way as to make it more, 
rather than less, likely to happen. 
 
Our first conclusion, then, is that it would be well to set 
down in legislation a standard approach to a number of 
basic points in relation to statutory interpretation, in order 
to encourage uniformity. 

 
So I’m just going to stop there for a second, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So what we’re talking about when we’re talking about 
interpretation Acts, as I said earlier, is using statute to aid the 
judiciary in interpreting various types of statutes. That’s the 
purpose of an interpretation Act. And I think that’s what I’m 
most offended by by this bill, is that this bill does something 
that no interpretation Act was ever intended to do or nor should 
it be doing, which is to insert a government policy of 
privatization through the back door when the government 
should have had the courage to bring this forward under the 
Crown protection Act that . . . I’m going to talk about that in a 
little bit. But I want to make sure I get the name right — Crown 
protection Act. Anyway, I know I’m missing a word, Mr. 
Speaker, but I will find it eventually. 
 
So it’s just disturbing to see a type of statute . . . Interpretation 
laws are, interpretation Acts are very particular types of 
legislation that have a very particular purpose. And that is to aid 
the judiciary in interpreting that word when it shows up in other 
statutes — that’s basically the reason for it — or where it shows 
up in the common law. But I don’t think the minister can show 
me a list of judicially considered cases where this word was 
judicially considered, for one. That’s one of the reasons why we 
put this in The Interpretation Act. 
 
Secondly, I don’t think the minister can demonstrate a long list 
of other statutes that refer to the word “privatization” which 
would require some sort of judicial interpretation. So this 
insertion . . . And as I pointed out at an earlier date, this type of 
insertion of the definition of privatization into an interpretation 
Act doesn’t exist anywhere else in the Commonwealth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We don’t know why the government has chosen this kind of 
vehicle to advance its own agenda for privatization, but it’s 
really concerning because I think this is going to present some 
problems in the future when we look at judicial interpretation 
and the consideration of the term “privatization” for other 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

common law applications. And I’m going to get into that a little 
bit more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in relation to the particular 
pieces of legislation that we currently have for the various 
Crowns like SaskTel and SaskPower. 
 
But I’m going to carry on, Mr. Speaker, with the points being 
made by the Law Reform Commission of Ireland. So I’ll 
continue at paragraph 1.12: “We would like to emphasise that, 
under Ireland’s constitutional arrangements, it is the function of 
the legislature to make the law, and of an independent judiciary 
to interpret it.” 
 
And when you have . . . I’m going to stop there. When you have 
an interpretation Act, the purpose of the interpretation Act is for 
the judiciary to make those interpretations. This is not the 
purpose of this bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s not so that the judiciary 
will be able to interpret the definition of privatization; that’s 
clearly not the purpose of this bill at all. 
 
I think we have to really question, then, what is the actual 
purpose of this bill. And certainly the privatization of Crown 
corporations up to 49 per cent without having a referendum 
would suggest itself as the clear reason why this government is 
avoiding the existing law, which would require a referendum to 
privatize to . . . I want to use that B-word again. But to 
manipulate the meaning of privatization in such a strange 
contortion through The Interpretation Act that it defies all laws 
of logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan will 
have some concerns about this at some point, and I think there 
will be, there will be articles, scholarly articles for sure and 
academic articles that see this as a huge deviation from the 
norm when it comes to the role of The Interpretation Act. 
 
I’m going to carry on with the article, Mr. Speaker. They go on 
to say that “None of the proposals which we [can] make . . . or 
should, undermine this vital demarcation line.” And again, 
that’s the line between the function of the legislature to make 
the law and an independent judiciary to interpret it. And of 
course this is an interpretation Act. 
 

Our recommendations, which we suggest should be 
brought about by way of an Interpretation Act, are not 
especially radical. They consist, in the main, of a gathering 
together of the best practices which have been evolved by 
the courts, or are in the process of evolving. 

 
So the Law Reform Commission in 2000 in Ireland said, we 
need to look at what’s happened in the past, gather together best 
practices, and then revisit legislation and modernize it with a 
view to best practices. Now again, I fail to see how the ministry 
thinks that this reflects anything like best practices because he’s 
pulling it out of nowhere, Mr. Speaker, out of some notional 
definition from the World Bank, which we certainly can’t locate 
anywhere on the Internet — and I know we know how fond the 
ministry is of telling us to go to the Internet to find things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
So in this case we can’t find it, and we have asked him to 
provide that definition, but he hasn’t been able to send it our 

way yet. Maybe he will when we get into committee, and I’ll 
look forward to the receipt, look forward to the receipt of that 
definition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I don’t think the minister could ever make a case that this 
reflects best practices of interpretation Acts, best practices of 
the judiciary, best practices of statute law in other jurisdictions. 
So again it’s really disturbing to see the twisting of the purpose 
of an interpretation Act to suit a government’s political agenda. 
I think that’s dangerous. I think it’s something that the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan is going to want to take a 
very close look at and provide commentary as we move along 
this path, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll just carry on with the article: 
 

This process of evolution has occurred because judicial 
practice in the interpretation of statutes has changed over 
time. Both here and in other common law jurisdictions, 
there has been an increasing judicial emphasis on giving 
expression to the obvious intention of statute law, rather 
than favouring literal and overly legalistic constructions of 
the wording of those statutes. 

 
I’m going to stop there, Mr. Speaker. Again we have a 
definition that can’t be construed any other way as overly 
legalistic. When we’re putting the word “privatization” through 
this contortion that suggests that there’s this marriage between 
public interests and private interests, that minority shareholders 
will be able to trump public policy, those kinds of concerns, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, sort of defy the purpose of an interpretation 
Act and what it is meant to do, which is to bring consistency 
and common application to certain words as we go through the 
common law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister never mentioned any particular judicial 
interpretations of the word that are concerning, so I don’t think 
this is an issue with the judiciary. I don’t think it’s an issue with 
the common law in Saskatchewan. I don’t know how many 
cases there are that provide confusion around the definition of 
privatization when it comes to Crown corporations. And yet the 
minister is using this as a vehicle to change the purpose of The 
Interpretation Act, which is really difficult to understand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll carry on with the article: 
 

One can identify very readily significant currents which — 
from disparate sources — seem to add up to a zeitgeist 
running in favour of moderate reform. We have already 
mentioned the Interpretation Bill, 2000. We mention 
briefly four other examples. 

 
So at this point . . . This is the chapter 1 of a very long report by 
the Law Reform Commission of Ireland, and I just wanted to 
make sure I got the word “zeitgeist” into my speech, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m going to move on at this point to some other 
points I do want to share with the Assembly tonight. 
 
One of the things that, as Finance critic, I’m keeping track of — 
because I guess I like spreadsheets more than anything — is my 
spreadsheet on CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] dividends, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve got a list of 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

the dividends that I’m keeping track of over the years. I’ve gone 
back as far as 2006 just to see what the general patterns we have 
here and the importance of the Crowns to, well, the revenue 
side of the equation. And we know that there is a little problem 
with revenues these days when we look at the current 
government’s deficit and the debt that they’re accumulating at a 
very rapid rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So let’s take a look then at the dividends that we’ve received 
from some of the main Crowns. So SaskPower, for example: 
over the last ten years we’ve received $323.2 million into public 
coffers to build schools, hospitals, highways — all those 
important things that the people of Saskatchewan expect from 
our government and look forward to having. 
 
How about SaskTel, Mr. Speaker? SaskTel has been probably 
in terms of this list the most lucrative Crown that we have in 
terms of owning public Crowns and public utilities, Mr. 
Speaker. Overall since 2006 to 2016, SaskTel has provided 
$796.6 million to our public coffers. So $796.6 million, Mr. 
Speaker — that is remarkable when we think of what that’s 
provided for our kids, for our parents, for our communities, all 
those important programs that are the backbone of what a 
government in Saskatchewan is and should be doing. So there 
you go, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got SaskTel with $796 million. 
And when you see a deficit of somewhere around $1.2 billion in 
one year, you can see where these dividends are incredibly 
important to the programs that are important to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Let’s look at SaskEnergy. Over the last 10 years SaskEnergy 
has provided $409.3 million to the provincial coffers, to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s ranged anywhere as 
low as . . . well in 2014 it was as low as 17.5, but the very next 
year or in 2016 it actually provided $64.7 million. So that’s a 
fairly high number for SaskEnergy and we know that they had 
some good revenues that we were able to benefit from as 
taxpayers and ratepayers and as citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskWater, we are even receiving dividends now from 
SaskWater. In 2016 we received $1.9 million from SaskWater. 
That’s the first time that we’ve received a dividend from 
SaskWater. 
 
Here’s a sad story, Mr. Deputy Speaker: ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We were receiving 
considerable dividends from ISC but because this corporation 
was never included in the Act that required referendum, it was 
sold, basically, and sold off to individual shareholders, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s doing very well by the way. I’ve checked it out on 
the stock exchange for Saskatchewan companies, and other than 
AGT Food which is the highest traded company . . . That’s the 
lentil company that owns the processing plant out on Tower 
Road, Mr. Speaker. They were able to secure some land there 
and were part of the crew that convinced the location of the 
road, so it works really well for them and they’re doing very, 
very well as a result. And I think they’re the highest trading 
company, but ISC is a very profitable company. 
 
I was around in 2000 when the bill was first introduced and did 
a lot of work through my legal work because I was involved in 
land transactions for First Nations and reserve creation and was 
part of the process of converting the paper titles to the 

electronic titles. And it was a tough job, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
monumental task. I think the people that worked at ISC are real 
heroes actually when I think of the sheer volume of the work 
that had to be done to convert this paper-based title system to an 
electronic title system. But you can see the results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
ISC in 2007 returned $8 million in dividends. In 2008 it 
returned $21.1 million in dividends, and that was its best year. 
And that’s when, as you will recall, housing prices exploded. 
And so that was in 2008; 2009, we got $13.6 million from ISC. 
In 2010, 14 million; 2011, 15.5 million; 2012, $19.1 million, 
second-highest year ever; 2013, 12.3; 2014, zero. That was the 
year that this government sold off this important Crown 
corporation. 
 
So in its lifetime, it did provide $103 million to the coffers of 
Saskatchewan. And you think about all the people that are 
suffering from cuts right now. I think that kind of money would 
go a long way for a strategy to help people in the North who are 
suffering, losing their children to suicide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that always reminds me of why we’re here. It’s the 
people’s side of the equation and the role of government, you 
know, to use those resources to help those most in need. And 
we see the tragedy occurring in the North regularly. I hate that, 
Mr. Speaker. I hate to even say that but it’s a fact. We know 
that people are suffering greatly in the North and we need a 
response from our common good to help those people who are 
suffering greatly. Our colleagues from the North come to us 
with heartbreaking stories regularly and it’s disturbing; it’s 
upsetting. And I think these are the kinds of things that these 
Crown corporations provide for the people of Saskatchewan, is 
that kind of revenue source that allows us to deal with those 
kinds of problems. 
 
When a 12-year-old child decides to take his life, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s something that is wrong. It’s just wrong with the state of 
the world. There’s something wrong about that. And when we 
cannot use government resources because the coffers are empty, 
there’s no natural resource . . . the natural resource revenue has 
dropped, why wouldn’t we be able to use Crown corporations to 
bolster our ability to help people who are suffering? It’s 
heartbreaking. And every time our colleagues come to us with a 
story in our caucus meetings of another suicide, we all grieve in 
our own way, and I’m sure members opposite do as well. But 
the question is, how do we fix it? And that’s where our Crowns 
are so incredibly important to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
we’re rightfully proud of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another very, very lucrative Crown that we have is SGI. And I 
think there’s a lot of concern out there that this is one particular 
company that may be actually on the selling block, at least 49 
per cent of it without a referendum if this bill goes forward. SGI 
in 2006 provided $33.9 million to the coffers; 2007, 22.8 
million; 2008, 26.2; 2009, 34; 2010, 43 million; 2011, there 
were no dividends from SGI. But then the very next year there 
was a record $52 million from SGI alone, Mr. Speaker, that 
goes to help the people who need it. And that’s something I 
think every Saskatchewan person can be very proud of. 2013, 
25.6 million; 2014, 31.6; in 2016, 47.3 for a total of 316.9. And 
now I haven’t got the 2015 figures in here yet, Mr. Speaker, so 
there’s actually more money that has come in. And again that’s 
so critically important to help people who need our help. 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

Mr. Speaker, the Gaming Corporation, we see a number of 
returns coming in and starting in 2008, 15 million. It peaked last 
year: 2016 we got $26.2 million for the Saskatchewan people 
from SGC [Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation]. And SOCO 
[Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation] is in its own way 
also contributing — last year, one and a half million; 2014, 2 
million. So this is an incredible resource for us, and I think 
something that we can be really, really proud of. 
 
Overall the total I have, and as I say I’m missing some numbers 
for 2015: $3.118 billion. So over $3 billion in the last 10 years 
just from our Crowns. And can you imagine what state we’d be 
in if we didn’t have these Crowns, Mr. Speaker? And sadly we 
don’t have ISC anymore, so we can’t count on that. 
 
So I think that’s the Saskatchewan success story. I think that’s 
something that we should be proud of and shout to the world 
that these things work, that utilities, public utilities that are held 
by a Crown are very, very successful. We know SaskTel is 
regarded highly throughout Canada. We know it is the only 
regional telco that remains in Canada and yet it still remains 
competitive, and if you look at our rates we’re the wonder 
across Canada. A lot of people really want to have a SaskTel 
number because they know that the rates are low and reasonable 
and that there is good packages. I think people from other 
provinces would really like to be able to access our SaskTel 
rates because they are enviable, and I think that’s something 
that we really need to focus on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things I was doing when I was looking into the role 
of The Interpretation Act is I found another article, that I won’t 
read the whole article, Mr. Speaker, but it’s written by Mr. 
Henry Molot who’s senior general counsel for the constitutional 
administrative law section, Department of Justice Canada. I 
have had the pleasure of meeting Henry Molot a few years ago 
in my former life as a lawyer for the Department of Justice, a 
highly regarded senior general counsel who is an expert on 
constitutional administrative law. 
 
A few years ago there was an amendment made to the federal 
Interpretation Act and, in particular, clause 8 of the 
Interpretation Act. And Mr. Molot had the opportunity to write 
an article about that, and it’s found online. It’s easily found 
online, but I’m just going to share with you, Mr. Speaker, some 
of the things he said in the fourth part of this article called 
“Interpretation Act: Scope and Purposes.” So the article itself, 
for the Hansard folks it’s called “Clause 8 of Bill S-4: 
Amending the Interpretation Act.” And again it’s by Henry L. 
Molot, senior general counsel. 
 
[20:30] 
 
So what does he have to say about the “Interpretation Act: 
Scope and Purposes” in chapter 4? He says: 
 

The provisions of cl. 8 raise a number of issues relating to 
the role of a general statute like the Interpretation Act in 
integrating into federal legislation the terminology and 
concepts of Quebec civil law, on the one hand, and of the 
common law of the other provinces, on the other. Before 
considering cl. 8 in detail, however, it may be useful to 
examine some of the purposes which a general enactment 
like the federal Interpretation Act is intended to serve. 

So I’ll just stop there for a second, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
see here that the Interpretation Act is considered to be a general 
enactment. It’s not a specific law. It’s meant to be a very 
generally applied law. And again when we see this kind of 
legislative creature that the government has created here by 
inserting their political aspirations, I guess, into a general 
enactment like the Interpretation Act, it just doesn’t add up. 
 
I’ll go on: 
 

The last general revision of the federal Interpretation Act 
in 1967 was initiated by Bill S-9. When the bill was before 
the Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs, it 
was introduced by D.S. Thorson, Associate Deputy 
Minister of Justice, as follows: 

 
This is the quote within the article. 
 

“. . . The fact that an Interpretation Act was the very first 
act passed by the new Parliament of Canada after 
Confederation is perhaps some indication of the 
importance that the first Parliament attached to this kind 
of statute. The importance of the act over the years has 
not diminished and, if anything, the extent and scope of 
today’s statute law makes a measure of this kind 
significantly more important today than in 1867. 
 
The purpose of an interpretation act is to facilitate the 
drafting and understanding of statutes and other legal 
instruments. By establishing uniform definitions and 
expressions, and thereby eliminating the need for their 
constant repetition in the law, the drafting of statutes is 
simplified and their interpretation is facilitated. An 
interpretation act also serves the purpose of 
consolidating in one place rules of construction and 
interpretation that have been developed over the years 
both by the courts and by Parliament itself. 
 
Finally, I should like to point out that this legislation is 
intended to be of benefit not only to parliamentarians but 
also to the courts and, indeed, to all persons who must be 
concerned with the understanding and interpreting of 
statutes and regulations made by or under the authority 
of Parliament . . .” 

 
So I’m stopping there for just a second, Mr. Speaker. Again we 
see the role of The Interpretation Act as, again, to aid the courts 
in interpreting and also to have a uniform application of certain 
words. 
 
We do not have any . . . I mean certainly in door knocking 
nobody was saying, boy, we don’t know what privatization 
means, Mr. Speaker, or I don’t think I’ve had anybody call my 
office and say, Mr. Speaker, I have to figure out what 
privatization means. I mean, this is a really important thing and 
we have to have a word definition from the World Bank. No, I 
haven’t had that call. I’m not sure the Minister of Justice had 
that call. I’m sure the member from Shellbrook has not had 
those calls, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nor any of these folks that are 
sitting across the way. 
 
This is not a burning issue. This is not a judicial issue. This is 
not an interpretation issue. This is a political issue that this 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

government is manipulating, a very important piece of 
legislation with a very specific role, and they’re manipulating it 
to meet their political ends because they didn’t have the courage 
to go to the people of Saskatchewan for a referendum to 
privatize our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see that clearly from the words of even our Premier. I was 
at SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. In 
the bear-pit session at SUMA there was a very specific question 
asked of the Premier about Bill 40, about this 49 per cent 
definition of privatization. And the Premier completely ignored 
that question and went on to talk about a referendum, making it 
clear that he even is hearing the message that people do not 
want a referendum on SaskTel. They’re not interested. So he 
didn’t answer the question, why do it through Bill 40? He 
completely avoided the question, as we often see in this 
Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. And that’s really frustrating, 
when we have that sort of backdoor approach to making these 
changes rather than going to the people with the referendum 
process and finding out what’s really wanted by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Feeling hungry for some reason, Mr. Speaker. I’m just not sure 
why. 
 
I’m going to go on and quote from Mr. Molot’s article again. 
“The purposes of an Interpretation Act . . .” I’m going to say 
this again: 
 

The purposes of an Interpretation Act, according to Mr. 
Thorson, may be summed up as follows: 
 

establish uniform definitions and expressions in 
legislation; 
 
eliminate the need for constant repetition in the law; 
 
simplify the drafting of legislation; 
 
facilitate interpretation of legislation; 
 
consolidate in one place rules of legislative construction 
and interpretation; 
 
benefit parliamentarians, the courts and all persons 
concerned with understanding and interpreting 
legislation. 

 
This bill has nothing to do with understanding and interpreting 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t. And I will be interested to 
hear the conversation in committee when we have an 
opportunity to ask the minister how on earth he can justify this 
as an appropriate use of an interpretation Act. It’s beyond the 
pale, Mr. Speaker, and I’m looking forward to those 
explanations. 
 
I’ll go on to quote from Mr. Molot: 
 

These purposes or rationales are not, however, as limited 
as they seem. The Act is more than just an extended 
definition or “short form” provision. Provisions dealing 
with such matters as the territorial operation of legislation, 
the form of the enacting clause of an Act, the general form 

of an Act, Royal assent and an Act’s commencement date, 
quorums and the admissibility of certain documentary 
evidence are not strictly limited to the interpretation of 
legislative language. Moreover, some provisions of the 
Act, whether or not couched in language of interpretation, 
appear to have a constitutional flavour: for example, 
enactments that apply “to the whole of Canada”; “no 
enactment is binding on Her Majesty . . .”; authorization to 
issue a proclamation, whether conferred at large or on the 
Governor General, means a proclamation issued by the 
Governor in Council; and effect of demise of the Crown. 

 
And we all know that when the Queen or King dies, we have a 
real problem about the rule of perpetuities, and so we have to 
make sure that we have standard, uniform definitions within our 
interpretation Act. And we see some of those changes being 
made here that are appropriate in this bill, and I’ll speak to that 
a little bit in a while. I’ll carry on: 
 

The Interpretation Act also contains power-granting 
provisions. Some of these may be thought analogous to 
what in Canadian constitutional law is labelled as the 
“double aspect doctrine.” For example, in the case of subs. 
24(1), it is provided that “words authorizing the 
appointment of a public officer to hold office during 
pleasure include . . . the power to (a) terminate the 
appointment or remove or suspend the public officer . . .” 
This provision is framed in definitional language: language 
that authorizes an at pleasure appointment is extended in 
meaning to include the power to remove or suspend. 
Therefore, the first aspect of the provision is that it simply 
defines the authority to appoint to include the power to 
remove or suspend. The second way of characterizing the 
provision is that it is the source of additional powers 
which, but for par. 24(1)(a), would not have been available 
to the appointing authority. 
 
A more interesting illustration of this phenomenon is to be 
found in par. 24(2)(d) of the Act which provides: 
 

Words directing or empowering a minister of the Crown 
to do an act or thing . . . include . . . 

 
(d) . . . a person appointed to serve, in the department or 
ministry of state over which the minister presides, in a 
capacity appropriate to the doing of the act or thing, or to 
the words so applying. 

 
Par. (d) is intended to overcome some judicial limitations 
imposed on the application in Canada of the so-called 
Carltona doctrine. Inasmuch as this doctrine is no more 
than a special exception to the application of the delegatus 
non potest delegare principle where administrative powers 
are conferred on a Minister of the Crown, a provision like 
par. (d), that expands the range of persons who are 
authorized to exercise a Minister’s discretionary authority, 
confers power on persons who would not otherwise have it. 

 
And again, I’ll stop there for a second, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The Carltona doctrine is one of the reasons people go to the 
Interpretation Act, is because that administrative law provision 
allowed for the minister to delegate his authority to the deputy 
minister. And then we get into the department pieces of 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

legislation, statutes where the deputy minister then can pass on 
that authority. And without that ability, the minister would be 
doing everything himself. He needs to be able to delegate, and 
that kind of application under the Interpretation Act provides 
that uniform application across all ministries. Makes sense; this 
is the kind of thing when a general law like this is passed. But it 
certainly doesn’t make sense to add a definition of privatization 
that means 49 per cent can be sold. That just doesn’t fit into 
what these . . . the legal interpretation and the legal writing 
about interpretation Acts. I’ll go on with Mr. Molot’s article: 
 

These two examples may be considered rather exceptional. 
They are, however, far from unique. Some provisions, as 
has already been noted, employ definitional language to 
confer powers, whereas others do not even attempt to 
camouflage that they are conferring authority that would 
not otherwise exist. 

 
So there are examples in . . . And I think the Carltona doctrine 
clause paragraph (d) of subsection 24(2) is a good example of 
saying this apple is now an orange, and that’s what the 
Interpretation Act can do. And again everyone understands that 
then now this apple is now an orange. And that is what happens 
when, as Mr. Molot says, “. . . they are conferring authority that 
would not otherwise exist.” And it’s a special tool that’s been 
used in interpretation Acts to provide clarity and also to allow 
governments to do their work in a more efficient way. 
 
To go on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Interpretation Act generally eschews enunciating the 
more general principles of statutory interpretation, 
preferring instead to prescribe relatively narrow rules to 
govern specific situations. One exception is to be found in 
s. 12 under which: 
 

Every enactment is deemed remedial, and shall be given 
such fair, large and liberal construction and 
interpretation as best and assures the attainment of its 
objects. 

 
That legislation should be given a “liberal . . . 
interpretation as best ensures the attainment of its objects” 
reflects the more current purposive approach to statutory 
interpretation. This approach is neither new nor novel. As 
Canadian texts explain, the “purposive” approach is 
associated with the so-called “mischief rule” and the 
judgment of Lord Coke in Heydon’s Case. The present 
analytical framework for interpreting legislation was very 
recently described as follows in Re Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes 
Ltd. 
 

And they go on, this is a quote: 
 

“Although much has been written about the 
interpretation of legislation . . . Elmer Driedger in 
Construction of Statutes,(2nd ed. 1983) best encapsulates 
the approach upon which I prefer to rely. He recognizes 
that statutory interpretation cannot be founded on the 
wording of the legislation alone. At p. 87 he states: 

 
Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, 
the words of an Act are to be read in their entire 

context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense 
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object 
of the Act, and the intention of Parliament. 

 
The current resurrection of a purposive approach to 
statutory interpretation may itself qualify as an example of 
the benefits derived by Canada from its mixed system of 
common and civil law. Both Driedger and Côté point to 
 

“the influence of civil law training in Quebec. The 
civilian approach to interpretation tends to be functional 
and purposive, emphasizing the spirit over the letter. 
This approach has been used in interpreting Quebec’s 
Codes. General speaking, the civilian judges on the 
Supreme Court of Canada have played an important role 
in developing the court’s current approach to 
interpretation”. 
 

That Driedger can also refer to the “influence of American 
case law, in which purposive analysis is [already] a well 
established practice” indicates that this approach is not 
unique to civil law systems. 
 
If the provisions of an Act are to be “read in their entire 
context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense 
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the 
Act, and the intention of Parliament”, it is particularly 
important to uncover and locate the “object of the Act” and 
“the intention of Parliament”. While ordinarily that object 
and intention will be disclosed by the words of the 
enactment, further assistance in resolving and clarifying 
uncertainty about the meaning of statutory language and its 
application to a particular set of circumstances may be 
forthcoming if those construing the legislation are made 
aware of its purposes and why it was enacted. 

 
Again I’ll stop there, Mr. Speaker. This is the essence of The 
Interpretation Act where we have . . . The object and intention 
are then disclosed by the words of the enactments, but this, The 
Interpretation Act, is to clarify and resolve uncertainty. I 
haven’t seen a lot of legislative or judicial debate on the 
meaning of the word privatization. 
 
Once again this is not the proper application of this type of 
statute, and I clearly, I mean, I cannot understand why the 
government would use this particular tool to do something that 
it clearly was not meant to be used for. 
 
[20:45] 
 
I’ll go on: 
 

The primary source of legislative intention is usually to be 
found in the enactment itself. It is no longer uncommon for 
federal legislation to be introduced by a preamble or a 
“purpose clause” which may identify the “mischief” or 
problem which the Act seeks to remedy or set out the 
object and purpose of the legislation. A perhaps extreme 
example of this is the recently enacted Canadian 
Environmental Protection Act, which contains a 
“declaration” of “primary purpose”, a preamble setting 
forth a long list of general goals and duties, and a provision 
that details the general “administrative duties” of the 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

Government of Canada in the administration of the Act. 
More modest examples, but having the same overall 
general objective of identifying the rationales and goals of 
the legislation, are to be found in the recently enacted 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Act; and Nisga’a 
Final Agreement Act. 

 
I can remember, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure which professor it 
was, but really, a professor in law school who was really upset 
about the use of preambles, and I think actually went after 
Premier Romanow when I was in law school saying, you know, 
that’s an improper use of preambles. They’re not meant to be a 
political statement and that’s not a good use of legislation. So 
I’m not too sure what that prof would have to say about this 
bill, but I expect that it would be quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to carry on: 
 

However, the purpose or object expressed in an Act may 
not be limited in scope to that particular statute but may be 
intended to apply to other legislation. For example, the 
purpose clause contained in s.2 of the Canadian Human 
Rights Act, is not limited to the operation of that Act but 
“is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect” to the 
principles of the Act. Moreover, in the case of the 
Canadian Bill of Rights, the opening provisions of s.2 
require as a general matter that “every law of Canada . . . 
be so construed and applied as to not abrogate, abridge or 
infringe or to authorize the abrogation, abridgement or 
infringement of any of the rights . . . herein recognized and 
declared . . .” 
 
Consequently, on the basis of statutory provisions that, in 
one way or another, require all or a specified class of 
enactments to be construed in accordance with those 
provisions or to be subject to the principles or purposes of 
those provisions, the principles, norms and requirements of 
one statute may be imported into and be made to apply to 
another enactment. This technique, as has already been 
noted, is a common one in the Interpretation Act. 
Moreover, as will be discussed below, that technique is 
available to facilitate the integration of civil and common 
law concepts and terminology into federal law. 

 
So there you have it, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Henry Molot’s 
explanation of the purpose of an interpretation Act. And I will 
repeat again that that’s clearly not what’s happening with this 
bill, Bill 40. 
 
I have another quote from the 6th of June, 1901, and this is 
from Australia this time. This is Australia’s first attorney 
general, Alfred Deakin, and he had this to say about an 
interpretation Act: 
 

[It’s] a measure providing the simplification of the 
language of Acts of Parliament and the shortening of their 
terminology. It constitutes in a sense a legal dictionary, 
particular meanings being assigned by it to particular 
phrases, which must be used over and over again in almost 
every Act of Parliament. 

 
So again I’m not sure that privatization shows up in a whole lot 
of Acts of this particular Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So that 

attorney general, I don’t think, would agree with this Attorney 
General. And I think that I’ll be again interested to see the legal 
analysis of this bill as we go through it, unless of course the 
minister pulls it, which then we wouldn’t have that legal 
analysis. But it will be interesting to see how it all unfolds. 
 
I’m just looking right now, Mr. Speaker, at the table of contents 
for the SaskTel legislation, Sask telecommunications Act, and I 
think it would be helpful to look through these tables of 
contents to see where it would serve Saskatchewan people well 
to have 49 per cent of this company, this corporation, being 
held by private interests. Because these bills are full of public 
interest, public policy principles that would never work with 
minority shareholders because it would be against the minority 
shareholders’ interests to want these public interest principles, 
because we know that, as a minority shareholder in the private 
world, there’s only one principle and that is the making of 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s just take a look at some of the things that we find in, for 
example, the SaskTel Act. There are expropriation rights from 
SaskTel. SaskTel has very significant expropriation rights. Now 
it’s not always the fact that private companies don’t have 
expropriation rights, but if we have the right to expropriate, 
which is taking land, it’s the most heavy hammer that any 
government can have. And we’ve seen it used, for example, in 
the bypass where we’re now in court, in several cases, where 
expropriation happened and people weren’t paid very much at 
all for their land. And yet we see the other extreme in the GTH 
east parcels where we actually paid $103,000 an acre for land. 
 
So expropriation, how is that going to work if 49 per cent of the 
company is owned by private individuals and they might have a 
problem with paying $103,000 an acre for land? So I think as a 
private citizen, those kinds of deals that are being made as well 
would be really questionable when I think about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Power to acquire lands for telephone and telegraph lines. Notice 
of requirements of an easement. Price or compensation to be 
fixed by a valuator. If you’re fixing the price of compensation 
to be paid by a valuator, that may not reflect what is happening 
in the private sector when it comes to determining 
compensation rates. 
 
Payment into the Court of Queen’s Bench. Very few private 
companies would have that provision in their contracts and their 
business dealings. 
 
Non-application of The Homesteads Act. Unregistered 
easements, there’s a whole section on unregistered easements. 
That’s a statutory creation, Mr. Speaker, that again if you have 
a company that’s owned 49 per cent by private individuals, that 
would not really reflect what happens in the private world. 
 
Borrowing powers of the Minister of Finance. It’s right there in 
the legislation, Mr. Speaker. Again we have a company that’s 
owned 49 per cent by individuals, private individuals, and yet 
they get to benefit from borrowing powers of the Minister of 
Finance. I don’t think that creates an equal playing field with 
other private companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Power to borrow by sale of bonds. Again is that fair when we 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

look at what other companies in the private sector will be 
dealing with? And then this will give those 49 per cent owners, 
whoever, if it’s one company or many individuals, they’re 
going to have advantages that they wouldn’t have without this 
kind of statute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s all kinds of other things in here. There’s investments, 
financial years, bonding of officials, and this is just the 
marginal notes. I didn’t bring the whole Act. I could certainly 
go on and read all those sections as well, but I didn’t bring them 
into the Assembly tonight, Mr. Speaker, but certainly could if 
was given another opportunity to speak to the bill. 
 
General provisions, power to break and open up highways and 
streets. We have given our Crown corporation the power to 
break open streets and highways. Many of our utility lines run 
along the ditches of our roads here in Saskatchewan. Entry on 
lands adjoining telecommunications, removal of trees and 
obstructions, these are all statutory creations designed to work 
for a publicly owned corporation, Mr. Speaker. And if 49 per 
cent of that is now handed over to the private sector, what 
happens to the competitiveness of other private companies for 
example? 
 
I brought out also the table of contents for The Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Act, for SGI. We have a statutory board 
of directors and most of these bills have this, Mr. Speaker. So 
we have directors that are being appointed through a statute, 
and yet 49 per cent of the company is owned privately. So again 
it just sort of raises a lot of really weird questions about how is 
this ever going to work. 
 
Here’s another one. The corporation is an agent of Her Majesty. 
So how can an agent of Her Majesty be 49 per cent privately 
owned, Mr. Speaker? Capacity to contract, sue, and be sued. 
Well that’s clearly a public company clause, Mr. Speaker, so 
are we going to have to amend the legislation as well? I’m 
assuming we will because so many of the constructs of our 
publicly owned utilities and our publicly owned Crowns are 
driven by statute, by laws that were created to reflect the notion 
that it’s a publicly owned company. 
 
SGI also — separate accounts of life insurance business, power 
of corporation to organize insurance and pension plans, power 
to borrow. Again that would be something that most private 
shareholders wouldn’t have legislation around that allows their 
company to borrow. That’s more driven through corporation 
law, Mr. Speaker. So that’s SGI. 
 
Let’s look at SaskEnergy whose table of contents is quite a bit 
longer than SGI’s. It’s a longer bill. There’s all kinds of things 
in terms of the corporation itself. The law determines who are 
members of the corporation. The statute determines again that 
it’s an agent of the Crown. In the statute, the corporation is 
responsible to the minister, and that’s found in other Acts as 
well. So here we have this Crown that’s 49 per cent privately 
owned and yet it’s responsible to a minister of the Crown. I 
think that’s opening a door to a host of questions as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Perpetual succession, Mr. Speaker. That’s clearly a public law 
concept. And when we have 49 per cent of our Crowns being 
owned by private individuals, how on earth would perpetual 

succession work? A common seal, liability and tort . . . Bless 
you to my colleague from Riversdale. The exclusive right to 
distribute gas, and it’s a monopoly right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when we hand over half of a company like SaskEnergy to 
private shareholders from who knows where . . . I mean this 
could be from outside of Saskatchewan. It could even be 
outside of Canada for all we know. And we’ve certainly seen 
SaskPower, or SaskTel, portions of it being sold to companies 
from China in 2012. That was something that the Premier was 
over in China visiting and facilitating. So how on earth would 
this work when 49 per cent of the company is owned by private 
individuals? 
 
Exclusive right to distribute gas, consent to distribute gas, the 
power to place and remove pipelines under certain public places 
— these are all public law concepts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
relates to the fact that these companies are public companies, 
and when you split that up and put 49 per cent of them in 
private hands, it doesn’t make sense. Again there’s a power of 
expropriation rights here, power to break open highways, 
appropriation rights again, borrowing power of the Minister of 
Finance, borrowing power of the corporation, temporary 
borrowing, charge and revenues — this is all driven by statute 
because it’s a public company. 
 
Insurance, the extent of the corporation’s powers, load 
balancing. I don’t even know what that is but it sounds 
interesting. And I’m not sure . . . I’m sure it is, and perhaps the 
Minister of Justice will be able to explain that when we get into 
committee as well. Records of buried pipelines, exclusive right 
to transport gas — exclusive right to transport gas. Again that’s 
a monopoly right. We have given these public Crowns certain 
monopoly rights, that once you move that into the private 
sphere, there’s no competition. I think we could have trouble 
along those lines as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So these are things that are very concerning. SaskPower Act, 
again there’ll be the similar kinds of things — chairperson 
vacancies, appointing people on the board. How are you going 
to feel if you’re a minority shareholder and the government is 
still appointing the board members? So all of these Acts are 
going to have to be taken apart and reconstituted. I’m not sure 
how, and I think it’s a real challenge to even begin to 
understand how you could create a hybrid company with private 
and public rights, private and public responsibilities, private and 
public policy aspects to those Crowns. 
 
Costs of arbitration are in the SaskPower Act. Power to acquire 
lands for power lines and pipelines. There’s programs 
respecting wiring of buildings, Mr. Speaker, advances for 
insulation, load building. Load building is also in the 
SaskPower Act, so there it is, Mr. Speaker. Relocation 
easement. All of these statutory clauses are here to help us 
manage and operate what is a public Crown. It’s very 
deliberate; it’s very systematic, and it wouldn’t work if 49 per 
cent of that company were not owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s the Act. It’s The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Act. This was brought in in 2004. Only one person from the 
Sask Party spoke to it when it was in the House and it was the 
former member from Cypress Hills who spoke to that bill. And 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

my colleague remembers it; he was here, my colleague from 
Elphinstone, and he obviously paid attention to what was going 
on when this bill was enacted. 
 
[21:00] 
 
But there’s some interesting pieces in The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act, and I’m still curious as to why the 
minister wouldn’t use that to introduce this definition of 
privatization. But I think we have clause 3 for example in The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act which says, “No 
Crown corporation shall be privatized unless that privatization 
is authorized by an Act enacted after the coming into force of 
this Act.” 
 
So if he had changed the definition of privatization in this bill, 
what impact would that have had on section 3? I think we want 
to ask him that question, why he didn’t do it that way. 
 
Section 4 under The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
says: “Every Bill to authorize the privatization of a Crown 
corporation must be referred to a Policy Field Committee 
established by the Legislative Assembly.” So we’re avoiding 
that for some reason by changing this definition of privatization 
through The Interpretation Act. 
 
Those are questions again that we’re going to have to ask the 
minister and say, why would you circumvent the requirements 
for a policy field committee to allow the public to have a say in 
what’s going on with our cherished Crowns? I mean, we see . . . 
I read earlier the amount of money that we’re taking in. But 
again, the public policy that these Crowns represent in terms of 
electrification in Saskatchewan, broadband access, Internet 
access for people in remote areas. That’s important to us as a 
people, Mr. Speaker, and those policy field committees would 
provide an opportunity for the government to hear what people 
have to say about this. 
 
In section 4(2), it says: 
 

Before a Bill to authorize the privatization of a Crown 
corporation is considered by the Policy Field Committee to 
which the Bill has been referred . . . the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council shall: 

 
(a) appoint any persons that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council considers qualified to: 

 
(i) examine the terms of the proposed privatization of 
the Crown corporation . . . 

 
(ii) undertake a valuation of the true consideration that 
the Crown will receive when the privatization is 
completed . . . 

 
(iii) prepare a written report on the matters set out in 
this clause and on any other matters the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council or the appointed persons 
consider necessary respecting the proposed 
privatization; and 
 

(b) table . . . [it here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker.] 
 

So there’s all kinds of provisions built into this Act that we now 
see the government able to circumvent simply by introducing a 
strange definition of privatization and tuck it away in The 
Interpretation Act. And it is a strange definition indeed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in section 5(2) of The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, it also provides the following: 
 

The Policy Field Committee mentioned in subsection (1): 
 

(a) must provide the opportunity for representations by 
members of the public . . . 

 
This is a statutory requirement for privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
As I said, ISC didn’t find its way into this Act so they didn’t 
have to do that with ISC. They don’t want to do it with SaskTel, 
because the Premier heard the message loud and clear through 
the Meewasin election. And anybody that was door knocking in 
Meewasin would have known. As I was out there a few times, 
Mr. Speaker, nobody asked me about privatizing SaskTel and 
said that they thought it was a good idea. It was quite the 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so these kinds of provisions are in this Act to protect our 
Crowns. And we know how important they are to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We saw that in the 2003 election, Mr. Speaker. 
We saw promises time and time again from this Premier that 
he’s not going to privatize, but he is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This clause will allow privatization of 49 per cent of our 
Crowns. And it is going through the back door, when the 
Premier clearly understands that the mood of the people of 
Saskatchewan is not to see privatization of our Crowns that 
have done so much for our economy. They’ve done so much for 
the people who work there, the jobs that . . . good 
mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know lots has been said by my colleagues, and we still 
have a lot more to say, but at this point I want to thank my 
colleague from Regina Douglas Park for bringing forward the 
motion to fix this bill. And first of all, that we would just 
decline to give second reading to Bill 40, because we know that 
this new definition allows them to go ahead with privatization 
without a referendum. And we also know, and I haven’t even 
talked about this, Mr. Speaker, is the millions of dollars that 
will go to Ottawa for the Income Tax Act of Canada collection 
under section 149. We won’t be exempt from corporate income 
tax anymore either. I don’t think that’s something that the 
people of Saskatchewan are looking forward to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so unless he’s willing to limit the sale to 10 per cent, and 
I’m told that people were . . . that issue was raised. I’m not okay 
with that, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 
minister wants to know. He knows where I stand. Not okay with 
this at all, because we know it’s a backwards way and 
backhanded way of treating The Interpretation Act, and it’s a 
backhanded way of going around the provisions of the Crown 
protection Act. 
 
It’s not an honourable bill, Mr. Speaker, and I think this motion 
is one that members should consider, and certainly I’m pleased 
to be able to enter the debate in relation to this motion. I do 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

support the motion. I support that we change the bill as my 
colleague suggested. And basically that would be the extent of 
my comments at this point, and I would like to cede the floor to 
my colleague from Cumberland I believe, or Riversdale . . . 
Cumberland. There we go. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
40. Thinking a little bit about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Thank you. There we go. 
 
Joining in on Bill 40, when you listen to, I guess, the words 
from my colleagues, and I say that they articulate well. 
Lawyers, as I give them credit. They take the bill; they can take 
parts of it and they articulate it very well and they draw a good 
picture of what’s going on. And I think some of the comments 
that have been made is why the way this bill has been 
introduced, and if it’s the backdoor way of bringing it in to 
privatize to get what government wants. 
 
Yet on one hand, we have a government who says they don’t 
want to privatize. And I’m hoping that the Premier and 
members opposite understand what the good people of the this 
province are saying about our Crown corporations, about the 
minute you talk about privatizing their Crowns. And they’re 
very proud of those Crowns. And you know, when you think 
about an area, in 2004 when the bill was introduced to protect 
the Crowns . . . We’ve seen an election in 2003. It didn’t go 
well for a party or an action that said they were going to get rid 
of the Crowns. The Crowns were up. That was very clear. 
 
The people sent a very strong message, and they had an 
opportunity and they said that. But having said that, members, 
you know, along with that party, with the Sask Party decided, 
you know, they would support. And I think they supported in 
2004. I don’t know if all of them did. I checked the record, but I 
think so. 
 
As my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana said, well one of the 
members talked about it, got on his feet and shared. I don’t have 
the details of what he shared, but at the end of the day that 
legislation was passed and it came into effect. 
 
Now I’ll go back to talking about the good thing that the assets 
and, as you turn those dollars back to the good people of this 
province and, you know, you turn back to the government. 
When you think about 2004 and you talk about the legislation, 
lo and behold, as my colleague articulated very well, and gave 
some dollars of ISC, it was a Crown corporation that, you 
know, paid some good dividends back. It took a little time, but 
it started paying some good dividends back to the people of the 
province. Very slowly, but in the end you’ve seen some good 
returns to the people of this province. 
 
It was a Crown corporation. It did a great service and it paid 
some good dividends back to help us pay for, as we talked 
about, schools, roads. And you know, when you think about 
every time some dividends come from back to the province of 
our Crown corporation, every time that happens, the good 
people of this province, you know what? They get an 
opportunity to say, look, if we’re taking these profits, you own 
this Crown corporation. It belongs to the good people of this 

province. When we have good dividends, we’ll pay that into the 
government coffers for everyone on behalf of the province. So 
maybe it’s less income tax. Maybe we don’t have to raise 
certain things. There’s benefits that you don’t have to generate 
that revenue because that revenue’s being paid for by all of us 
and then shared. 
 
So when we talk about that, and I’ve listened to my colleagues 
share that and the good work that’s been done. But having said 
that, before we go into a little more of some of the benefits that 
our Crowns have done, and I mean there’s many things we 
could say. And there’s passion. 
 
You know, you think about whether it’s our cell service, you 
know, the Internet, there’s so many different opportunities — 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower — that where there’s rural areas, the 
North, the far north, there is opportunity. And I don’t know that 
if it was a private company, would they get the same service? 
Would they be able to afford? Would they be willing to do that 
partnership that this good province has partnered with many, 
you know, when you look at the municipalities, you look at 
homeowners, you look at the business in communities? And we 
have certain benefits that those Crown corporations have made 
and the good working people have brought, whether it’s, you 
know, cell service, telephone service, whether it’s, you know, 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower. It’s done many great things to bring 
those services to our rural, remote communities. Some of the 
most isolated communities were fortunate to get that. 
 
And if you look at balancing that out where we, you know, do 
you charge one area because you’ve had the cost to provide that 
service, or to get it in the initial area cost so much? I think about 
some of the areas and I think about even, you know, you look at 
SaskEnergy. It came up to La Ronge. Some of the other 
communities were very fortunate to have natural gas and I 
know that people appreciate it. You know, that Crown 
corporation had the ability and with, you know, the assets, the 
staff it had. And because we own it we’re willing to, you know, 
commit to that partnership and provide that community, Air 
Ronge, La Ronge, you know, and I think about, you know, 
Weyakwin. There’s many other communities along the way that 
benefited from that, having natural gas. So our Crown 
corporations are very important because they provide an 
affordable service to residents, to business. There is an 
opportunity. So it has. 
 
But having said that, you know, and I’ve talked a little bit about 
this — I know my colleagues have — about there’s 10,000, I 
believe roughly 10,000, maybe a little more than 10,000 
workers who work for our Crowns, who do a great job, who are 
paid a salary, who again go back home after they, you know, 
they do their work. They get their paycheque.  
 
They pay and they buy goods and services in their local 
community. They help out. Whether they have families, you 
know, they get involved in recreation. And I kind of talked 
about this and, when you think about the good work and think 
about the hours of and how good that looks when you see our 
Crown corporations that people are proud of. They’re in the 
community, and they’re doing the good work helping out 
wherever, whether it’s coaching, you know, there are 
fundraisers. It’s amazing the things that you hear from different 
people who work for our Crowns, the good work they’re doing. 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

They get involved and they help out. Not only do they provide 
us with a great service . . .  
 
And sometimes it is about safety. They provide us . . . You 
know sometimes we ask them to go out in some pretty rough 
conditions. When I think about this winter, some of the storms 
and some of the challenges there, they go out and they do their 
job. So you know, you want to thank them and you want to say, 
we’re proud of our workers and the great job they do. 
 
But having said that, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a bill that’s being introduced, and my colleagues have 
talked about why. Why do we need a bill?. You know, we think 
about in 2004 when, you know, the Crown protection bill came 
into play and it was passed and it became legislation, and there 
was some Crown protection. 
 
Now we talk about one that was sold off, bits and pieces, and 
they started that at ISC. They said, well there was no protection, 
oh, sorry. And I remember hearing some of the members 
saying, well you should have put it in there, in the protection. 
Well if you want to amend it, you could have made some 
amendments, and you could have suggested some changes 
when you were in opposition, members on the other side that 
were there. They could have said, you know what, you missed. 
You missed. And I’m not saying they didn’t, and maybe they 
did. Maybe we have to check Hansard and maybe they did 
make those good changes and, for whatever reason, it didn’t 
happen. I don’t know. 
 
[21:15] 
 
But I’m just . . . I sometimes wonder, why didn’t that happen? 
If you have members saying that, well why didn’t you do this? 
Why didn’t the government of the day do that? Well why didn’t 
members opposite say, you know what, we claim that we work 
together, and sometimes I’ve seen legislation where both sides 
have worked together to pass legislation that has done some 
good. And there’s nothing wrong with that. I think it’s supposed 
to work like that. We’re supposed to work together sometimes. 
 
But sometimes there are bills introduced and legislation and 
amendments that come in that we cannot support. Bill 40 is one 
of them. We look at how many workers and, you know, the 
good Crown corporation workers that are, are so against this. 
And there’s a reason why they’re so against it. I think they’re 
starting to realize. They’re starting to realize. 
 
And when I . . . You know, you think about the benefits, the 
benefits that our province have benefited. And when you think, 
you know, in 2015-16, and I kind of . . . You looked at the 
amount of money that the good people of this province, they 
paid for the service to have in their whatever it is; whether it’s 
SGI, whether it’s SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SGI. I talked about. It’s 
all our Crown corporations where we pay for the service, a 
good service that we’re happy. And you know, there might be 
complaints out there that individuals are not always happy.  
 
But you know, at the end of the day, for myself, I can say I’ve 
had an opportunity, you know, to use our Crowns. And you 
know, the Crowns that I use and my family use, we’re very 
happy with the service. There’s no reason why we would want 
to change the service we get when they come to our house. 

They’re professional. They’re courteous. They do a great job 
when you’re phoning in and you have complaints. Is it all 
perfect? It’s nice to see that our Crown corporations, they know 
they’re owned by the people, and I think they treat the people 
pretty good. Is it perfect? No, I know that there’s complaints. 
People have concerns and you can raise them, and I don’t think 
they’re against raising them and they try to do better. So having 
talking about the services that they provide and I’ve talked 
about that and the good dollars that come back, the good dollars 
that come back. 
 
But to see a government on one hand say, no our Crowns aren’t 
for sale, where are they getting that? Where is that opposition 
getting that? It’s legislation like this. And again I talked to the 
member and my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana who has 
articulated very well, who has showed why would you come 
this way when you have . . . You could have come through 
another process and made an amendment. Or you could have, 
you know, worked with the members opposite and worked with 
the good people of the province to say, you know what. And I 
don’t know who was consulted. Who were they talking with 
that . . . And who wants our Crowns, who wants 49 per cent of 
our Crowns sold? Like why this number of 49? At 51 we still 
will have control; we still own the Crowns. Is that the 
interpretation? 
 
Well if that’s the interpretation that they’re trying to sell, let’s 
be very clear. The good people of Saskatchewan are sending the 
minister, the Premier, and the Sask Party government a clear 
message: we do not want any of our Crowns sold, not any part 
of it. We want it left alone, intact, and we want the benefits that 
it helps Saskatchewan people and it helps all of us pay. Whether 
it’s roads, education, it helps; it definitely helps. So that’s what 
the good people are saying. 
 
And you know, you think about the by-election. We talked 
about that, you know, going out door knocking and talking with 
residents in Meewasin. They made it very clear they did not 
want the Crowns touched, in no way, in no way. So I don’t 
know if the government’s listening, but here’s a good point you 
may want to listen to this. You know, the member’s here from 
Meewasin who was declared the candidate. And you know at 
the end of the day, it was clear from the people. They made a 
very clear choice when you talked to them about how concerned 
they are about the Crowns.  
 
And we’re hearing that everywhere you go. There are so many, 
so many of our community members are talking about that. And 
they talk about, well hold it now. You know, when you think 
about the mismanagement that people are saying, the scandals. 
People are looking at, at what this government’s track record is 
and they’re saying, well under the best years with record 
revenue and everything, we had — and we’re proud of our 
Crowns — the best years you had, you put nothing away. But 
now you want to sell off to help you because you’ve got a mess. 
You’ve made this mess as a government. This wasn’t the good 
people of this province that have made the mess. They were 
there doing their part. They’ve paid their bills. They have done 
the hard work. 
 
And I think about, you know, our seniors, and I think about the 
young people. And we see a government that’s going to come 
out and there’s going to be a budget soon and that’s going to be 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

interesting to see how they’re hit. So is the government looking 
for some quick cash, saying oh, no, no, we’re not? I don’t know 
what the motive behind this bill is. And you know I’m hoping 
that at the end of the day, when we go through the whole 
process, we’ll find out what it is. But it’s also very scary 
wondering like, where’s this going and why. Why this way? 
 
And like I said, I can’t help but to think about my colleagues, 
how they articulated well and they’ve gone through the 
different processes that could have done. And I think the 
minister and the government had another access or different 
ways of amending it or doing more protection of our Crowns. 
There’s different ways, you know, that they could have done 
that. They could have consulted with, I guess, there’s so many 
different areas and individuals they could have consulted with if 
they wanted to find a way to clarify what is it they’re saying, 
and if we need that. 
 
And my colleagues articulated well why do we need this 
interpretation, the way it’s bringing back and it’s allowing the 
government to sell off 49 per cent of our Crowns. And you 
know what’s really interesting is if you talk about that, why 
would you want to send money to Ottawa? Like we do our part, 
and that’s fine. Where things go good, you send it, but here’s 
going to be a tax. If you’re going to sell off, you know, any 
more than 10 per cent of our Crown . . . I don’t think you 
should just sell off any one. Let’s make it very clear. I don’t 
think you should sell one — one share, 1 per cent, I don’t care. 
You shouldn’t touch it. It should be there and protected. This 
shouldn’t be done. 
 
But let’s say the government’s going to do what they’re going 
to do and they’re going to try to do, and I think against the good 
people of this province and then you’re going to be taxed and 
we’re going to send money away. Well you use those dollars. 
 
I think about, you know, my grandkids. I think about my 
grandkids. I think about well just kids in general when you talk 
to them, you know, people. You talk about the good . . . Would 
you like to have, let’s use $300 million. If we could say our 
Crowns are going to provide $300 million to Saskatchewan 
people for your education, for your health care, for your roads. 
Would you like that 300 million to help out that way, or would 
you sooner it go to a private company or most of it go to a 
private company? And we’ll tax you or we’ll find other ways to 
make residents pay for that. And there’s different ways that 
government can do that. It’d have lots of ways that it can 
generate dollars, and we’re going to find that out, I guess, in the 
next little while here how they’re going to do that. 
 
I think most would say, yes, I would like to have our Crowns 
and utilize, you know, the profits to come back and help pay for 
this stuff. It just makes good sense, and people will say that. It’s 
just good, common sense to do that. Why would you want to 
mess with that? Like it’s not broken, so why mess with it? Why 
do this? Why go this route? 
 
It’s interesting, you know, that a government . . . But they have 
an agenda. They say, oh no, no. The Premier and his ministers 
and his cabinet, his colleagues on the other side with his 
government saying no, no, no, no. 
 
We talked about the backbenchers, you know. We talked about 

the backbenchers, you know. My colleague, the member from 
Athabasca, made it very clear. Say something. Get up. Fight for 
the constituents because at the end of the day, it is our kids and 
our grandkids that will pay dearly. And it is. And I don’t say 
that to criticize. I say that I’m hoping the backbenchers would 
hold your government to account. You have a strong voice, and 
you can be a strong voice for the people that elected you to 
represent them. I hope . . . You know, you’re sitting back, and 
you’re, you know, you’re talking to your constituents and that 
you do something. 
 
I hope that because I know on my side, I’ve heard many people 
talk about they do not want their Crowns sold, not whatsoever, 
any part of it. As soon as you bring up that discussion, people 
get very upset, and they’re very protective. And I’m glad to 
hear that, and I’m glad to see that. 
 
So this government . . . And you know, my colleagues talked 
about a referendum, you know, an election. But that was not 
brought up to the people in 2016. There was no mention from 
the government, the Sask Party. They didn’t say, oh we’re 
looking at maybe selling off 49 per cent, maybe 10 per cent, 
maybe 11 per cent. Not a word about that to the good people of 
this province. Just left it alone. And now look where they’re 
going. Look at the amendments they’re making, and the way 
they’re trying to bring it in. 
 
So here we have a government, and I don’t know for what 
reason they have to have this interpretation. And like I’ve said, 
my colleagues have made it very clear. And I know we’re going 
to have opportunities to talk, you know, on this bill. There’s 
going to be more colleagues that want to join in and get in on 
the discussion. But I think about it, even in committee, you 
know, the minister will get a chance, and hopefully his officials, 
to explain why, why they need to do this. 
 
And when I think about some of the comments we’ve heard 
from people, and I think about this motion that was brought in 
today and introduced, the member from Regina Douglas Park 
who introduced the motion, you know, to say the government 
could withdraw this, you know, the minister could withdraw 
this motion, Bill 40. And if there’s areas where we can protect 
our Crowns even more, or if there’s other ways of having an 
interpretation that they’re willing to . . . You know, you could 
work out . . . So strengthen. 
 
And I want to make it very clear when we say we want to work 
with government to strengthen our Crown protection, not to 
weaken it, not to give a government an opportunity to do any, 
as my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, any back door, you 
know, coming at it, legislation. Make it very clear it’s from the 
front door; you’re upfront with the Saskatchewan people of 
what this government is going to do and what you’re going to 
do. And I think that’s what the people of this good province 
expect and want, you know. They don’t want a government to 
say one thing, and then when they get in do another thing. 
 
You know, I’ve heard the government’s side and, you know, 
they have a big majority. Let’s be honest. They have a huge 
majority, and it has. So pretty well they can, you know, they 
can manoeuvre and do what they want. And sometimes they’ll 
say, oh we can’t do anything. The opposition, the NDP, they’re 
stopping, they’re stopping us. They’re holding us up. You 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

know, the NDP, those 11 members now, are holding us up. 
Well you know, I want to be very clear, and I’ve said this 
earlier, we’ll work when we can, when it makes good sense, 
legislation, that we work together. And I’ve said that; we have 
done that. 
 
But this piece of legislation, I’m hoping the minister will do the 
right thing and hopefully follow this motion and, you know, 
take Bill 40 and say, let’s have another look at this. Maybe this 
is the wrong way to go. There’s another way to do it. And let’s 
protect our Crowns and let’s strengthen them so nobody can 
mess with them. Because the people of this province do not — 
make it very clear — do not want any part of our Crowns sold 
in any way. 
 
And you know, having said that, I go back to the benefits that 
our province and all of us have benefited by our Crown 
corporations. And many of us use many of the services, whether 
I think about SGI, and I go through . . . And we could go on 
about the good work that they do, and the benefits that benefit 
Saskatchewan people and our province and the government 
because the government gets to use those assets, whether they 
borrow on them, however the Crowns do, whether they take 
dollars in.  
 
And I think some people talk about the dollars our Crowns do 
when they want to . . . I think about SaskTel. We pay a certain 
amount that we pay and goes into maybe upgrades. And over 
time the government will say, yes. But when we see power rates 
going up the way they have been going up, people wonder 
about that. I’ve had people ask that. You know, January they 
went up; I think previously went up. So people are asking, you 
know, why. They want it affordable. They want it affordable. 
They want to have it affordable. They want to make sure the 
people do the right things with their dollars. 
 
So the government needs to make sure less scandals, no 
mismanagement. Let’s make it very clear: that’s what the good 
people of this province want. They want a government to take 
good care of dollars — whether it’s our tax dollars, whether it’s 
the dollars that coming from our Crowns. Make it very clear. 
The good people of this province, you will not pull the wool 
over their eyes. They will not put up with this, and they will 
send a message. Maybe it’s not today. Maybe it’s tomorrow that 
maybe they’re saying, enough’s enough. But it will come. 
Change will come and my colleagues talked about that. When 
you lose the faith of the people, they will send you a message. I 
know that. 
 
[21:30] 
 
So having said that, I know my colleagues have more words 
they want to share and some good information that they want 
articulate well and bring forward to the Assembly. And 
hopefully the minister will withdraw Bill 40. He will see that 
this is the wrong way to go as my colleagues before me have 
articulated well, that he will see that this is the wrong way to 
go. So at this point, you know, I’m going to prepare to conclude 
on my comments. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Ms. Ross):  I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to enter into the debate on the motion before us 
tonight. My colleague from Douglas Park moved a motion 
regarding Bill 40: 
 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 

this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 
40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 because: 
 
the Bill creates a new definition for privatization that 
allows the government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up 
to 49 per cent of shares of a Crown corporation without 
holding a referendum; and further 
 
that this bill risks sending millions of dollars of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa, rather than to the people of 
Saskatchewan, because under section 149 of the Income 
Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from 
corporate income tax, provided not less than 90 per cent 
of the shares are held by a government or a province. 

 
So that was the motion moved just a short while ago by the 
member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
It’s interesting Madam Deputy Speaker, this is, it’s called a 
reasoned amendment, and this is the second time on my time in 
this legislature that we’ve moved a reasoned amendment, just 
casting our minds back a few years ago. So a reasoned 
amendment is an amendment that objects to the second reading 
of a bill. And in that amendment, as you can see that it . . . The 
reasons for rejecting that bill need to be laid out, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Old habits die hard. It’s not very often we have the privilege of 
having a woman sitting in the Speaker’s chair, so my apologies. 
 
So the last time that we have a reasoned amendment actually 
was around the addition of three more MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] to this House, Mr. Speaker. And the 
members on this side of the House, I think, made a clear case 
and spoke strongly about not needing three more MLAs. And 
you know, much like this bill, Bill 40 before us, I didn’t find 
any support in the public nor did any of my colleagues who sat 
here before, for the addition of three more MLAs. People 
weren’t interested in having more politicians, Mr. Speaker. That 
wasn’t something that people were talking about. That was not 
a demand that they were asking for. 
 
Much like Bill 40. I’ve not heard one person say to me, we need 
to privatize our Crowns, Madam Deputy Speaker. So much like 
the last reasoned amendment that we brought forward several 
years ago, that was eventually defeated 49 to 9 I believe, or 
whatever the numbers. I’m not sure if everybody was present 
for that vote, but it would have been 49 to 9. Unfortunately, 
there is a . . . in a place sometimes in this House where the 
majority rules. 
 
But I can tell you that in my time on the doorstep in Saskatoon 
Meewasin, and prior to that as well, I’ve had a lot of 
correspondence to my office in Saskatoon Riversdale, and I’m 
sure all members in this House have from people — people we 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

know, but many people we don’t — actually reaching out and 
saying, we don’t want to see our Crowns privatized. And they 
are aware of this bill before the House and have huge concerns. 
 
We have a Premier who, less than a year ago, reaffirmed his 
commitment to not privatize our Crown corporation. There was 
a hard lesson learned, I believe, in the election of 2003 when 
the then leader of the Sask Party had toyed with the notion that, 
of course if his government was elected, he’d have to look at 
any, the government would have to look at any options. And 
that was the nail in the coffin of that election for the Sask Party, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think the future leader, our now Premier, has learned that 
lesson. And actually, I may read into the record some of the 
comments he’s made around that time, and recognizing that the 
people of Saskatchewan know the benefits of our Crown 
corporations, know the jobs that they create, the rates that they 
keep low, the services that they extend to people in rural and 
remote communities that we might not . . . who might not 
otherwise receive those services. 
 
The fact that dividends, this is the big one, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the dividends that our Crown corporations, our 
successful Crown corporations paid to the people of 
Saskatchewan to add to the revenue side of the ledger, to ensure 
that we have health care, that we have education, that we have 
highways, all the things that we value and we think are 
important here in Saskatchewan — our Crown corporations 
help support those. 
 
So again it is my privilege to be speaking to this motion tonight, 
this reasoned amendment. Again, again casting our minds back 
to that last reasoned amendment, we actually find ourself in a 
similar place where there wasn’t a huge public demand for three 
more MLAs, much like there’s not a public demand to privatize 
our Crown corporations. 
 
And we have the debate before us as well. At the moment, the 
opposition is actually calling on the government to reduce the 
number of MLAs in this House. We believe that, if you look at 
the numbers, we’re one of the most over-represented people on 
a per capita basis if you take a look at the rest of the country, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And so we’re proposing that we could 
use five fewer MLAs in this legislature in the next election. We 
think that that’s something that we’re happy to work with the 
government to make that happen, to reduce the number of 
MLAs. 
 
We also think that another part of that debate right now is 
reducing . . . Obviously everybody in this House, I know we’re 
very willing to take that 3.5 per cent pay cut, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. But we believe, and the people of Saskatchewan 
believe, that those who created the financial challenges — the 
ministers — should be taking a 20 per cent cut, as well as the 
fact that, with respect to the 3.5 per cent cut, that shouldn’t be 
an excuse to foist that upon the public service, the people who 
work hard for their money every day, Madam Speaker, who 
didn’t create this mess. 
 
So it’s just interesting from a historical perspective that two 
reasoned amendments that have come before this House in my 
seven years here, have a bit of a connection, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the jobs that Crown corporations 
create. The reality is there’s more than 10,000 jobs across the 
province, 10,000 people employed by Crown corporations who 
make a living wage, who have the opportunity to pay their 
mortgages, to spend their money in their community, to 
contribute to their community, pay taxes. But people who have 
decent incomes have an opportunity to spend that money and 
invest in services and make businesses in their communities 
flourish. 
 
But I think one thing that stood out for me, and I haven’t 
actually researched this or looking . . . I don’t know, this 
popped into my head actually today when the member from 
Saskatoon Centre was reading his pay equity petition. And in 
that pay equity petition it talks about women in Saskatoon 
earning 63 cents on the dollar, and women in Regina earning 73 
cents on the dollar compared to men. I think the discrepancy, 
whether it’s 63 cents or 73 cents, isn’t good enough and we 
need to do something about that in general. 
 
But I was just thinking about why the difference between 
Regina and Saskatoon. And I don’t know this; I haven’t looked 
at the numbers. But I’m wondering, or just suggesting, 
hypothesizing perhaps, that it is the Crown jobs or the civil 
service jobs here in Regina that are a good reason why women 
are making 73 cents on the dollar compared to men, as opposed 
to 63 cents in Saskatoon. But either way, that needs to be 
rectified in the whole. 
 
So jobs are one part of the work that Crown corporations do 
very well. When we think about rates, a Crown corporation, the 
reason Crown corporations were established in the first place 
were to serve the people of Saskatchewan. They were 
established by and for the people of Saskatchewan. We are the 
shareholders, all of us citizens here in this province, and when 
we think about one of the reasons why we would have Crown 
corporations, it’s to keep rates low, to ensure that citizens have 
the ability to afford the services that they need. 
 
And just looking at an intercity comparison of taxes and 
utilities, when we take a look at rates, just pulling out one 
income line . . . So this is the 2016 intercity comparison of taxes 
and utilities, single person at $25,000 total income. And just for 
listeners’ sake, there’s also a comparison of 40,000, 50,000, and 
75,000, but the utility rates and insurance are listed as the same. 
But just when we’re comparing telephone utilities across cities 
here, so here we have in Saskatchewan, $258, Mr. Speaker, in 
Regina, compared to cities like Winnipeg, 314; 369 in 
someplace in St. John; 370 in Halifax; 370 in Charlottetown; 
369 in St. John’s. 
 
We can look at auto insurance. We have SGI, a Crown 
corporation. $1,159 here in Regina, the average single person 
rate for auto insurance. So we think about that compared to, 
say, Vancouver, which is 1,730; Calgary, 2,341; Toronto, 
4,410; Halifax, 1,992; St. John’s, 2,991. So that’s just an 
example of how our Crown corporations can help keep our . . . 
are a clear example of how our Crown corporations help keep 
our utility rates down. 
 
I think another very important aspect of Crown corporations are 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

the dividends that they pay to the General Revenue Fund, to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We can look at the last decade, 
basically since 2006, and all our Crown corporations have 
contributed more than $3 billion to Saskatchewan’s economic 
well-being, Mr. Speaker. More than $3 billion. So you take that 
$3 billion out of the picture and we have an even bigger hole 
than this government has created without the Crown 
corporations being sold off, Mr. Speaker. That is a substantial 
number. 
 
I think another interesting thing about Crown corporations are 
the ability to direct policy, Mr. Speaker . . . We had Madam 
Deputy Speaker in the Chair. And it’s good to see you back but 
it was nice having a woman in the Chair for a little while there, 
Mr. Speaker. So I just wanted to . . . Just for clarity’s sake, if 
people were wondering what was going on there, that’s what’s 
happened here. 
 
In terms of policy choices, our Crown corporations have the 
ability to help drive . . . Government can use our Crown 
corporations to help set policy, and positive policy. I remember 
having a conversation with Premier Calvert several years ago 
around SaskPower and the green agenda, and him being at a 
SaskPower event and talking with some front-line engineers, 
some people who made stuff happen, Mr. Speaker. And he was 
very interested in wind power. Premier Calvert had been very 
interested in wind power. And he had talked to some folks in 
SaskPower who weren’t those front-line engineers, and he was 
told that it wasn’t the easiest thing to pursue. 
 
But then he had a conversation with some of the people who did 
the front-line work, and they said, of course we can make it 
happen. And Premier Calvert at that point said, well let’s make 
it happen then. So our Crown corporations can also be an 
opportunity to set positive policy agendas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
so we have good jobs that help people pay their mortgages and 
contribute to the local economy. We have competition and 
keeping rates . . . well, the ability to set rates and provide 
competition as we have with telecommunications here in 
Saskatchewan, and keep those rates reasonable or low. The 
dividends, more than $3 billion in the last decade, paid to the 
people of Saskatchewan for our services that we enjoy, Mr. 
Speaker, and the ability to impact policy choices. 
 
I think a big concern I have with this bill and with many choices 
this government has made in the past, it reflects this 
government’s inability to analyze the situation or do in-depth 
analysis of the impact of their decisions. So this interpretation 
Act gives and defines privatization, which the member opposite 
. . . I know the minister has heckled that, well nobody else has 
defined, nobody else. He’s not heckling tonight, just to be fair, 
but in the past he was. He was in the . . . earlier tonight. Hey, 
Gordon . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[21:45] 
 
I do like the Minister of Justice very much. I would consider 
him a friend, but I think he’s completely off base with this Act, 
Mr. Speaker. So he has heckled that the NDP failed. He has lots 
to say tonight, Mr. Speaker. So he has said the NDP failed to 
put a definition into the Crown protection Act or to provide a 
definition of privatization. But I can tell you on the doorstep in 
Meewasin or anywhere I’ve been, and actually prior to the 

by-election, taking a petition out in our respective communities, 
talking to people in our community about privatization, they 
know what it means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Minister of Justice has been quite vocal in saying that 
the NDP government, past government, failed to put in place a 
definition of privatization. But I need to point out that when the 
Crown protection Act was put in place, was introduced in 2004 
and then passed, it had support of both sides of the House. And 
back at that point in time, none of the members who were then 
in opposition, who are now in government, felt the need for a 
definition. 
 
So I’m wondering what has changed. Well actually, I’m not 
wondering; I know. I know what has changed. This government 
is trying to do by the back door what they can’t do by the front 
door, Mr. Speaker, and that is to create the opportunity to 
privatize our Crowns. And I can tell you that the CRA, the 
Canada Revenue Agency, has a definition for income tax 
purposes, Mr. Speaker. Anything over 10 per cent will see us 
shipping . . . Anything over 10 per cent will see us shipping 
money to Ottawa rather than keeping those dividends here in 
Saskatchewan. So that’s a pretty clear definition right there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So one of the things I was saying a moment ago, the thing that 
bothers me about this particular bill and about other things that 
the government has brought forward is their lack of analysis at 
the time. So the point about the Canada Revenue Agency and 
the 10 per cent, I know the . . . Initially it was the Minister of 
Finance who took some of these questions and he said, oh, well 
that’s a hypothetical. We’ll cross that bridge when we come to 
it. It’s just a hypothetical, that 10 per cent. We’ll deal with that 
situation. 
 
But that’s something, when you’re creating public policy, Mr. 
Speaker, that should be thought of long before you introduce a 
bill. That’s not an afterthought. That’s something that should 
have gone into . . . I’m sure in their cabinet decision items, that 
was probably included or should have been included. Someone 
should have thought about that or realized that, Mr. Speaker. It 
wasn’t long after the bill was tabled that the opposition and 
many other people realized that was an issue. And it is an issue 
that this Act will possibly put us in the position of shipping 
money to Ottawa instead of keeping those dividends here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think about other areas where this government has done a very 
poor job of those unintended consequences and not really 
thinking things through. And actually it was an issue around 
privatization of the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
which this government sold, I believe it was in 2010. Again 
budget time, it’s just about budget time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and so this makes my mind go to that place. So in 2010, the 
government, without any consultation, without any word to 
anybody, announced in their budget that they were privatizing 
the Saskatchewan Communications Network, the last public 
broadcaster in Canada. They didn’t realize the impact or the 
ramifications of that decision on the film industry. 
 
So SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network], aside from 
providing good local content, being an educational broadcaster, 
also was the first in. So local production companies could get 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

. . . SCN would purchase or get a broadcast licence or issue a 
broadcast licence and they would be the first in, which would 
cause other organizations to support and get involved in that 
production as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the reality is . . . So 
the government hadn’t thought about that at all. Clearly they 
hadn’t thought about it because the Canada Media Fund . . . I 
don’t think they realized the dollars that the film industry . . . 
when we still had a film industry at this time. This was before 
they made the decision to cut the film tax credit, so this was the 
start of the erosion of the film industry. So no, it wasn’t the 
erosion. It was like the outright obliteration of it a few years 
later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that lack of analysis around the sale of SCN was a huge 
issue. And they ended up selling SCN, a treasury Crown for 
$350,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was valued, its assets were 
valued at 4 million. So they undersold it and then just a short 
while later, I believe it was about a year and half later, the 
person who purchased it for $350,000 turned around and sold it 
for much more money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So lack of analysis 
is, I think, the hallmark of this government, or I would say 
analysis after the fact as well. 
 
Again I can’t help but think about the film industry again and 
when the government introduced the cut to the film tax credit. 
And we discovered later through freedom of information 
requests that the government decided to cut the film tax credit 
and then called for analysis of the cut to the film tax credit. So 
they made a decision and then they analyzed it after the fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, which to my mind is the wrong way of 
doing things. And this is exactly what this government, with 
respect to the Canada Revenue Agency . . . and what this will 
mean to the people of Saskatchewan if we end up sending our 
dividends to Ottawa instead of keeping them here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Again I had a very interesting conversation, just thinking about 
the by-election here again. We all had many conversations. I’m 
sure the members opposite did as well. But I’m thinking about a 
young fellow who I met on the doorstep who was from just 
outside of Swift Current, from a small town not far from Swift 
Current. He knew the Premier. He likes the Premier. He likes 
the Sask Party. He’s a Sask Party supporter. There were lots of 
places where we weren’t on the same page, but the one thing 
that he didn’t like was the privatization of our Crowns. He had 
huge concerns about this. So it was interesting to me that . . . 
And I know that he was planning on casting a vote for my new 
colleague from Saskatoon Meewasin, but he still, he made it 
very clear that he was a supporter of the Sask Party generally 
and a supporter of this Premier, but he felt that privatization of 
our Crowns was not the right choice. This is exactly what this 
bill allows this government to do. 
 
So the Premier, it was interesting to me, so the Premier just a 
few weeks ago says, people in Saskatchewan are not interested 
in a referendum. They are most certainly not interested in a 
referendum, but that’s not because they’re not interested in this 
issue. They don’t want a referendum because they don’t want 
our Crowns privatized. They just don’t want our Crowns 
privatized. They don’t want the government to do by stealth 
what it can’t do through the proper channels, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So the Premier is right when he says the people don’t 
want a referendum, but it’s not that they aren’t willing to place 

their support in favour of Crowns. They just don’t want a 
referendum because they don’t want our Crowns privatized. It’s 
that simple. 
 
So I just want to point out the SaskTel effect in . . . And I want 
to thank my colleague for dropping these off on my desk a little 
bit earlier. I’d been looking for them. So I’ve just . . . looking at 
utilities. You know what? I’m not going to talk about those 
right at this moment. 
 
I just want to put some of the Premier’s own comments on the 
record here around privatization. So he’s recently said that he is 
not, again as I just said, he doesn’t want us to have a 
referendum because he knows the people in Saskatchewan 
don’t want to have a referendum, but again it’s not because they 
aren’t interested in our Crowns, that they are not interested in 
selling our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So just a few years ago . . . I’m drawing your attention to Planet 
S which is a Saskatoon paper. And the article’s entitled, “In 
Brad Wall’s Words: A recap of our premier’s statements on 
SaskTel privatization.” I only used his name, Mr. Speaker, 
because it was in a newspaper article. So in this article, the first 
thing that the Premier more recently said about privatization 
came in a one-on-one interview with Gordon Pitts in The Globe 
and Mail in May, 2010. 
 

Pitts asks Wall why he resists privatizing Crowns; Wall 
references the 2003 gaffe by then-party leader Elwin 
Hermanson. Here’s what he said. 
 
“It’s a practical lesson from the election of 2003 (which his 
[Sask] party narrowly lost) when we sacrificed the chance 
to implement the rest of this growth agenda. I was the 
Crown corporation critic and I helped write the policy, so 
mea culpa. We sacrificed the chance to make some 
long-term changes in the psyche and environment in the 
province for this one issue. 
 
“Some on the right say SaskTel doesn’t have a future as a 
standalone indie. Well, it just had its biggest year. Part of it 
is a growing economy and part of it is an attachment 
people have to their Crowns. In the case of SaskTel, it is 
competing with other telcos, and this (attachment) has 
stood them in good stead. I’m not saying Saskatchewan is 
an island with respect to government-owned enterprise, but 
there are unique elements that say to me: ‘We still have 
other things to do, we made a commitment and we plan to 
keep it.’” 

 
Well I’d like the Premier to keep that commitment as I think 
would the people of Saskatchewan. So in this article: 
 

. . . Leader-Post reporter Angela Hall did a year-end 
interview with Wall [with the Premier]. She asks him about 
accusations about a hidden privatization agenda. 

 
He says: 
 

“The fact is we have put significant investment into the 
Crown sector. We put significant general revenue dollars 
into SaskTel over three years to help them expand 
connectivity in the province, to help them expand the 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

mobility network” . . . [said the Premier]. 
 
And then the Premier doesn’t . . . From the same article from 
Planet S, not too much comes out from the Premier on SaskTel 
and privatization until last year’s election, which started March 
8th. And on March 15th, the former NDP leader raises the 
prospect of the “hidden privatization agenda for the province’s 
Crowns, as reported by the CBC.” 
 

When pressed on the issue, Wall said [or the Premier said]: 
“There’s something we signed on to called the Crown 
Corporation Protection Act, or to that effect. Basically, it 
protects Crowns from being privatized,” he said. “If 
elected, we will make one change to that: that’s to the 
liquor [store] retailing in the province. And we’ve already 
announced that.” 
 
“With respect to the major Crowns, we will not be 
changing it if we’re re-elected again,” he said. 

 
So that was just over a year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we 
find ourselves in the position of a bill being before the House 
which will effectively change the nature of our Crown 
corporations if given an opportunity. The reality is a business 
owned 49 per cent by private investors and a business owned 51 
per cent by the people of Saskatchewan will have a very 
different agenda and a very different feel than it currently does. 
 
Our Crown corporations are owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan and are to serve the people of Saskatchewan. The 
49 per cent of whomever may hold that percentage has . . . As 
with all businesses, the goal is to maximize profits, but that’s 
not just the goal of a Crown corporation. So there are two very 
competing interests if this bill goes forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So the discourse . . . I’ll take you back to the Planet S article 
that talks about the Premier’s own words on privatization and 
this: 
 

Before [on May 17th, before] entering the Legislature for 
his government’s throne speech . . . [the Premier] told 
reporters that “competition has gotten tough,” for SaskTel, 
due to a May 2 deal that saw Bell Canada buy Manitoba 
Telecom Services, according to Leader-Post reporter 
David Fraser. 
 
“Maybe that’s a discussion Saskatchewan people want to 
have,” Wall said. “We wouldn’t be able to be in a position 
of welcoming private investment into SaskTel even if that 
was thought to be the right thing, because we didn’t 
campaign on it. 
 
“If it was something Saskatchewan people, we thought, 
really wanted to at least talk about, there is the idea of a 
provincial referendum,” said . . . [the Premier]. 

 
Well we’ve gotten to the place now since that time, less than a 
year ago, the no privatization, oh, then the possibility of a 
referendum, and more recently no referendum. But the reality is 
this bill, The Interpretation Act, leaves that opportunity wide 
open to change, to change the nature of our Crown corporations 
and thus changing their ability to do what they do best, create 

good, mortgage-paying jobs; keep rates low; ensure that the 
dividends are paid to the people of Saskatchewan; impact public 
policy. All those things are put at risk by this government’s 
willingness to do by the back door what they’re not willing to 
do by the front door. 
 
[22:00] 
 
But with respect to this bill, I do know that I have colleagues 
who are interested in speaking to this reasoned amendment, and 
I’d like to cede the floor to my colleague. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
to stand again to talk about Bill 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act. The last time I was able to speak with regards 
to this bill, there was some areas that I wished I had time to 
mention, and so I’m happy to be able to stand today and have 
that opportunity. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill is quite concerning, some of 
the . . . a lot of the aspects of it actually, and it really should be 
withdrawn. And allowing this bill to pass would be allowing the 
Saskatchewan Party government to sell and privatize our 
Crowns, which is wrong. And so I really appreciate that my 
colleague, the member from Regina Douglas Park, putting forth 
the motion for changes to the amendments of this bill. And so I 
look forward to hopefully seeing that pass, and I’m glad that 
she was able to put that forward. 
 
I’ve been speaking to many people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a 
lot of people are very concerned about the aspects of this bill. 
And I was speaking in particular with a friend and a strong 
labour activist, Kent Peterson, who helped me prepare this 
response to this bill. And I told him I would give him a 
shout-out so his name would be on the record. So thanks a lot, 
Kent. 
 
We have been seeing the increase of sell-offs and cuts since this 
government took office in 2007, so that’s been in the past 10 
years. We saw very quickly that our Crowns were at risk as 
soon as they were elected. We know that the people of 
Saskatchewan want and need the Crowns, and we want and 
need to keep our Crown corporations public. So when I talk 
about Crowns, more specifically I’m talking about, you know, 
SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI, SaskEnergy, and there’s many other 
Crowns within that too. 
 
So they provide profits in the form of dividends back to the 
province. And we know, and through past discussions, that it’s 
about approximately $300 million of dividends a year that we 
get back from our Crown corporations. And you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, these Crown corporations, they provide good 
service and particularly important in rural and remote areas 
where there would otherwise be no services provided because 
the cost to provide services in these areas are quite costly. And 
because we have these Crown corporations, we can offset some 
of those costs and make it affordable to provide the service 
there. But if a person owned the business, it wouldn’t make a 
lot of logical sense for them to provide that service in these 
areas. 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

And like my colleague, the critic for Education, indicated that, 
you know, if we can’t get services like SaskTel into a lot of 
these remote and rural areas, that will impact the level of 
education kids get in schools. And our children across the 
province deserve to have the same level of education regardless 
of where they live. And so that’s one of the major, important 
parts of what these Crown corporations do and help provide 
with these services. 
 
Our province is a huge geographic area, and to be able to 
provide service to all the locations and small populated areas, 
again for a business that is looking solely on profits, it doesn’t 
make good sense for them to provide that service there. That’s 
why our Crown corporations were established, and that’s why 
it’s so important, one of the reasons of why it’s so important to 
keep it here. 
 
And there’s many other reasons, such as the rates are among the 
lowest in Canada. We provide services in a huge geographic 
area, but yet our rates are the lowest. And the reason for that is 
because, since we own the Crown corporations, we have control 
over the prices and therefore the competitors that we do have in 
our province also have to compete with our competitive prices. 
So that keeps all of our costs low for the consumers. 
 
And they also provide good jobs. These are good, 
mortgage-paying jobs, jobs that you can buy a house, raise a 
family, have benefits. And we really need those types of jobs in 
our communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So think about what it would mean for cities like Moose Jaw or 
Prince Albert or small towns in rural areas if these jobs would 
disappear because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these communities 
really rely on these types of jobs. And you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s really upsetting when my colleague from 
Saskatoon Riversdale talked about how she hasn’t talked to 
many people who think that privatizing the Crowns is a good 
idea. And I have to agree. I also have that experience. 
 
But when the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow sits and 
indicates that he talks about it a lot and proceeds to laugh, well I 
think a lot of the constituents in his area would be upset if they 
heard that he was talking like that because Moose Jaw was one 
of the communities that was heavily hit by a lot of the 
privatization of these Crown corporations that this Sask Party 
government has put in place since they’ve been elected. 
 
And I think, with the phone calls that I’ve been getting from 
residents in Moose Jaw, they’re getting fed up with the fact that 
their members aren’t sticking up for them. And their members 
in fact were the ones who stood up and voted for cuts to their 
municipal parks. And it’s their members that are supporting the 
cuts of jobs in that community, which is really troubling. So 
with Moose Jaw, they’ve already lost many jobs with the 
closing of Valley View, the cuts to SaskTel jobs. 
 
And both Moose Jaw and Prince Albert lost jobs when they 
privatized the laundry services. They made cuts to the 
municipal parks, and now the privatizing of custodial services. 
This has been having a major impact. And also Prince Albert 
lost many jobs with the privatizing of food services in the 
correctional centres. This is slowly eating away at our services 
that we provide. 

And now that this government started privatizing liquor stores, 
food services, and custodial services, people are concerned that 
more is yet to come. How many other liquor stores will be 
given away? Is our health going to be the next one up for 
privatizing services? If you privatize the food services in the 
jails, will you start privatizing the food services in the 
hospitals? If you privatize the custodial services, will that be 
next, the custodial services in the hospital? People are really 
concerned and people are feeling really uneasy when they 
watch the news and they hear that there’s more cuts in all these 
areas. And they’re wondering, will they be next and will the 
government be putting their livelihood on the block? And so 
this is really serious, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are real 
people, real families that are losing their jobs and opportunities, 
and they are good taxpayers in our community. 
 
These are sometimes the only stable and reliable jobs in these 
small communities, and it’s unfortunate. Like in Prince Albert, 
we talk that it’s a government town. The good-paying jobs are 
government jobs, and that’s because a lot of our other resource 
sectors have been not being utilized to their full extent. Our 
forestry industry has gone south, and we don’t have a lot of 
other industry there for good jobs. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes, 
when this government starts making these decisions, it has a 
major impact on our community. And our unemployment rate is 
one of the highest in the province, you know, and when we 
have the highest rates of poverty and our food banks are being 
used like more and more and half of the people using them are 
children, you’ve got to look at how we’re providing stable 
employment for our province. So that’s why we value our 
Crowns. 
 
And we saw very quickly that they were at risk once this 
government was elected in 2007. So for example, in May of 
2008 SaskTel was forced to contract out some installation 
services for SaskTel Max and high-speed Internet. They had 
trained staff that were able to provide that service, but that was 
contracted out and I believe out of province as well. In July 
2008 the provincial government sold Saskferco to a Norwegian 
company, which had provided the province $209 million since 
the original investment, in dividends. 
 
So I sometimes wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we say 
we’ve got to not only rely on our natural resources, how these 
sales have maybe had the long-term impact on the situation that 
we’re in right now with regards to our economy. 
 
It started off, comparably speaking, as a piecemeal 
privatization. A little bit here, a little bit there, just so that 
nobody really paid attention or nobody really knew what was 
happening. Then we saw big change in October 2008. 
 
The provincial government announced its Saskatchewan First 
policy for Crown corporations, and this was nothing about 
putting Saskatchewan first. It forced our Crowns to sell off and 
give away its out-of-province operations that had until that 
point generated money out of the province for use back into 
Saskatchewan. And we realize more and more how important 
that is. It’s to be bringing money into our province, and how 
that provides that stability. 
 
So this was meant to weaken our Crowns. The more that we 
sold little pieces of it, it was to show that our Crowns were 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

getting weak. We saw SaskTel outsource email and conference 
call services, and then SaskTel had to sell Navigata and 
SaskEnergy had to sell its 50 per cent stake in a Nova Scotia 
natural gas distribution business. All of these were making 
money. All of these were supporting our economy and our 
province here. And then SaskTel had to give up its holdings in 
DirectWest Canada. And this was all in the first two years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of their mandate. This was when we had 
unprecedented resource revenues also, and we were selling 
away a lot of our Crown. 
 
There are many other examples of this type of privatization, 
where our Crowns are being hacked down to limit their capacity 
and ability to provide good returns. So we fast-forward to the 
Information Services Corporation was privatized. Saskatchewan 
Communications Network was effectively given away. The 
SCN was sold for $350,000 to Bluepoint, a private company 
wholly owned by Bruce G. Claassen. Just two years later, Mr. 
Claassen sold SCN to Rogers Broadcasting for $3 million, a 
price more than 8.5 times higher than what we had paid for that 
channel. So it sounds like someone knew the true value of this 
network, but unfortunately it wasn’t our government who 
valued it. 
 
This government attempted to sell our two publicly owned 
casinos, but that was blocked by this opposition. And more 
recently the government has given away nearly 40 public liquor 
stores, all of which turned a profit that was used to fund our 
hospitals, schools, and roads, and keep our taxes lower than 
they otherwise would be. 
 
So we’ve got to remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that revenues 
exist to pay for expenses. And if we give away a good chunk of 
those revenues by privatizing Crowns, expenses are still there. 
So who pays for them? Guess who? We all do with higher 
taxes. 
 
So public services have also been at risk for 10 years — not 
only our Crowns, our public services. So for instance, 
correctional food services were privatized to save no money, 
and we all know that the cost is going to increase because now 
we have no control over the costs. And they’re going to say 
food costs are more, and so they’re going to change the contract 
and they’re going to want more money. And we know that’s 
going to happen. 
 
And also when you talk to people who work in these 
correctional facilities, they talk about how safety has been 
compromised since they went to a private company because 
these workers aren’t trained like our staff were that worked in 
the kitchens. And they’re not trained to handle the 
manipulativeness of inmates, and that’s also very important. 
 
[22:15] 
 
And so hospital laundry services were privatized to an 
out-of-province corporation, and our health care workers are 
telling us now that the supposedly clean laundry is coming back 
to hospitals still wet, stained, and questionable safety when the 
linens have blood on them, and other human by-products. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know, especially in Prince Albert 
with the laundry facility right there, laundry was done in the 

exact same day, you know, so these stains weren’t set in. They 
were treated. They were always clean to perfection. And I know 
with talking to hospital staff there that they’ve ran out of like 
face cloths or soilers or things like that, and they have to wait 
until the next shipment come, whereas when we used to have 
our laundry completed there, they just phoned the laundry 
department and they’d get some brought up right away. And so 
like try to be doing your medical procedures and running out of 
your basic necessities, you know. 
 
And this makes no sense. Not only that we lose those 
good-paying jobs, that we’re . . . And I believe we lost some 
people in our community because of those jobs being lost, but 
we also lost good service. So can you imagine what this means 
to seniors’ or patients’ recovery when they have bedsores or 
infections, or even workers’ safety when the clean laundry 
comes back not clean at all, you know. And so this is putting a 
lot of people at risk and possibilities of infection and then that 
just ends up with a bigger bill in the end. 
 
So then we have our public-private partnerships, the P3s. And 
schools will be one of the examples of this privatization that 
we’re going to be paying for these projects for years and years 
to come. And so your grandchildren will be paying for these 
and that’s just not right to be putting the burden of expenses 
now on them. 
 
And we’re paying for a French company to be building the $2 
billion privatized bypass around Regina. And we talk a lot 
about how there’s a lot of companies from the province here 
that are working on this bypass, but was there nobody in our 
province that was able to take over this contract? There was 
nobody in Canada that was able to take over this contract? And 
we won’t even get into the fact that this contract expanded by 
lots of money. So we’ll carry on with what I have here. 
 
We have private MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging]. So now 
the richest among us can pay to jump the queue for MRIs and 
CT [computerized tomography] scans as well. And we have 
private surgical centres. 
 
And we remember the lean scam. I’ll call it a scam because the 
government forced this into our health care system and we paid 
millions, $100 million and counting, for American consultants 
and Japanese senseis, because I remember those days when they 
paid them lots of money to come and sit and tell us how to do 
this. And the interpreters for the senseis. And I know the sensei 
that came to Prince Albert didn’t want to stay in any of our 
hotels, so then he was transferred from Saskatoon to Prince 
Albert. So the expenses just skyrocketed from there. 
 
And they were paid to follow health workers — nurses, health 
workers like myself — around with stopwatches, and even 
timed us when we went to the bathroom to see how long that 
took. You know, and it just seemed senseless and a waste of 
time. And it really did not end up with any good results, in my 
department anyway. And I didn’t hear of any positive results 
from others. So that was a lot of loss of money right there, too. 
 
So whether it’s Crowns or public services, it’s clear that they’re 
under attack. And there have been thousands and thousands of 
people across the province that have signed many different 
petitions regarding these privatization plans. There’s been 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

thousands of people across the province that’s rallied to show 
this government that they’re against the privatization. 
 
But clearly this government doesn’t listen. And we are now 
facing new threats. And privatization is ramping up on all fronts 
and it’s targeting much larger things, like the whole scale 
sellouts.  
 
So this is with our Bill 40 and the changes to the definition of 
privatization. So currently this government cannot sell a major 
Crown without running on it as an election like they did with 
the liquor stores, or they must hold a referendum. So you have 
to have an election or hold a referendum if you want to sell. 
That’s why you’ll oftentimes hear the Premier talking about 
referendums, and he would say that we need to have a 
referendum if we were planning on selling any one of our 
Crowns. And he wasn’t doing this because he is a nice person 
and really wants to consult with the people in this province. He 
was doing this because it’s the law. 
 
And so now this government is trying to find a different way so 
that they don’t have to go to the public and ask for permission. 
And if this bill passes, it means the government can sell half of 
any Crown without holding a referendum or consulting voters 
whatsoever. This government wants to pass Bill 40 so they can, 
for example, take 49 per cent of SaskTel and convert it into 
shares to be sold or sell it to a pension plan or a giant 
telecommunications company. Either way it would mean 
SaskTel gets privatized. We would lose our dividends, and 
SaskTel’s mandate would change from providing good service 
and return to Saskatchewan to making a profit at all costs for its 
private business shareholders. It would be a loss forever. Bill 40 
is a huge threat, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And just last month, the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation, the body that oversees Crown corporations, found 
himself talking out of both sides of his mouth. In a letter dated 
February 3rd, the member for Prince Albert Carlton responded 
to a concerned constituent by saying, Bill 40 is “. . . not about 
the privatization of any particular Crown corporation” and that 
Crowns will continue to provide service to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Just 10 days later on February 13th, the member for Prince 
Albert Carlton had a change of heart. At a luncheon event in 
Prince Albert he said, “If somebody comes along and offers a 
bunch of money for . . . [STC] just like SaskTel, I think that 
question would have to get answered.” He effectively put STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], the next Crown, on 
the chopping block. 
 
The government’s talking points on selling Crowns is a bit 
weird. It’s kind of like we are not saying they’re for sale but 
we’re definitely taking offers. If I didn’t want to sell my house, 
I wouldn’t talk about potentially selling my house. They have a 
for sale sign outside our Crown corporations and will jump at 
the chance to sell them. They have a plan. 
 
Think about STC as an example. It’s a province-wide bus 
service. It costs us about $17 million a year, according to the 
minister, so that’s why we should sell it, he says. Seventeen 
million dollars as a percentage of the provincial deficit is 1.4 
per cent, so we would lose a vital service, that seniors rely on to 

attend medical appointments and that people across the 
province use for transportation and shipping, forever. We’d lose 
this forever. We would lose STC and the jobs that go along with 
it forever so we would save 1.4 per cent of what our current 
deficit is. 
 
So let me spell this out: deficit before giving away STC, $1.2 
billion; deficit after giving away STC is $1.183 billion. It 
doesn’t seem worth it to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So lately we have also seen deep cuts to education, a complete 
upheaval in health care through cuts and amalgamation, threats 
to wage rollbacks for hard-working public servants. And not 
long ago, the Finance minister said he thinks people should be 
forced to take an unpaid day off per month to help save money. 
They were calling those days Wallidays or whatever the people 
are calling them. I believe the Premier, at SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], said they 
could be Doherty days. A lot of different names. 
 
It’s about the provincial government trying to blame workers 
for their financial mismanagement, scandal, and waste, and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s unfair. This will not stimulate our 
economy or provide the much needed stability or grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So the information that’s in this bill is not going to help 
Saskatchewan in any way, and in fact it’s going to cause more 
hardship. It’s going to cause issues with our economy. We’re 
going to lose control of our Crown corporations, which we 
know are really important with providing services across the 
province, which are really important for providing jobs and 
stability within our province. And this isn’t the way to fix our 
economic problems right now, with regards to attacking our 
hard-working public servants. 
 
And the definition of privatization, just like my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana said, nobody is confused about what 
privatization means. When you ask someone if they know the 
definition of privatization, they could give you a pretty good, 
clear answer. And I have to admit that the answer that I’ve ever 
thought of privatization doesn’t look anywhere near or close to 
the one that’s identified in this bill. And I think this bill is kind 
of deceiving in a bit and that it’s going to be putting people in a 
hard place because the residents of our province don’t want to 
sell their Crowns and they don’t want to lose those services. 
 
And so if the minister’s correct, and he said that this bill is not 
for the intentions of selling our Crown corporations, then he 
should just rescind this bill and say that maybe it wasn’t the 
right way of going about things. And I know, like he can do that 
because he has in the past and accepted this as the wrong move 
to have. 
 
So we don’t need it. We don’t need to have the definition 
clearly made. We know what privatization is, and we don’t 
want to have that. And we know that if we want to do 
something like that, we could go with a province-wide 
referendum because the Minister Responsible for SaskTel even 
indicated that if there was a sale he would do a private-wide 
referendum. 
 
The Premier was quoted saying that there would be no sale of 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

SaskTel because that wasn’t something they campaigned on, 
and it’s because of the current legislation that they couldn’t do 
this. So I wonder if he was talking about this legislation when 
he was quoted saying that. But when it comes down to it, we 
should not sell any of our Crowns or government owned . . . 
because they’re government owned and they’re owned by the 
people of the province, and each person in this province should 
have the ability to put forward what their thoughts of this was. 
 
And that’s what a referendum would do, or even presenting it at 
the next election. Put it in your platform, and we’ll work on it 
for the next election and see what the people of Saskatchewan 
think at that point. And this is just a backdoor way of trying to 
get what this government wants done in the end, and it’s to 
slowly deteriorate the public sector. And so like I said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s a cost to privatizing and we need to 
recognize that. And it’s important to acknowledge that when 
we’re looking at bills such as this one. 
 
I’m really happy that I was able to stand up again today to 
discuss this bill because, like I said before, there was some 
things that I didn’t feel I was able or had time to say the last 
time I spoke on this bill. And so tonight gave me the 
opportunity to do that. And I really appreciate being able to 
have that opportunity. 
 
And I know my other colleagues will want to say a lot about 
with regards to this bill because this is really important on our 
side of the House. And we’re really passionate about this and 
we really feel that we need to really work hard to ensure that 
this bill gets rescinded. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the time of adjournment, 
this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1779 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1782 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1793 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1796 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1800 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


