






















































Hansard: March 13, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 56A  MONDAY, MARCH 13, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1637 
 March 13, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — It being Commonwealth Day, I would ask 
members to please rise for a message from the Queen: 
 

This Commonwealth Day, a baton will set out from 
Buckingham Palace and begin a long and extraordinary 
journey. Over the next twelve months, the Baton will visit 
people living in the nations and territories of our 
Commonwealth family in every continent and ocean. 
 
Carried on its way by thousands of people of all ages and 
backgrounds, by the time it reaches its final destination, 
The Queen’s Baton will have brought together, through its 
route and symbolism, almost 2.5 billion people who share 
the special connection of being Commonwealth citizens. 
 
Contained within the Baton will be a written message that 
will be opened and read at the Commonwealth Games in 
Australia next year. However, there is an even more 
powerful message to be seen and experienced as the Baton 
passes from hand to hand, from seashore to mountaintop, 
through cities, towns, and villages. It is the message of a 
peace-building Commonwealth. 
 
The cornerstones on which peace is founded are, quite 
simply, respect and understanding for one another. 
Working together, we build peace by defending the dignity 
of every individual and community. 
 
By upholding justice and the rule of law, and by striving 
for societies that are fair and offer opportunities for all, we 
overcome division and find reconciliation, so that the 
benefits of progress and prosperity may be multiplied and 
shared. 

 
As members of the Commonwealth family we can find 
much to be thankful for in the inheritances we have 
received from those who came before us. Through 
consensus and co-operation great things have been 
achieved. 
 
We can find further reward and fulfilment by continuing to 
collaborate with others in a spirit of goodwill to build a 
peaceful and abundant future for all Commonwealth 
citizens. 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour today, a pleasure to be able to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, a very special 
guest, Mr. Speaker, and a representative of a fellow 
Commonwealth nation, Mr. Speaker. With us today is His 
Excellency Mizanur Rahman, the High Commissioner of the 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh to Canada. 
 
His Excellency is joined by his colleague, Mr. Dewan 
Mahmudul Haque. Mr. Speaker, he is the first secretary for 
commercial affairs at the High Commission, and accompanying 
our guests from protocol, Melinda Carter and Lisa Harder as 
well, Mr. Speaker. We want to welcome this group and these 
two gentlemen from the High Commission to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the High Commissioner is visiting Saskatchewan 
for the next three days, and he has a very, very busy schedule. 
He’s already met with the Minister of the Economy as well as 
the Minister of Agriculture, and there will be other meetings 
with representatives from the government, the business 
community, and our academic institutions here in Regina and in 
Saskatoon. There will also be, in Saskatoon, tours of the 
Canadian Light Source synchrotron, and then a tour of the 
Lanigan potash mine I think, Mr. Speaker, is also planned. 
 
This is fitting because not too many years ago, sales of potash 
from our province continued — were restarted, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker — between Bangladesh and the province of 
Saskatchewan. That was an issue that I had raised, that our 
delegation had raised on the first ever trade mission from the 
province of Saskatchewan to Bangladesh some years ago, and 
we’re very grateful for the reanimation of that relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can inform members of the House that 
Saskatchewan is Canada’s leading exporter to Bangladesh. Of 
all of the provinces in Canada, in fact 56 per cent of all of 
Canada’s exports to Bangladesh come from the province of 
Saskatchewan. And so it behooves us this day, and frankly 
beyond this day, to say thank you, to say thank you to the 
people of Bangladesh through the government, through the 
republic itself for the partnership that we have.  
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last decade, shipments from 
Saskatchewan to Bangladesh have actually doubled to 
$441 million. Principally the exports are pulses, lentils, and 
peas, but also wheat and, as I’ve just noted, potash as well. In 
2014 is when I was happy and pleased to be able to go to 
Bangladesh and witness the signing of an agreement that 
marked the first exports of potash, as I’ve already noted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the academic front, our researchers are working 
with their counterparts in Bangladesh on a number of 
innovative projects, and we’re advised that there are 150 
students from Bangladesh enrolled in post-secondary 
institutions in Saskatchewan. 
 
We should also acknowledge the growing and vibrant 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

Bangladeshi community that exists here in the province. Since 
2011 more than 1,700 citizens from that country have become 
permanent residents of the province of Saskatchewan, and they 
have made Saskatchewan a better place, a more diverse and 
better place. And we’re grateful for that part of the partnership 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you learn new things when you travel abroad. It’s 
been a great honour for me to have been to Bangladesh, as I’ve 
mentioned, and to learn that this relationship is a mutually 
beneficial one. It needs to be two-way; in fact we probably need 
to double our efforts on this side to make sure there is a greater 
benefit to Bangladesh. And one of the ways I hope to do that 
are through investments in the global food security institute at 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s true that red lentils from our province are high 
in selenium, and that has a salutary effect on the fact that there’s 
a high natural occurrence of arsenic in Bangladesh. We need to 
explore more synergy, more opportunity to improve the health 
in our partner nations, including obviously in Bangladesh. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask that all members would 
join with me today in welcoming His Excellency and the 
official from the High Commission here to the legislature in 
Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier here today 
and welcome this delegation from Bangladesh to the Assembly, 
to thank them on behalf of a grateful opposition and thank them 
on behalf of a grateful province. 
 
Certainly to His Excellency Mizanur Rahman, the High 
Commissioner of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to 
Canada, and to Mr. Dewan Mahmudul Haque, first secretary of 
the High Commission in Ottawa, welcome to Saskatchewan. 
Welcome to our Assembly. 
 
As has been mentioned but wanting to share this, your presence 
here today is greatly valued, as is the relationship that 
Saskatchewan and Canada has with Bangladesh. Of course that 
relationship is not just valued but it’s a growing relationship. As 
was mentioned by the Premier, Saskatchewan leads Canada by 
way of provinces with exports to Bangladesh, with over half a 
million dollars in exports to Bangladesh annually. And I know 
that agricultural producers all across Saskatchewan are so 
thankful for that relationship. 
 
We also greatly value that relationship as it relates to potash, 
and not just our ability to sell potash to Bangladesh and support 
that important industry here in Saskatchewan but to support 
agriculture in Bangladesh as well. 
 
Very, very importantly, it’s important for all of us to note the 
contributions of the Bangladeshi-Canadian community to our 
province. To all of those that have chosen to build their lives in 
Saskatchewan, to study, to work, to build their families, and to 
build and better Saskatchewan within the 
Bangladeshi-Canadian community, I say thank you. It 
strengthens our province and it builds our future. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important relationship. It’s valued to 
have this delegation here today. On behalf of the official 
opposition, as I say, I say thanks. Let’s build this relationship. 
We wish you constructive meetings, and let’s keep building for 
the future. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce two constituents of ours in 
Regina Walsh Acres, Elizabeth and Ian Knibbs. Elizabeth is in 
grade 5 at St. Angela. She enjoys the classes of religion, math, 
and art. Her interests are politics and candy, and she is very 
good at artwork so she has some artwork hanging on her 
bedroom wall. And she is very excited because after these 
proceedings we’re going to have opportunities to go and have a 
discussion with the member from Swift Current, which she is 
very much looking forward to meeting him. 
 
With Elizabeth is her father, Ian. I’ve gotten to know Ian quite 
well over the last couple years as a constituent, and he’s very 
involved with his community. Ian is the district manager for 
Coram Construction. He’s a chairperson for Merit Contractors 
Association, the chairperson for the Carpentry Trade Board, 
director for the examination development curriculum board, 
director for Merit Canada, and he was a participant for Kiss the 
Canvas fundraiser which is a boxing fundraiser for palliative 
care in Regina for Greystone Bereavement. Coram participates 
with Caring Hearts Camp, bereavement for children.  
 
So as I said, Ian is a very active member of his community, and 
our communities are all better off for involvement by people 
like him. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 
Elizabeth and Ian to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And finally, they’ve already had one of the best parts of the tour 
because they were able to partake in the member from Carrot 
River Valley’s brownies. He is famous for his cooking. And we 
had lunch, and he had a couple left over for dessert, so he was 
very excited to share those. So welcome, Ian and Elizabeth. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask your permission to 
have an extended introduction today. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very honoured 
today to present members of my family who are here, most of 
them for the first time, today. 
 
Mahli Brindamour, my wife, is here for the first time. The other 
day the Premier referenced 650 new docs in the province and 
then said, oh wait, 649, and pointed at me. And I thought that 
was a pretty good joke. But Mahli came out here for residency, 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

the other year from Montreal, and she’d planned to go right 
away back to Montreal as soon as she could, but she decided 
she liked me and decided she liked Saskatchewan and has stuck 
around. So in recruitment and retention, I think it evens out. In 
terms of quality of physician, we’re much ahead. She’s an 
excellent pediatrician, working with refugee populations, First 
Nations and Métis children, and children in foster care, and has 
been a great advocate for the health of children in our province. 
 
I’m also very pleased to welcome Abraham, who is five. He 
goes to the École canadienne-française in Saskatoon. He’s an 
excellent swimmer, and I was able to convince him to join us 
today by telling him that this place was a lot like the Hogwarts 
school of magic . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. Mr. 
Speaker, no comments to Mr. Malfoy at this time. 
 
I would also like to present . . . 
 
Je dois présenter . . . Je suis très content de présenter ma 
belle-mère, Françoise Tchou, qui est avec nous pour la première 
fois dans cette legislature. Elle est ici de Québec pour nous 
rendre visite, et je suis très remerciant pour l’appui et l’amour 
qu’elle et sa famille m’ont montré dans les dernières années. 
 
Et je dois aussi tristement mentionner quelqu’un qui n’est pas 
avec nous. Ça c’est Michel Brindamour, mon beau-père, qui est 
décédé la veille de Noël cette année. Et je suis vraiment triste 
qu’il n’est pas là parce qu’il aimait tellement la politique. Il 
aimait tellement la fransaskoisie et la francophonie d’ici. Il aura 
été vraiment content de me voir dans cette place. 
 
[Translation: I have to present . . . I am very happy to present 
my mother-in-law, Françoise Tchou, who is with us for the first 
time in this legislature. She is here from Quebec to visit, and I 
am very thankful for the support and the love she and her 
family have shown me over the last few years. 
 
And I must also sadly mention someone who isn’t here with us. 
That is Michel Brindamour, my father-in-law, who passed away 
Christmas Eve this year. And I am very sad that he is not here 
because he so loved politics. He loved the Fransaskois and the 
francophone community here. He would have been very happy 
to see me in this place.] 
 
I’ll translate for the members, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
welcome my mother-in-law, Françoise Tchou. I’m very grateful 
for the support and love that she and her family have shown me. 
And I’m sorry not to be able to welcome Michel Brindamour, 
who is my father-in-law, who passed away just before 
Christmas this year and was a political fanatic with a particular 
and perhaps peculiar love of by-elections, who would have been 
very, very happy to see me in this role. And in particular I’m 
sad not to be able to share my work as critic pour la 
francophonie [Translation: for the francophonie] with him. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Finally I’d like to welcome again my parents, Wally and Lea 
Meili. Wally is a retired farmer, but not particularly retired 
because he works just as hard as ever now doing real estate. 
And Lea is retired from work as an RN [registered nurse], and 
later as administrator for Extendicare in Moose Jaw. And I’m 
very grateful for their support and presence here today. I ask the 

members to join me in welcoming them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present the 
petition to stop the redirection of funding for the Northern 
Teacher Education Program Council, Inc. NORTEP-NORPAC 
[northern teacher education program-Northern Professional 
Access College] is a program of higher learning, and has 
changed the classroom landscape in the North for over 40 years. 
A recent report shows that 94 per cent of NORTEP grads found 
employment in the North. NORTEP has improved teacher 
retention rates in the North. During this time of truth and 
reconciliation, the NORTEP program supports its fundamental 
recommendations, maintaining culture and language goals. 
 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program] has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to students. 
The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in the North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of the communities of La 
Ronge, Air Ronge, Beauval, Pinehouse, Stony Rapids. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Estevan, Carlyle, Benson, and Broadview. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased again 
to rise today and present a petition that has been spearheaded by 
the Saskatchewan Seniors Association. It points out the 
government’s decision in last budget to increase the 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

per-prescription fee by $5 under the seniors’ drug plan, and they 
have some huge concerns about what’s going to be in this 
budget next week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out that this decision to increase this 
per-prescription fee by $5 affects about 120,000 seniors alone 
by an average of about $80 per year, Mr. Speaker. They also 
point out that there are many seniors who, because of this 
increase to drug costs, are actively making decisions to pay 
their rent instead of take medication or pay their power bills, 
Mr. Speaker, instead of take their medication, or they take their 
medication in a smaller quantity than was prescribed, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s a huge issue for many citizens across our 
province. 
 
This petition today, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take the necessary 
steps and the immediate action to end this discrimination 
of all people afflicted with illnesses, especially seniors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition that I’ve been presenting has 
signatures from across Saskatchewan. The pages today, some of 
the signatures are from folks at Horseshoe Bay, Livelong, 
Mervin, Turtle Lake, Maidstone, Imperial — many from 
Imperial, Mr. Speaker — again Livelong. All across 
Saskatchewan, I’ve had the opportunity to present. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again under the direction of my colleague from Prince Albert, 
I’m proud to stand in my place to present a petition around the 
second bridge for Prince Albert. And the need for the second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clear than it is today. 
Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert and all 
the businesses that send people and products through Prince 
Albert require a solution. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Sask Party government stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And as I stand in my place every day presenting this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, we have pages signed from all throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, in particular Prince Albert and area, 
but this particular page has been signed from people from 
Saskatoon, from Regina, and Canora. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
my place today to present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. 
 
The individuals who have signed this petition wish to bring to 
our attention the following: that the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates 

a new definition for privatization that allows the government to 
wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum; that in 
2015-16 alone, Saskatchewan Crown corporations returned 
$297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. These dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not private investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan 
people across the province. And that under section 149 of the 
Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are exempt 
from corporate income tax provided not less than 90 per cent of 
the shares are held by a government or a province. The Sask 
Party’s proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be 
sold without being considered privatized, and that this 
short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than the people of Saskatchewan. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting our jobs and Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Prince Albert. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to raise 
a petition concerning the issue of pay equity, and the people 
signing this petition want to bring to your attention the 
following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity, and that all women should be paid equitably, and that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth, and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
We know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives saw 
that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on the average 
63 cents for every dollar a man makes; and in Regina, women 
earned on the average of 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a man 
makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from the 
city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, we know in Prince Albert we have 
high rates of suicide, and our Parkland Health Region 
implemented that they would train all health care professionals 
in providing the suicide risk assessment tools. And in 
incorporating their plans, they included the Prince Albert 
mobile crisis and trained all their workers to implement the 
suicide risk assessment. And so with the closing of mobile crisis 
during the daytime hours, we don’t have these crisis workers 
available to provide the suicide risk assessment that is very 
needed in our community. 
 
So when someone contacts mental health in Prince Albert and 
they’re suicidal and it’s during the daytime hours, they have to 
refer that call to the Prince Albert Police Service. And our 
Prince Albert Police Service, they do the best they can with 
working with crisis issues, but they’re not trained to provide 
that service. And it oftentimes takes them off the streets for 
hours in our ER [emergency room] rooms, waiting with the 
client so that they could get their services, which this service 
was provided by Prince Albert mobile crisis and again with 
trained workers that were sitting with clients. Also they were 
providing the suicide risk assessment at Victoria Hospital 
because we know our staff at the ER are very busy and so this 
has been putting a lot of pressure on staff of Victoria Hospital 
when we had workers available to do that. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert Mobile Crisis Unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition was signed by people in 
Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those 
signing this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
that many of our licensed non-profit child care centres pay 
commercial property taxes, and this is not done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care centres are essential to our economy, yet most 
centres struggle just to keep the lights on. This issue threatens 
both the number of child care spaces as well as the quality of 
care. Quality child care has an enormous positive impact on a 
child’s future outcomes and yields high rates of economic 
return for everyone in the province. 
 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the citizens signing this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling on the Government of Saskatchewan 
to keep custodial work public and to stop the contracting out of 
cleaning services. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 
following: 
 
The Saskatchewan government has taken steps to contract out 
cleaning services in government buildings which will result in 
loss of 251 jobs in 17 communities. The decision will impact 
workers and taxpayers. It will affect health and safety. It will 
affect the quality of work. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, all this 
certainly has proven in other jurisdictions to be more expensive. 
Mr. Speaker, they also are well aware that this government does 
not have a mandate to proceed with this. They didn’t have the 
guts to talk to the people of Saskatchewan about this at election 
time. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan stop the contracting-out 
process and keep custodial work public. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by 1,140 citizens from 
across the province from the communities of Moose Jaw, Swift 
Current, Pennant, Abbey, Yorkton, Regina, Vibank, White City, 
Sheho, Canora, Springside, Insinger, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Qu’Appelle, Melfort, Dundurn, Martensville, Vanscoy, Delisle, 
Allan, Prince Albert, Christopher Lake, Melville, Wynyard, 
Moosomin, Grenfell, Ituna, Preeceville, Hudson Bay, Porcupine 
Plain, La Ronge, Lamp Lake, Stanley Mission, Air Ronge, 
Marshall, North Battleford, Richard, Lloydminster, Albertville, 
Meath Park, Birch Hills, Shellbrook, Leask, Muskoday First 
Nation, St. Louis, Spruce Home, Tisdale, Nipawin, Rosthern, 
Debden, Warman, Saskatoon, Asquith, Outlook, Langham, 
Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Indian Head, White City, 
Milestone, Bengough, Weyburn, Kronau, Kindersley, Balgonie, 
Rush Lake, Osage, Craven, Regina Beach, Weldon, Battleford, 
Cut Knife, Shell Lake, Dorintosh, Makwa, Meadow Lake, 
Goodsoil, Aberdeen, White Fox, Carrot River, Rhein, Avonlea, 
Greenwater, Creighton, Bjorkdale, St. Benedict, Lac Vert, 
Archerwill, Crystal Springs, Gull Lake, Waldeck, Watrous, 
Consul, Shaunavon, McLean, Wilkie, Cando, and Colonsay, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of domestic 
violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence follows them to work. 
Victims of domestic abuse should not be further victimized at 
work. Employers lose $77.9 million approximately annually 
due to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted such legislation, 
and Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 
17 weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job 
security upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals who are signing the petition today 
come from Moose Jaw and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and present a 
petition to reverse the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker 
program. The Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for 
the Aboriginal court worker program in the 2016-2017 
provincial budget. 
 
Aboriginal court workers, Mr. Speaker, play an important role 
helping First Nations and Métis people in criminal and child 
apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately 
represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional system, and this 
program helped people to be safer, help our communities to be 
safer through reducing recidivism rates, making life better for 
those who have to go through the justice system, making all of 
our communities safer, and reducing costs. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan reverse its short-sighted and 
counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal court worker 
program. 

 
The petition is signed by citizens from Wynyard, Foam Lake, 
and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Women of the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As you 
know, last Wednesday, March 8th, was International Women’s 
Day. And while that was a day to celebrate all women of the 
world, I’d like to take today to stand and recognize a specific 

group of women, the women of Saskatchewan’s northern 
communities. 
 
In light of the many tragic events in the North, the loss of young 
lives due to this government’s lack of mental health and 
addiction services, it is important for us to acknowledge the 
essential role that women in the North play as teachers, 
caregivers, and role models in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grandmothers, mothers, and sisters of the 
North are the backbones of their families. Their strength and 
compassion keep our young people safe and cared for. And 
their wisdom instills in our young people with the traditional 
knowledge and values that keep the northern people’s strength 
going. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, the women of the North are struggling 
over the recent rash of suicides that are plaguing our 
communities. These are their children, grandchildren, sisters, 
and brothers that are suffering. It’s their families who aren’t 
receiving the mental health and addiction services that they so 
desperately need. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in 
recognizing the women of our northern communities, to 
acknowledge their strength and the effort it takes for them to 
hold their communities together during this time of despair, and 
to stand with them in solidarity as they continue to work and 
care for the North and her children. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Golfer from Moose Jaw Enjoys Winning Season 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
acknowledge Canadian golfer Adam Hadwin on his first PGA 
[Professional Golfers’ Association] Tour win. Yesterday Adam 
came away with a 71 even-par on the final round at Valspar 
which was enough to win the tournament and to guarantee a 
spot in the coveted Masters at Augusta in April. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Adam, who currently lives in Abbotsford, BC, 
was born in Moose Jaw and actually took his first golf lessons 
at a Moose Jaw golf course. He has not only had an incredible 
season of golf and is ranked fourth overall in the FedExCup 
standings, but he also is only weeks away from getting married. 
That’s right, a winning season is a great way to pay for a 
honeymoon he and his bride-to-be have planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was only one problem. He needed to 
postpone the honeymoon as the Masters is scheduled for the 
same week they were planning to travel to French Polynesia. 
Thankfully Adam says his fiancée is understanding, and they’ve 
been able to get a refund on the tickets to reschedule to another 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me congratulating Adam 
Hadwin on his big win at Valspar and on his upcoming 
wedding. Also we wish him the best as he represents Canada at 
the Masters in Augusta. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

Park. 
 

Red Cross Pink Day 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, February 22nd marked the Red 
Cross’s annual Pink Day, which aims to raise awareness on the 
impact of bullying and teach our young people to take action 
towards creating safe and respectful communities for others. 
 
Pink Day began in 2007 when two grade 12 boys from 
Cambridge, Nova Scotia named Travis Price and David 
Shepherd noticed a younger boy being bullied for wearing a 
pink T-shirt. The senior boys rallied their friends to send a 
message to these bullies, and the next day the school hallways 
were filled with students wearing pink T-shirts as well. 
 
The Red Cross was inspired by these young people’s brave 
decision to take action and used the idea to create a worldwide 
movement where students and adults alike can rally together 
and wear Red Cross pink T-shirts in solidarity against bullying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that on February 22nd I, along 
with many Saskatchewan people, wore a Red Cross Pink Day 
T-shirt. The celebration of this event in our province supports 
the year-round bullying prevention program run by the 
Saskatchewan Red Cross. Considering that three out of four 
people say they have been affected by bullying, this is an 
invaluable cause that not only helps individuals but makes our 
schools and communities stronger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
recognizing the valuable work that the Red Cross accomplishes 
on Pink Day and throughout the year in preventing bullying and 
creating a safe and healthy environment for future generations. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

The Battlefords Citizen and Junior Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to stand today to recognize and thank two very special 
citizens of The Battlefords. On February 3rd of this year, 
Natalya Shevchuk and Pat Gotto were recognized as Junior 
Citizen and Citizen of the Year, respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Natalya is a grade 12 student at North Battleford 
Comprehensive High School and she is indeed a very busy one, 
being involved in many activities such as the Interact club, cake 
decorating club, the student representative council, the debate 
club, and she competed in baking at Skills Canada. I think it’s 
safe to say that she has time management down to a science. 
 
In recent years she started a great fundraiser called Dancers 
Who Care to raise money for our new BTEC [Battlefords Trade 
and Education Centre] building. Their annual event grows every 
year and continues to raise money for this very worthy cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pat Gotto is our 2016 Citizen of the Year. Since 
Pat retired as director of nursing at Battlefords Union Hospital, 
she has been a tireless volunteer for numerous organizations in 
The Battlefords. Her resumé is long and illustrious with such 
things as board member and volunteer for Battlefords Union 

Hospital Foundation, board member for the Third Avenue 
United Church and the Edwards Society. She volunteers for the 
pastoral care committee, the Dekker Centre, Meals on Wheels, 
and the Western Development Museum. She is a tireless worker 
whenever she volunteers, and certainly her efforts are greatly 
appreciated by everyone she touches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking and 
congratulating Natalya and Pat for all that they do. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

100th Anniversary of Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 10th 
marked the 100th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association. Last week the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health, the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure, and the member from Saskatoon 
University and myself had the distinct pleasure of welcoming a 
number of the members and representatives for a flag raising in 
front of the Legislative Building to mark this great milestone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministers of Health, and Rural and Remote 
Health also met with representatives of the SRNA 
[Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association] later in the day, 
and I am told that they heard some great ideas on how to move 
forward with nursing in our province. Mr. Speaker, our health 
system depends on nurses and their leadership. Without them, 
efforts to improve it would not be possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my mother was a nurse, so I understand how 
important it is to have nurses and the large contribution that 
they make to our province. Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, because of 
this government’s commitment to health care, there are over 
3,000 more nurses in our province than there were a decade 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in thanking the SRNA and all nurses for their hard work and 
dedication to caring for the people of this province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame Inductee 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 
happy to join with the Prince Albert Council of Women to 
celebrate the induction of new members into the Prince Albert 
Council of Women’s Hall of Fame. This event is held each year 
in correlation with International Women’s Day. Over the years, 
Prince Albert has seen amazing women who have led to 
achievements resulting in outstanding contributions to our 
province and country. The Council of Women encourage and 
support local women who act as role models for future 
generations of women and girls. 
 
This event yesterday celebrated the induction of a constituent of 
mine, Lynda Monahan, into the hall of fame. She is a celebrated 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

local author and writing instructor who has become well known 
in Prince Albert and area for her contributions as a volunteer, 
community leader, and fellow sister to many of us women. 
 
It is not uncommon for Lynda to lend her creative writing 
expertise through writing workshops in our community and use 
her talents to help those in need through the Prince Albert youth 
outreach program and also the Pine Grove correctional institute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
please join me in congratulating, thanking, and acknowledging 
Lynda Monahan for her passion and dedication to women’s 
issues in her community. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Provincial Job Numbers for February 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New job numbers 
were released on Friday for all the provinces. They showed that 
in February Saskatchewan had the best job creation in Canada. 
In fact there was 15,300 new jobs created in all of Canada in 
February; 8,000 of those new jobs were in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the past year, there were 7,800 more people working in 
trade in Saskatchewan, 4,800 more people in scientific and 
technical services, and 4,500 more people in education, and 
3,000 more in manufacturing. There are 5,000 more women 
working in Saskatchewan than a year ago and 3,500 more men. 
Aboriginal employment is up 4,400, or 10 per cent. That’s eight 
consecutive months of growth. Aboriginal youth employment is 
up 1,000, 12 per cent. That’s 10 consecutive months of growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great jobs report for our province. But we 
realize that employment reports fluctuate from month to month, 
so it’s important to look long term. In a decade since the 
government was elected in 2007, Saskatchewan has the second 
best job creation in all of Canada. And where did Saskatchewan 
rank the decade before under the NDP [New Democratic 
Party]? Dead last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has changed. Even during 
challenging times, Saskatchewan’s diversified economy is now 
built to remain strong. And we are never going back to the way 
under the NDP. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party and that 
Premier want to talk about just about anything other than the 
scandal that filled the pockets of well-connected businessmen 
associated with that government, their well-connected friends. 
So I hope that finally we’ll get some answers that’ll help us get 
to the bottom of this so we can move along.  
 
I’ll ask a very simple, straightforward question to the Premier 
once again here today. There’s absolutely no excuse for him not 
to answer. When did this Premier find out that the original 
seller of the land in the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 

scandal was the landlord for the then minister of the GTH? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course the Provincial Auditor has looked into this matter. The 
Provincial Auditor had full authority to examine all of the 
records related to this matter. The Provincial Auditor had access 
to all of the individuals to whom she wished to have access to. 
She availed herself of those opportunities to interview parties 
involved. She availed herself of the opportunity to review all of 
the documents involved, and she came to a conclusion, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would just quote the auditor, the words of the 
auditor on a provincial open-line radio show, and I quote: 
 

In any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for red flags, 
and because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest. And we didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing in 
the course of our work, so there were no red flags there. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer. The question was for the 
Premier, and this question is for the Premier. When did that 
Premier find out that the original seller of land with the GTH 
scandal was the original . . . was the landlord for the minister of 
the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor has looked into the matter. The Provincial 
Auditor made 10 recommendations in her report on this matter: 
eight recommendations pertaining to the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure, two recommendations pertaining to the 
Global Transportation Hub. We’ve accepted those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. Those recommendations have 
been implemented or are in the process of being implemented.  
 
We also know that the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] have indicated they’re looking into the matter. We 
pledged full co-operation with work that they’re undertaking, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was for the 
Premier. No answer again here today. It’s weak and pathetic 
that the Premier of Saskatchewan can’t take to his feet and 
answer that very simple, basic question. It’s a deal that wasted 
millions of dollars. It filled the pockets of well-connected 
friends of the Sask Party, and the Premier can’t even answer a 
question about his own personal knowledge in this scandal. 
Maybe I’ll move along from this scandal and more into the 
waste and even more mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

The Regina bypass of course was studied to death, as this 
government said, and it was $400 million at that time. Then it 
doubled to $800 million. And then it just kept going, and now 
it’s $2 billion and counting. And that Premier has signed 
taxpayers on to an overrun of more than a billion dollars. Even 
with so much at stake, that Premier and the Sask Party refused 
to release any of the details. If there’s really nothing to see here, 
then open the books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s attacking workers. He’s attacking democracy. 
He’s attacking our Crowns, and he’s attacking the jobs of 
Saskatchewan people, the contracts with Saskatchewan people. 
Will he open up the contract with Vinci? Will he fight to get 
back the more than a billion dollars that have been wasted in 
this overrun back from this conglomerate from France and 
beyond? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite repeats 
over and over again this nonsense with his numbers with 
respect to 400 and the updated amount that we’re currently 
investing in the bypass. The $400 million estimate is years old, 
and it contemplated a much smaller project that frankly 
wouldn’t have been much of a bypass, as it turns out. 
 
What we’re talking about here is a complete bypass operation, 
Mr. Speaker, one that is employing Saskatchewan people, 
principally . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, do members 
opposite want to hear the answer to the question? It’s 
employing Saskatchewan people. It’s utilizing the services of a 
great Saskatchewan company called Broda Construction. 
 
Will that member please take to his feet and finally indicate that 
he understands it was never a $400 million project at the scale it 
is now, Mr. Speaker? It’s a $1.8 billion project putting 
Saskatchewan people to work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of people are surprised that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to talk about the jobs 
report that came out last week, Mr. Speaker: 8,000 new jobs in 
this province, year over year. Eight thousand new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, from month to month, from January to February. 
Aboriginal employment up, Mr. Speaker; the third-lowest 
unemployment rate in the country even as we face headwinds in 
terms of commodity prices, Mr. Speaker. Part of the reason for 
the success are projects like the Regina bypass. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Resource Revenues and State of Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer again there. We 
can’t get a straight answer from the Premier on front after front. 
Just a couple of years ago, they said this was $400 million. Now 
it’s over $2 billion and counting, and going to a conglomerate 
from France and beyond. It’s beyond defence, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But of course they’re also hiding other facts. They’re hiding 
their third-quarter financial report, keeping those facts locked 
up as well. They’ve said of course through this year, that the 
deficit was originally $400 million. Then it doubled, I guess 
like the bypass, to $800 million, and then well beyond that to 

well over a billion-dollar deficit again, Mr. Speaker. And now 
this week we’re starting to hear comments, or last Friday from 
the Finance minister pretending that the budget . . . or claiming 
that it’s going to be balanced next year, from well over a billion 
dollars of deficit to balanced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that they’re not taking back dollars from 
this French conglomerate with the overrun of over a billion 
dollars. So they must be hiding even deeper cuts and more 
desperate selloffs and more tax on Saskatchewan people. So 
today — not tomorrow, not next week, but today — will the 
Premier of Saskatchewan finally come clean with the true state 
of our finances and the Sask Party plans to deal with it? Or are 
they so arrogant, so arrogant that they think that the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t deserve to know the facts or Sask Party 
schemes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think we made it very clear in this Chamber and in the province 
of Saskatchewan over the course of the last year, the resource 
revenues are down about 1.2, $1.3 billion over the course of the 
last couple of years and each and every successive year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also know that 74 cents of every dollar that this government 
collects, seventy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Listen to him 
chirp over there, Mr. Speaker, just chirping away over there, 
Mr. Speaker, like he usually does, because he’s just not 
interested in the truth, Mr. Speaker. Seventy-four cents of every 
tax dollar that we collect in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
74 cents, goes to education, health care, and social services. 
That leaves every other area of government to compete for the 
other 26 cents of every tax dollar across government, Mr. 
Speaker. What do we know? Well we know . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The members come to order. I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier indicated in a speech to the SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] convention several weeks 
ago that the deficit for this current fiscal year is in the 
neighbourhood of $1.2 billion, duly released in that factual 
information come March 22nd when we bring down the budget 
and the third quarter update, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we also know from a report from CUPE [Canadian Union 
of Public Employees] that was just brought out, Mr. Speaker. 
CUPE, I’m sure that they’re familiar with this organization, 
CUPE came out and it said this, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s revenues from non-renewable resources 
are expected to have dropped off in half in two years, from 
$2.6 billion in 2014-15 to a projected 1.3 billion, a decline 
of 1.3 billion. If these non-renewable resource revenues 
from oil, potash, natural gas, minerals, and Crown land 
sales hadn’t declined, then the province would run a 
surplus this year as it would have last year. 

 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what CUPE said. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Drainage Issues and Water Management Strategy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Finance minister 
understands that there are real people, real families who feel the 
pain and the consequences of the Sask Party’s cuts and attacks 
— people in this building, Mr. Speaker. He can’t just wave a 
magic wand and make the deficit disappear. And they also can’t 
make the backlog of drainage issues facing farmers and rural 
municipalities disappear overnight either. 
 
For years neighbours have been pitted against neighbours in 
costly court battles while this government has refused to 
properly enforce and address the backlog in claims across large 
swathes of the province. This year’s runoff is projected to be 
worse than average. So instead of just hoping it will all be 
magically different this year, when will this government do its 
job and properly enforce the existing laws instead of pitting 
farmer against farmer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks to the member opposite for asking a question that’s very, 
very pertinent to the province of Saskatchewan, and in 
particular to the rural areas and agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I need to correct a few things with respect to not doing 
anything. It’s this government, Mr. Speaker that started 
consulting back prior to 2012 with ag groups, with municipal 
groups, with conservation groups, with respect to the ag water 
management strategy here in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
followed that up with regulations and now introduced 
legislation; contrary, Mr. Speaker, to 16 years prior to this 
administration being here, Mr. Speaker, where there was 
absolutely nothing done with respect to ag water management 
in the province of Saskatchewan. There was nothing done with 
respect to emissions in the province of Saskatchewan as they 
rose 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  
 
We now have members across that want to . . . that support the 
federally imposed carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. They did nothing 
when it came to supporting agriculture and water management 
and strategy in the province, and they did nothing when it came 
to supporting industry in the province of Saskatchewan as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Incidence of Crop Insurance and AgriStability Claims 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, that’s coming from a minister 
who’s representing a government that’s failed to meet any of its 
promises regarding climate change at all, so I think it’s very 
rich. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without a more concrete plan of action than that, 

the flood of water rising this spring is going to be followed by a 
flood of crop insurance and AgriStability claims that this 
government needs to be prepared for. But last month’s special 
warrant shows how unprepared they are. They grossly 
underestimated the payouts due for AgriStability by $22 
million, and thirteen and a half million dollars for crop 
insurance. With more flooding and unseeded acres projected for 
this year, there are bound to be even more claims.  
 
So can the Agriculture minister assure Saskatchewan farmers 
that they won’t be hung out to dry by the Sask Party, or are 
farmers once again going to have to pay the price for the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement, waste, and scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member for her question, but I have to seriously question 
the premise of it. 
 
What we are doing with special warrants is what’s required 
under summary finances. There’s no surprises here. 
AgriStability claims are going to be up this year $21.6 million, 
and crop insurance claims are expected to be up about 13.5 
million because of the crop that’s left out over winter. And 
that’s not because of yield and quality losses; those anticipated 
losses are from wildlife damage. And now, under summaries, 
this is the way it’s handled. It’s handled with special warrants.  
 
Now I remind the member that it was her party that insisted that 
we go to summaries. Evidently they didn’t understand how they 
worked. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Government Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, every day we see more evidence of 
the Sask Party desperately scraping for cash wherever they can 
find it, and shamefully that includes our children’s classrooms. 
They’ve underfunded and undervalued teachers and the people 
who work with our kids. They’ve threatened to cut school 
boards and eliminate local voice. And they’re telling schools 
that they can’t use their own reserve funds to relieve the 
financial burden that the Sask Party is forcing upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me repeat that: they’re telling our schools that 
they can’t touch their own savings to ensure that our children 
get the education that they deserve. Mr. Speaker, I can’t help 
but wonder: was this the Sask Party’s plan all along to raid 
these rainy day funds to fill the hole left by their 
mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got an issue that I 
want to take with the member opposite. On February 8th, the 
NDP issued a news release saying the Minister of Education 
skipped a session at SUMA. Mr. Speaker, I want to say this: 
SUMA did not have a dialogue session for the Ministry of 
Education. You can’t go to what isn’t there.  
 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

SUMA was forced to clarify that there was no session planned 
for education. To be fair and clear, SUMA had not planned a 
session for that. He went on to say all invited ministers 
responded positively and attended, as most have done for many 
years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give the member opposite the 
opportunity to stand and rise in this place and apologize to 
SUMA. Because this week, Mr. Speaker, is SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], another 
situation where I don’t want to see this repeated so she confuses 
other members of the public like she did to the SUMA reps. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, taking money that was set aside for 
our kids’ education and using it to fill the deficit, not even 
acknowledging it, it’s not smart. And now it looks like they’re 
doing the same with NORTEP. We asked the minister to shed 
some light on their plans for NORTEP. Instead she chose to 
throw shame on the staff of that fine institution. Now it appears 
the Sask Party may be using NORTEP to get some more fast 
cash. 
 
NORTEP owns residence buildings, buildings that are essential 
to allowing people with lower incomes to access higher 
education. Can the minister assure us that housing costs will not 
become an obstacle for young northerners training to teach the 
next generation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these residences are worth millions of dollars, but 
they’re worth a whole lot more to the future for the North. Are 
they and NORTEP’s other assets part of the next Sask Party 
sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, I will say that this is an important decision for the 
students in the North to ensure they have access to solid, 
rigorous teaching education programs for years to come. 
NORTEP council received and reviewed submissions from six 
organizations. They made a recommendation for an alternate 
provider which we are taking into consideration and into 
account, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the meantime though, let’s not lose sight of the fact that as a 
government we’ve provided $25 million for income supports 
and post-secondary education and training programs in the 
North this year. Ninety million invested in First Nations and 
Métis initiatives and institutions this year. That’s a 48 per cent 
increase in funding since ’07-08. Sixty-five million dollars for 
First Nations and Métis unemployment, education, and training, 
Mr. Speaker, this budget year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Provision of Emergency Services in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the 
Saskatchewan Party, their personal interest comes first and the 
North comes last. It’s no secret that there’s a shameful shortage 
of mental health services in northern Saskatchewan. I know 
people from La Loche who are dealing with so much trauma 
and they still have to travel for hours and hours to Saskatoon 
and other areas to get mental health care supports that they 
desperately need. 
 
When I asked the Minister of Rural and Remote Health about 
this last week, he said recruitment and retention issues are a 
significant part of the problem. Can the Minister of Rural 
Health tell me how cutting the wages and benefits of nurses, 
doctors, counsellors, and mental health therapists by three and a 
half per cent is going to make recruitment and retention better 
for the North and improve services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for the question so I can get on record some of the 
points I wasn’t able to get on record last week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned last week, I think at the end of my remarks, that 
there has been a community health nurse and a community 
wellness worker that have been hired for suicide prevention so 
that 24-7 mental health services can be offered at the La Loche 
facility, as well as the amount of physicians that are on the 
ground for emergency services that can be accessed there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also through Keewatin Yatthé there’s seven mental health 
counsellors that are available, seven addictions counsellors, 
three regional trauma-informed counsellors, Mr. Speaker, a 
visiting psychiatrist, two more psychiatrists providing services 
via Telehealth, Mr. Speaker, which we’ve heard is very 
important when we have clients up there and patients up there 
that need quick response to a psychiatrist and the visiting one 
may not be in there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve increased funding to northern medical services, which 
provides a lot of these services that visit the community, by 
62 per cent since 2007, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased the 
number of clinics scheduled in the area from 30 to up to 58, Mr. 
Speaker, almost doubled. Hired additional health care workers 
throughout the region. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
funding to the northern health regions, they’ve increased by an 
average of well over 56 per cent to almost 70 per cent, 
depending on the region, whereas the provincial average is at 
50. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Recruitment of Social Workers in the North 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, they’re announcing cuts and 
pretending that no one will feel any pain. It’s just not 
believable. Everyone knows that the cuts to wages and benefits 
are going to make it harder to fill vacancies. That goes for 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

social workers in the North too. Everyone except for the 
Minister of Social Services, apparently. When asked by a 
reporter if cutting salaries for social workers would make things 
worse, she said: 
 

You know, I’m not sure. I don’t think that is going to have 
a significant effect on my recruitment efforts. We do 
obviously have a struggle there. Let me rephrase that. I 
think it may impact on our recruitment efforts.  

 
I’m not sure? No? Yes? One question and three answers. Which 
one is it, Mr. Speaker? Does the minister think cuts to social 
workers will make things worse in the North? If not, how? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
said last week, vulnerable children and their families are a 
priority, both for me and for the people that work in my 
ministry. 
 
We’re pleased to note that a number of the positions have been 
filled in the North. And we’ve had more interviews, both last 
week and there will be more this week, and additional staffing 
actions that we’ll be bringing forward. And as I indicated last 
week, we’re also working on recruitment efforts in both the 
Bachelor of Social Work program and the Bachelor of 
Indigenous Social Work program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many employers, our ministry has difficulty 
with recruiting qualified individuals for our northern 
communities. We need qualified applicants for those. But I’m 
very pleased with the work of my ministry, Mr. Speaker, to 
temporarily make sure that people are provided with services. 
We are seconding from other places in the ministry to make 
sure that vulnerable children and families continue to be served, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Provision of Cleaning Services in Government Buildings 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this government brag 
about the job statistics released on Friday. In reality there are 
almost 40,000 people looking for work, twice as many as there 
were when they came to power. 
 
And today the Sask Party added another 230 custodial workers 
in 17 communities to that list. They were told they’ll lose their 
jobs at the end of June. And several of those individuals, Mr. 
Speaker, they clean the offices of everyone in this place. We all 
know them. Like their colleagues across the province, they 
work hard to earn an honest day’s pay to put a roof over their 
heads and food on the table, and now they don’t know where 
their next paycheque will come from. And for what, Mr. 
Speaker? How has contracting worked out for them in the past? 
It ended up costing more. 
 
To the Minister for Central Services: can she please tell us what 
is the point of these callous cuts to workers in the public 
service? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a result of a 
request for services, 12 Saskatchewan-based companies will be 
awarded contracts or are set to be awarded contracts for 
janitorial services for 95 government-owned buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all listened to what the Finance minister has 
had to say over the last couple of weeks. These are very, very 
tough decisions. We understand that. These are real people, the 
people who work for government, with real lives. 
 
Of these 12 Saskatchewan-based companies, Mr. Speaker, six 
are employee-owned companies. And I must also say that the 
weighting for the contracts were in favour of employee-based 
applications and for companies who are prepared to hire the 
current government workers. 
 
The move to contract out janitorial services will save the 
government $3.5 million annually. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Supports for Health Care Workers 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government has no regard 
for the workers of this province. Across the public sector, we 
see the Sask Party making workers and Saskatchewan people 
pay. This includes health care workers, Mr. Speaker. In the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, a lack of staffing means that 
more workers are subject to violence in the workplace. In the 
last year, incidents of violence for health care workers are up 
74 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are hard jobs that of course come with their 
challenges. But to see a jump of 74 per cent, that is significant, 
and that is unacceptable. It is directly related to understaffing. It 
is a clear consequence of cuts. With staff overworked and fewer 
people to help out, things are getting more dangerous for health 
care workers and care is suffering. How does the minister think 
that more cuts are the answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
government takes safety in the workplace very seriously, and I 
would urge any workers that feel threatened in the workplace to 
report this to the appropriate authorities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the premise of the question, that this is 
somehow because of understaffing, frankly is just wrong. Mr. 
Speaker, since we’ve been given the privilege of forming 
government, we’ve increased numbers of health care workers 
right across the piece, Mr. Speaker. We have more workers in 
long-term care, over 800, Mr. Speaker, far more doctors than 
we did before, over 3,000 more nurses. Mr. Speaker, we made 
health care funding a priority: over a 50 per cent increase since 
we’ve formed government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite take great pleasure in 
heckling, Mr. Speaker, to the point that the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition at times heckling, for instance today, using some 
potential inappropriate language, Mr. Speaker. And the Leader 
of the Opposition, sitting right beside him, did nothing. Mr. 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

Speaker, that’s not leadership; that’s not even interim 
leadership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to make a 
statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Withdrawal of Statement and Apology  
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to apologize and withdraw the statement I made during 
question period. 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. Introduction of bills. 
Oh, why is the Minister of the Economy on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I apologize to the minister for missing him 
standing during ministerial statements. I’ll recognize the 
minister at this time. 

 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 
Zika Virus Research at the University of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2016 the 
World Health Organization declared the Zika virus a public 
health threat and emergency. Last Friday I was at an 
announcement at VIDO-InterVac [Vaccine and Infectious 
Disease Organization-international vaccine centre] at the 
University of Saskatchewan joined by the members from 
Saskatoon University and Saskatoon Westview to announce that 
VIDO-InterVac has developed the swine model for the Zika 
virus, a world first. 
 
This significant advancement will further profile the research 
organization and imprint our province as a leading jurisdiction 
for research and development. This development could not 
come at a better time. Pharmaceutical companies are working 
hard on vaccines for this disease; however, before they can 
receive regulatory approval to conduct clinical testing on 
humans, they have to clear certain hurdles. They must first 
show testing results from animal trials. 
 
Animal testing is controlled, and there are only a few categories 
of animals that may be used for medical research. Of the 
animals used for medical research, swine is most preferable 
because it provides high-quality data at a reasonably lower cost. 
There is still more work to be done on the model to understand 
the different stages of the virus development and the 
Government of Saskatchewan, through Innovation 
Saskatchewan, will be providing $150,000 in funding towards 

this research. 
 
This is good news for Saskatchewan particularly as 
VIDO-InterVac has the only infrastructure in Canada that can 
complete vaccine research and development studies for the Zika 
virus. Private companies are seeking animal testing facilities for 
the virus. In fact, there are currently about eight pharmaceutical 
companies that have candidate vaccines prepared. Some of 
these companies have already signed letters of intent to use 
VIDO-InterVac’s swine model for testing and more are 
expected to do so soon. 
 
Saskatchewan has always been a leader in biomedical and 
health sciences and, as a government, we strongly believe it is 
important to invest in research. I want to thank the research 
institutions and funding partners of VIDO-InterVac for the 
work that they do and the contributions that they make, not only 
here in Saskatchewan but around the world. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
minister opposite for providing his remarks a little bit earlier on. 
We always appreciate that. I want to start by saying that 
VIDO-InterVac, Vaccine And Infectious Disease 
Organization-international vaccine centre is a remarkable place, 
Mr. Speaker. I had an opportunity, with many of my colleagues 
here, not long after I was first elected to tour this state of the art, 
world-class facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
VIDO-InterVac is a leader in infectious diseases research and 
vaccine development in the world and home to some of the 
world’s most advanced containment level 2 and 3 vaccine 
research facilities. And VIDO-InterVac’s experience in animal 
health makes them a leader in the study of zoonotic pathogens. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this work with VIDO-InterVac securing the 
$700,000, 150,000 from the Government of Saskatchewan and 
some from other partners, for research using the new animal 
model to investigate how the virus causes diseases and to test 
new drugs and vaccines for prevention is good news, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously it’s good for people around the world, Mr. 
Speaker. You can look to citizens in South and Central America 
and as the virus has spread further north, Mr. Speaker, the 
southern US [United States]. And it will continue to unless this 
research is done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Living in a province like Saskatchewan where the mosquito 
could be considered our official insect, Mr. Speaker, this work 
is very important. We think about things like West Nile virus. I 
remember a time not long ago where West Nile virus seemed to 
be an illness that wouldn’t come our direction, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know it certainly has. I had an opportunity while 
knocking on doors in Riversdale to meet a constituent whose 
husband had the misfortune of being one of the individuals 
affected by West Nile virus in a very dramatic way with 
long-term health implications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with climate change, Mr. Speaker, and as these vectors, the 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

mosquitoes who carry these pathogens, change their area, make 
them more broad, Mr. Speaker, this research is really very 
important. 
 
So I want to join with the minister in congratulating InterVac 
VIDO on their securing of the $700,000 and wish them well for 
the three-year project and look forward to hearing about their 
progress. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Question of Privilege  
 

The Speaker: — At this point I have a statement to be read. 
 
Today, March 13th, 2017 at 11:40 a.m., the Opposition House 
Leader gave notice that he proposed to raise a question of 
privilege in accordance with rule 12. I thank the member for 
providing notice. 
 
In his case he argued that the Minister of the Economy released 
the content of Bill 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly, 2017 to the media on March 9th, 
2017, the same day he gave notice of the first reading in this 
Assembly. The Opposition House Leader went further that the 
untimely release of confidential information by the Minister of 
the Economy consequence a prima facie case of contempt of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Opposition House Leader points out that the media and the 
public were made aware of the content of the bill prior to the 
members of the House, and as such limited their ability as 
legislators. 
 
I’d like to draw to the attention of the Assembly that the 
Opposition House Leader provided notice at 11:40 a.m. today. 
This notice was late as the rules state that at least two hours 
notice is required prior to the regular daily sitting. 
 
In the case presented by the Opposition House Leader, the 
Speaker is asked to deal with the early release of content of a 
bill and rule on this matter.  
 
The bill has not been introduced at this point, so the Speaker 
has no way of knowing or ascertaining the contents of the bill. 
 
In making his case, the Opposition House Leader acknowledged 
uncertainty as to the content of the bill. Consequently I find that 
a prima facie case on privilege, or a question of privilege has 
not been established. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 

Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to stand 
today and speak to Bill 40. I have been speaking for the last . . . 
quite a while about the need for made-in-Saskatchewan 
solutions to problems in health and education, to reducing our 
carbon emissions, and to providing essential services via our 
Crown corporations. So this today, Mr. Speaker, is my 
made-in-Saskatchewan maiden speech. 
 
I am the new guy here, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank you, 
and I want to thank all of the members of this Assembly on both 
sides, as well as the staff, for having been so welcoming. As the 
lone person taking a seat this sitting, it’s been very important to 
have that kind of support. 
 
It is a pleasure to be in this Assembly, although I must admit 
this actually isn’t my first time to be sitting on the floor. That 
might be a surprise to some of the members here, but I was a 
member of the debate club in high school, the Vanier Collegiate 
debate club, and I was here to participate in the model 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. And that was quite a lively debate. I 
think we even orchestrated a crossing of the floor and a 
non-confidence motion. 
 
But what really stuck out in my mind was the after-effects. I 
was a curious 14-year-old, and we had these old analog 
microphones. I took one apart to have a look at how it worked, 
and I put it back together. I didn’t think much of it. And then 
later it turns out it didn’t work anymore. And so my debate 
coach got in trouble. I got in trouble. It was a lot of drama. And 
I learned years later, I was speaking to a debate coach here in 
the city, Deron Staffen, who many of the members here would 
know, and he said that story was a cautionary tale for decades 
as the model legislature took place. Well, Mr. Speaker, I remain 
curious about the way things work here. I’ll try not to take 
anything apart and try not to become a cautionary tale once 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course that wasn’t the only time I’ve had the 
chance to be in this legislature. I’ve had a chance to be in the 
gallery on a number of occasions. The most memorable of those 
for me was the 2014 Speech from the Throne. In that speech, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised to establish a 
comprehensive poverty reduction strategy for our province. 
This promise was the result of work — and this was 
acknowledged in that Throne Speech — it was the result of 
work of Upstream, an organization that I worked with that 
works on developing healthy public policy, alongside the 
Saskatoon Food Bank, Saskatoon Health Region, and Saskatoon 
Anti-Poverty Coalition, among other organizations. 
 
And that group had recognized that it’s only Saskatchewan and 
British Columbia that don’t have poverty reduction strategies. 
So we worked together on a campaign called Poverty Costs. 
And we told stories of the real lived experience of people in 
poverty today in Saskatchewan and the impact on their health 
and well-being. 
 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

We also shared the information about the cost of poverty for our 
province: $3.8 billion a year, Mr. Speaker, 5 per cent of our 
GDP [gross domestic product], is lost as a result of poverty. So 
we were very pleased, of course, when the Premier announced, 
referencing the work of Poverty Costs, that there would be a 
poverty reduction strategy. And the minister of the day, Social 
Services minister at that time, invited community advisers 
including myself to join with deputy ministers, assistant deputy 
ministers, and the ministries of Health, the Economy, Justice, 
Education, and of course Social Services to meet over many 
months and come to a set of consensus recommendations on 
what the best steps would be to reduce poverty along the current 
rate of decline, which is what the minister at the time informed 
us what she wanted to see. And it was an excellent experience, 
Mr. Speaker, to work across party lines, to work between 
community and government. 
 
Unfortunately that’s where the excellent part of the experience 
ended because, while we produced a set of recommendations 
that everyone agreed on within and outside government, the 
minister chose not to follow those recommendations. Instead, 
kind of last minute before the last provincial election, she 
released a document that was far less serious, far less ambitious, 
and really didn’t qualify as a comprehensive poverty reduction 
strategy, which means it’s still British Columbia and 
Saskatchewan that doesn’t have one. And even in that 
document, they deferred most of the measures that they wanted 
to put in place to better times, times when we were doing better 
financially. 
 
It’s actually when you have a financial downturn, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s most important that we invest in the people of this 
province. The alternative, through the lag of skills as people are 
out of the workforce, the lost opportunities in early childhood 
development, and even population as people leave the province 
seeking other opportunities, the alternative of not investing in 
tough times is far too costly. 
 
So I suppose this could be another cautionary tale, Mr. Speaker, 
but I won’t take it that way. I will remain committed to 
collaboration, in fact a greater commitment because of how 
important poverty is, how important reducing poverty is to all 
of us. Whether for humanitarian or economic reasons, it matters 
to everyone and it matters to me in particular. 
 
It’s directly linked to the experience that I’ve had working as a 
physician at the Westside Community Clinic where I think 
primarily of the patients that I see there and the way that they 
have suffered from diabetes, heart disease, mental health 
challenges, addictions, and, in recent years, growing rates of 
hepatitis C and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], all 
conditions directly related to poverty. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, I was cleaning out my office at the 
Westside Community Clinic and I took home a keepsake. Not 
the funnest keepsake, not the kind of souvenir that you want, 
but important to me to remember. It was the funeral 
announcement of a 25-year-old woman that I got to know very 
well over the last few years, and she died last spring. 
 
Over the years that I knew her, we worked as a team to support 
her — the outreach team, the community-based organizations, 
and the clinic — to help with her problems with HIV and other 

medical problems, to help her through the court system as she’d 
been a victim of violence, to try to help her to find more stable 
housing. 
 
And while great efforts were made, these efforts were not 
successful, Mr. Speaker, because the reality is she wasn’t sick 
with HIV; she was sick with poverty. She was sick with the 
marginalization of being First Nations in this province, of 
having a family affected by residential schools, by never having 
had the money she needed, never having had safe and stable 
housing, not being able to continue in her education, never 
being able to afford the food you need to stay healthy. We gave 
everything we could within the limits of the system but it was 
too late, Mr. Speaker. The damage was already done. 
 
In order to have healthy people, we need to create the 
conditions for good health and that means addressing poverty, 
addressing affordable housing, addressing education. And it’s 
for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I chose to move away from 
the active practice of medicine and seek the nomination for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. I’m so honoured to have been chosen by 
the members in that area and the people of Saskatoon Meewasin 
to represent this constituency. 
 
I’d like to tell you a little bit about that constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s located on Treaty 6 territory along the western 
bank of the South Saskatchewan River. And it includes the 
historic neighbourhoods of City Park and North Park, the newer 
suburban neighbourhoods of River Heights, and the businesses 
and residences of the downtown area and Kelsey-Woodlawn.  
 
Now the word “meewasin” comes from Cree and it means 
beautiful and that’s very apt. It’s a very beautiful area along the 
river valley. And I was also informed by an indigenous studies 
professor that that word also means good. And that made me 
very happy to think about this idea of having been elected in 
service of the good, which is, I think, what we’re all here to do 
and what I hope that we’re all here to do, for the good of 
Meewasin, for the good of the entire province. Of course the 
Meewasin Valley is also a watershed, and we’re certainly 
hoping that this by-election will have proven to be a watershed 
moment. 
 
On the doorstep the last couple of months, we heard a similar 
desire. I had a chance with my team to knock nearly every door 
in the constituency, to walk down every street. And most of 
those were pretty typical conversations. Some of them got a 
little bit unusual. At least two turned into house calls where 
people’s medical needs were more pressing than their political 
questions. And on at least a couple of occasions, I nearly 
needed medical attention myself, whether that was a slip on an 
icy sidewalk or the pit bull that got away from its owner and 
wanted to express its opinion with a little more bite. 
 
But more typically, Mr. Speaker, we heard on the doorstep, we 
heard concern and we heard worry. We heard concern about the 
direction of this government with the talk of deep cuts to health 
care and education, with the growing deficit, and worry about 
the type of response that this government will have to that 
deficit. And we heard about the privatization of SaskTel 
whether in whole or part. I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, I did not 
hear from a single person on the doorstep that they thought that 
that was a good idea. No one said to me that what we need to do 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

is privatize any part of SaskTel or any other of our Crowns. 
 
But along with that worry and concern, Mr. Speaker, I heard 
hope. I heard people saying that they believed that 
Saskatchewan is strong but that we can do better. I had people 
wanting to send a message that this government is on the wrong 
track. They wanted to send a message from Meewasin that we 
can do better, and that’s why they chose to strengthen the NDP 
opposition. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order for us to be able to relay that message, 
well that was very much a group effort. It was the work of 
Nancy Morrison and that main staff team that did the lion’s 
share of organizing a ground game that was very much the pride 
of the Saskatchewan New Democrats during this campaign 
period. And we had dozens, no, hundreds of volunteers doing 
all kind of tasks, Mr. Speaker: knocking doors, putting up signs, 
bringing in meals, making calls, crunching numbers, helping 
people to the polls, making sure that every voice could be 
heard. 
 
In Meewasin we’re also very lucky to have a strong and active 
executive who supported this campaign and supported the 
campaign in the 2016 provincial election where we had the 
excellent candidacy of Nicole White. Her hard work and the 
work of that Meewasin executive laid the groundwork for this 
success. 
 
But speaking of laying groundwork and doing the work on the 
ground, I must recognize the Leader of the Opposition and the 
members of the opposition caucus for the work that they did. 
This is an exceptional group who made exceptional efforts as a 
loyal opposition in the last year that made it possible to send 
this message, that made it clear that there is an appetite and a 
need for change. And then they brought those tireless efforts to 
canvassing in Meewasin. And I’m so pleased to have joined as 
a loyal member of this strong and united NDP team. 
 
I’m excited to learn from each other. This group, as a group of 
10, had been sending a message loud and clear, and I’m happy 
to say, in the immortal words of Spinal Tap, that we’ve turned it 
up to 11. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s one more. 
 
Mr. Meili: — It’s 10 per cent. Mr. Speaker, of course we were 
not the only party to field candidates in this election, and I want 
to recognize the campaigns run by Brent Penner of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Darrin Lamoureux of the Saskatchewan 
Liberals, Shawn Setyo of the Green Party, and David 
Prokopchuk of the Progressive Conservatives. Every one ran a 
campaign with decency and respect. These are good people in it 
for the right reasons, the sort of campaign that restored your 
faith in democracy. 
 
I also want to mention someone else, Mr. Speaker. The 
circumstances of this campaign of course were not happy 
circumstances, and no one would want to find themselves in a 
campaign for this reason — the passing, of course I’m referring 
to, of Roger Parent, the former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Meewasin. I never had the 

honour to meet Mr. Parent, but I ran into him every day on the 
doorstep. People spoke to me of the conversations they had with 
him, of the ways that he helped them. It was clear that he was a 
real servant to his constituents, and I hope to maintain the same 
level of relationship that he has set the bar to do in Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course none of this work for any of us, whether 
in an election or doing the work here in the legislature, could be 
done without the support and love of our families. I’m very 
happy to have been able to recognize and present my family 
here today. They’ve been very patient and supportive 
throughout this process. 
 
I’m sure that I will be hearing later from my son that we are 
vraiment pas polis, [Translation: not very polite] that we’re 
nowhere near as polite as we should be in here, but fortunately 
he got to meet a few of you outside the Chamber as well and 
saw how civil you can be in a different setting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have, as I mentioned, my parents here 
today. And I grew up with my brothers and my parents at the 
farm near Courval, south of Old Wives Lake, and learned a lot 
through that experience of course. And like any farm kid, I 
learned the value of hard work and that the job is done when the 
job is done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also learned some more valuable lessons as 
well from my mother who’s an RN. She would tell me about the 
ways in which, if she found in her work at Extendicare, that she 
didn’t agree with someone or really had a hard time liking that 
person, that she would try and think about, why do the people 
that love that person love them? And try and see them through 
the eyes of the people who love them. I think that’s so valuable 
as a lesson as we look for the ways that others would value 
those who we might be opposed to and try to find, through that 
value, some common ground to work towards.  
 
And from my dad who taught me to drive a tractor . . . I’m sure 
he might have regretted at times letting me behind the wheel of 
the tractor. I recall being Abraham’s age and leaving a track like 
a drunken sailor behind the open cab tractor. But he would tell 
me, when you’re trying to keep those rows straight in the field, 
you make your corrections small. If you find yourself drifting 
one way, you don’t drastically move the other way. 
 
And when we see and hear talk of deep cuts or rash sales of 
large chunks of Crown corporations, those are the kind of 
corrections that aren’t small corrections. They’re drastic 
corrections that will hurt people and that will delay the recovery 
from the downturn of this economy. 
 
Of course I also learned from watching my dad and my brother, 
Jim, who farms that land, how much you need to know to be a 
farmer: crop science, engineering, market analysis, mechanics, 
business management. I realized very soon that there was no 
way I was smart enough to be a farmer so I went into medicine 
instead. 
 
And I think that was probably a good choice. I’m sure my dad 
would say that was a better choice than going into farming. And 
I’ve had a chance through that work to work in many places in 
the world, including all over Saskatchewan — from Arcadia to 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

Esterhazy to Turtleford to Ile-a-la-Crosse, and most recently at 
the Westside Community Clinic, working as a family physician 
there and teaching medical students at the College of Medicine.  
 
And one lesson sticks out from all of those previous roles in 
medicine and the work around medicine, and that comes from 
my work with Canadian Doctors for Medicare. For the last 
decade, I’ve been on the board of that national advocacy 
organization that works to preserve and improve our public 
health care system. I learned from such luminaries as Danielle 
Martin and Monika Dutt the importance of sticking up for that 
publicly funded system. 
 
But there’s a tag line for that organization that I really think is 
worth us keeping in mind in this Assembly. They say that they 
are evidence based, but values driven. It means they need to 
know their numbers. They need to know their facts, know the 
studies, know what’s been done elsewhere and right here, and 
what works and what doesn’t, but that those facts don’t exist in 
a vacuum. We need to use those facts to achieve the best for 
Saskatchewan people. And the best indication of our success in 
this legislature is the health of the people of Saskatchewan. It 
means the most to them in their own lives, and as well, it’s 
something we can measure. It’s something we know whether 
we are succeeding or not. 
 
And we know that while we tend to focus our attention and our 
funds on health care, on responding to ill health, what actually 
makes the biggest difference in our health is how much money 
people make, how far they go in school, whether they’ve got a 
decent job, whether they have a safe place to live. Those social 
determinants of health are where we need to invest, where we 
need to act if we’re going to achieve the best outcomes for the 
people of this province. 
 
We’ve seen many jurisdictions around the world start to use a 
model called Health in All Policies, where decisions made in 
finance and in education, made in justice or the environment go 
through a process of using a health lens to decide: are the 
choices in front of us going to improve or worsen health 
outcomes? And we gravitate towards those that will improve 
them the most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the type of model that I think we need to be 
bringing forth. I personally, and I believe many within this 
caucus, are agnostic about the exact methods that we use. What 
matters the most are the outcomes that we achieve. It’s not 
about ideology, but it’s about practically achieving the best for 
Saskatchewan people. And at the heart of that approach is 
attention to an investment in the root cause of it. 
 
And in public health we use the story, Mr. Speaker, that we call 
the upstream story. Imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, that 
you’re standing at the edge of a river and you see a child 
drowning there. You’re a brave soul, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
you’re going to dive in. I’ve seen you out swimming with your 
kids; you’re going to dive in and save those kids. You’ll save 
that life, and that’s wonderful. 
 
But then along comes another kid. Another kid is drowning. 
You’re not even dry yet. You’ve got to dive in and save that 
kid’s life as well. It’s wonderful; you’re a hero. You’re going to 
be in the newspaper. But then along comes kid number three, 

and kid number four, and five. You’re calling the member from 
Carrot River and the member from Saskatoon University. 
Everybody’s getting called over to dive in and save these kids 
in the river. 
 
Eventually, hopefully, one of you — maybe a bunch of us — 
will come up with the question: wait a minute, who keeps 
chucking these kids in the river? Move upstream to try and find 
out. 
 
And that’s a sensible approach, Mr. Speaker. It’s an approach 
that is evidence based and values driven, where we go to the 
root causes to make the best outcomes for the people of this 
province. 
 
It’s not about whether government is big or small. It’s not even 
about left or right. It’s about the right size, the right place, the 
right time to meet our needs. It’s about not seeing the bright 
children of today become the patients of tomorrow, in desperate 
need, where it’s too late to help. And our work in debate and 
argument when necessary, and co-operation where possible, is 
to achieve the best for the people of this province. 
 
Which brings me more specifically, and you might say finally, 
Mr. Speaker, to Bill 40, the bill in front of us today. By 
changing, as this bill describes, the definition of privatization to 
a counterintuitive and unlikely definition of selling most, or a 
large portion I should say, of a Crown corporation to a company 
or to shareholders, to allow for the sale of 49 per cent, we have 
to ask ourself the question as we explore this bill: are we taking 
steps that will meet the needs and improve the lives of 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations contribute to 
the health of the people of this province. Crowns like SaskTel, 
like SaskPower, when well managed they keep rates low, which 
is important for affordability of those services, but also of 
housing, of good quality food, of other essentials. And they also 
provide needed services: the shelter and comfort associated 
with having access to heat and electricity, the social connection 
that comes with telecommunications. And they create good 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, and that employment is a key determinant of 
health. And of course they’re profitable companies. They 
produce dividends that allow us to do that social investment that 
we need to achieve the best outcomes. 
 
The evidence for the contribution to health is clear. But the 
evidence is also very clear against the sale of public institutions. 
Austerity approaches of which this kind of a sale is a part, 
accompanied often with deep cuts to public services like health 
and education and sell-off of other public assets, that kind of an 
austerity approach has been shown, Mr. Speaker, around the 
world and right here in Saskatchewan to worsen health 
outcomes in the short term and to slow economic recovery in 
the long term, to have long-term ramifications to our quality of 
life and to the costs of our public coffers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 and the control that the sale of up to 
49 per cent of a Crown would give away jeopardizes our ability 
to implement those made-in-Saskatchewan solutions, 
jeopardizes our ability to create the infrastructure we need for 
social needs. I remember growing up on the farm, or not long 
before I came around, we were communicating with neighbours 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

on CB [citizens’ band] radio. Later it was party lines provided 
by SaskTel. Today you can get Internet and cell service. 
 
What big corporation cares enough about grid-road country or 
remote reserves to do that kind of investment? What 
corporation in their boardroom, influencing our decisions, is 
going to allow us to make that kind of investment, to give back 
to the community the way that our Crowns have done? 
 
What corporation will lend money to the government when we 
need it? And obviously we would like to see this government do 
that a little bit less, draw a little bit less off of the Crown 
corporations, loaning to other parts of government, but it’s an 
important thing to be able to do when we need it. 
 
We need to be able to employ people with good-quality, secure 
jobs. And this jeopardizes that ability, and it jeopardizes the 
ability to keep our rates low for the services we need. It does so 
in order to maximize profit at the expense of people. 
 
You know, selling off a particular branch of a Crown, that’s 
happened in the past and it may happen again. You know, it 
might be appropriate to manage the business model at the given 
time. But the sale of any portion of ownership, of ownership of 
a Crown, that fundamentally undermines the local control that 
is key to success. One can no more be a little bit privatized, Mr. 
Speaker, than one can be a little bit pregnant. It’s an 
all-or-nothing proposition. This redefining just does not stand 
up to the scrutiny of sensible reflection. Once any influence is 
ceded, the whole operation fails to play the intended role, a role 
the Crowns have played so successfully. 
 
Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, and the door it opens to the failure of our 
Crowns, doesn’t pass the business test. It doesn’t pass the health 
test. It’s neither the right thing to do nor the smart thing to do. It 
takes a made-in-Saskatchewan solution and unmakes it, to the 
detriment of the people of this province. That’s why I and my 
colleagues will certainly be voting against Bill 40. And now I’d 
like to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 40. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to stand in my place and enter into debate on Bill No. 43, The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, this is of course 
an important piece of legislation, this Act. I think any time that 

we’re talking about a proposed Act in front of this Assembly, 
it’s important that we look at the full context in which the bill 
was introduced, and the circumstances that we find ourselves in 
today. 
 
I think if you talked to anyone in the province about pipelines 
right now, one thing that will come up will be the 2016 oil spill 
that occurred near Prince Albert and the over 200 000 litres that 
spilled into the North Saskatchewan, and really the subsequent 
hardship that was caused directly to over 70,000 residents of 
northern central Saskatchewan and their drinking water, and 
that sort of disruption. 
 
I had the chance at that point to head north with a number of my 
colleagues, and one of the first things that we noticed on the 
way up was stopping in Melfort, the water advisories there 
when we stopped. It was a very sudden and tangible notice of 
the impact that the people in Melfort were experiencing. And 
then of course as we got closer to Prince Albert and drove 
through some of the local First Nations up there, Mr. Speaker, 
the impacts became more and more evident. At that point they 
were in the process of rolling out a temporary pipeline, 
over-ground pipeline, in order to alleviate the immediate 
drinking water needs of people in Prince Albert. 
 
Of course there are a lot of things that we can, you know, cinch 
our belts up about and do without, but water is not one of them, 
Mr. Speaker. It is essential to all of us that we have access to 
drinking water. And I think that this bill really, really 
highlighted the need to update some of our oversight and 
legislation around the inspection and how we deal with 
pipelines in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the other things that I would note, when we went up to 
Prince Albert, we spoke of course with people in Prince Albert 
and also the Prince Albert Grand Council who indicated a 
number of concerns about how this oil spill was going to be 
remediated, the concerns about the impacts on wildlife. And of 
course in speaking with mayor and council, we got to sit in on 
an update and hear just how impactful that spill was to people. 
 
I think of the immediate concerns getting water to people who 
were in custody there as well as people who were in nursing 
homes. I think of the businesses that were impacted. I know 
that, for example, car washes and the restaurant industry were 
all very impacted. So, Mr. Speaker, all of that to say that it is 
important that we get this right, that we get pipeline inspection 
and oversight right. And we need no further evidence of that 
than the experience of July 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I was talking earlier about context. I think 
another important piece of context around this bill is the 2012 
auditor’s report. Of course it is 2017 now. Away back in 2012, 
the auditor put out a report raising some very significant 
concerns around regulating pipelines in the province and made 
some recommendations. I’m just going to read from page 59 of 
that report from 2012, Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan 
volume 1: 
 

Our audit concluded that for the year . . October 31, 2011, 
the Ministry did not have effective processes to ensure 
[that] full compliance with The Pipelines Act . . . There are 
requirements under this legislation that are not being acted 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

upon. Failure to regulate pipelines effectively could harm 
people or the environment.  

 
And of course that is exactly what we saw happen last summer. 
 
So the recommendations that were made at that time were to: 
 

Develop written policies and procedures to guide staff 
when assessing pipeline design, monitoring pipeline 
construction, and evaluating pipeline operations 
 
[The need to] Consistently document its assessments of 
pipeline license applications for compliance with the law 
prior to issuing pipeline licenses 
 
[In addition] Implement a risk-based assessment approach 
to monitor pipeline construction and verify pressure tests 
 
Monitor pipeline operator compliance with integrity 
management and safety processes for existing pipelines 
 
[And to] Assess the resources [that] it requires to fulfill its 
legislative mandate and responsibilities under The 
Pipelines Act, 1998.  

 
In 2014, again prior to the spill last summer, it was found that 
only two of those seven recommendations had been dealt with. 
And of course you know hindsight is 20/20, but it is very 
unfortunate that there was the situation that we found last 
summer. And I think it does highlight the need for addressing 
how pipelines are dealt with in the province, Mr. Speaker. So 
this bill proposes a number of measures, and I’m just going to 
. . . I believe it’s seven direct measures that the minister 
mentioned on November 29th when introducing second 
reading, and I’m just going to go over some of his comments. 
 
First of all, that the minister noted that this Act establishes the 
authority of the Oil and Gas Conservation Board, and that there 
are currently three types of pipelines exempt from the provision 
of the Act, including the interprovincial pipelines regulated by 
the NEB or the National Energy Board, natural gas distribution 
pipelines operated by SaskEnergy, as well as pipelines that are 
situated within refineries. 
 
So there were a number of objectives as stated by the minister 
on that day, November 29th, 2016, the first of which was 
creating a legal framework for the fees and licensing of over 
80,000 flow lines that are currently exempt from licensing 
under the Act. So that’s a huge undertaking, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, phasing in the 80 flow lines, and I’m not sure how 
that’ll be prioritized, or how the resources will be allocated. But 
it is very important of course to ensure that when we have 
regulations, that is a partial measure. 
 
But ensuring that there are the resources available and put 
forward to be able to enforce those measures is also an 
important part, and I think will be something that members of 
this side of the Assembly will have questions about, perhaps in 
further comments or in committee. 
 
A second objective of this bill, according to the minister, was to 
provide legal framework for the building, for building an online 
pipeline licensing system. Mr. Speaker, that seems like a 

reasonable measure, that there would be some ability to have a 
listing — that it would be accessible online — of all of the 
licensed pipelines in the province. I seem to remember after the 
Husky oil spill that there was some confusion or some question 
about when the last inspection had happened. And I think that 
that’s, particularly when we’re talking about pipelines that are 
near water sources, something that we really need to have a 
good handle on and good information about. 
 
Certainly Saskatchewan is not alone in this but nationwide and 
perhaps worldwide, as I’ve spoken about before, we have a real 
issue with aging infrastructure. We see that certainly across 
Canada. We’ve seen a lack of investment in infrastructure over 
a number of years, and certainly pipelines are not exempt from 
that. We see a number of these pipelines are aging and that 
presents some reasonable concern for people, Mr. Speaker, 
when we have oil being carried, in some instances, very near 
sensitive environmental locations — across people’s land, 
where they live, where they work. And of course this is 
especially the case when we see pipelines near water. So the 
need for increased inspection and increased monitoring near 
water sources is certainly something that is very important. 
 
One of the things that I noted in looking at the Husky oil spill 
from 2016, there were a number of sources that cited that this 
was a one time sort of a catastrophic shift in the ground, and 
that was provided as the reason for this pipeline break. Mr. 
Speaker, of course when I hear that, I have some concerns. We 
have seen a number of once-in-a-hundred-year, weather-type 
events happening with increasing frequency, certainly here in 
Saskatchewan and elsewhere — increased thawing and freezing 
events, increased flooding, and sometimes followed by 
prolonged period of drought. So as we get further down the line 
with climate change and those big shifts in environmental 
weather patterns, long-term weather patterns, I think that that’s 
something also that we need to be very aware of. 
 
When it’s cited as a one-time event, a once-in-a-hundred-year 
event, I think we have to watch that those events aren’t 
happening more and more frequently and putting more stress on 
infrastructure like pipelines, Mr. Speaker. But I digress for a 
minute. 
 
Going back to the objectives as outlined by the minister on 
November the 29th, the third objective of this bill was to 
“establish new inspection, investigation, and compliance audit 
powers for ministry staff.” Again that sounds like a very 
important development, and again it is very important that we 
not only have that in place, but we ensure that there is proper 
staffing so that those people can do their jobs. 
 
As we said, there are 80,000 flow lines that are currently 
exempt alone, let alone all of the existing pipelines. So that’s 
something that I think is very important. Again a good first 
start, but the need to ensure proper staffing and proper 
resourcing so those inspections can happen. 
 
The fourth objective of this legislation was to “update and 
modernize the penalty provisions of the Act . . .” And certainly 
that’s something we saw as well with the drainage Act. As we 
move forward, the need for increasing and modernizing the 
penalty provisions is important. The minister also noted that the 
bill would “provide the legal basis for creating technical 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

directives for pipeline licensing, construction, operation, and 
abandonment.” 
 
So that’s an interesting piece of this Act as well: the licensing 
not only for the construction and operation, which is important, 
but also the abandonment. What happens to these pipelines 
when they’re abandoned? How do we account for that? How do 
we ensure that there is enough money set aside so that they can 
be properly decommissioned? And I think that is something 
very important to pay attention to here. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The sixth stated objective here was providing “. . . new 
regulatory authorities to require financial assurance from 
operators for pipelines located in high-risk locations such as 
water crossings.” And of course this was something that came 
up again last summer. When companies are looking to run 
pipelines near high-risk areas such as water crossings, again, 
there isn’t anything really more important than ensuring that we 
have an adequate water supply for people and for animals, for 
the environment. We have to make sure that there is money set 
aside so that we don’t have to go about chasing that money 
down, that there is some money held there so you can 
immediately start addressing the concerns. Like I noted, in P.A. 
[Prince Albert], I don’t think it was very long after the spill that 
we were up there, but already they were rolling out overland 
pipelines to ensure that people had drinking water. People can’t 
go very long without it, so it’s important to have those funds set 
aside for that. 
 
Lastly, as stated by the minister, the objective here was to “. . . 
establish ongoing obligations related to addressing any 
environmental issues that might be discovered after a pipeline is 
abandoned.” So I’m not sure the number of abandoned 
pipelines that we have in the province. I’m sure someone over 
here or perhaps in committee would have a better number on 
that. But as they degrade maybe it’s not initially a problem, but 
after time you start to see more and more issues there. And it’s 
important that we have some way to address those issues that 
might be found there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just going to pull back to some of the other summary notes here 
about this bill. I guess on the whole we’re pleased to see that 
the recommendations of the auditor were addressed here with 
this bill. Express some concern that her initial report came out 
in 2012, an update in 2014, where we only saw two of the seven 
of those recommendations addressed, and then of course a very 
major incident last summer in this province that really brought 
this issue to the fore. 
 
You know, again looking in the rear-view mirror it’s easy to 
have 20/20 vision. But it is important; I think it speaks to the 
need for long-term planning and not waiting for a crisis to 
address issues that really we ought to be addressing, that are 
part of good governance or that are part of good long-term 
planning in a province such as ours . . . well in any jurisdiction 
actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are taking measures to 
provide a balance — a balance of course between industry, like 
we see here with pipelines, and balancing that with the interests 
of people who need to drink water, which I think is all of us. 
Coffee has water in it, so that certainly applies to all of us. 
Taking into account the needs, not only of the people in this 

room, not only in the people who are in this province today, not 
only the children who are born and live in this province today, 
but into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hope that we all perhaps have learned a bit of a lesson, a 
very hard lesson of course, with that oil spill that happened last 
summer, and that we really endeavour to do better in the future 
here. So I am glad — you know, credit where it’s due — to see 
some of those very significant concerns addressed with this bill 
here. 
 
Just to hit some more highlights with regard to Bill No. 43, it 
allows pipelines to move fluids other than hydrocarbon steam 
and CO2 to be considered under the definition of pipelines. So 
that’s an expansion of the term “pipelines,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also gives new powers to the pipeline inspectors to collect 
information and enter property. So of course that is important, 
that if they have the right, that they also have the right to enter 
the property to do those inspections. Again all of that being 
contingent on actually having enough inspectors to do the work, 
which we will be following closely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This bill also grants immunity to government from litigation 
based on the actions of pipeline inspectors, as long as they were 
carried out in good faith. I guess that’s some protection there, 
that those pipeline inspectors, or in turn the government, won’t 
be slapped with a lawsuit, assuming that their actions were done 
in good faith. 
 
It allows the minister, with the approval of cabinet, to create 
directives related to areas where he or she has regulatory 
authority, Mr. Speaker. It allows for pipelines previously 
exempted from regulation and licensing to be eventually 
covered by the Act at a time to be set out in the regulations. So 
that’ll be something to follow in the regulations. As I’ve noted, 
that I think that accounts for about 80,000 pipelines and just 
how those will be pulled into the Act, how that will be 
resourced and what type of oversight is yet to be determined, 
and as we see here is something that will be determined in the 
regulations. 
 
I mentioned previously the modernization of the penalties that 
would increase those penalties from 50,000 to 500,000. 
Certainly significant. Not as high a penalty, just by note, as the 
drainage which goes up to $1 million, but that is a significant 
increase of course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another important point, I think, is that prosecutions under The 
Pipelines Act can now only be commenced less than three years 
after the government learns of the infraction. That is something 
that’s significant. 
 
And it also anticipates and sets out some criteria and rules for 
transferring pipeline licences from one person to another, 
including a clause stating that the transfer must be in the public 
interest. So that’s something to watch. That’s interesting how 
that will be defined — the public interest — with regards to 
transferring the licence from one person to the other. And that’s 
something I suppose I would be curious — I’m sure my 
colleagues as well — just how that is determined, the public 
interest. It certainly applies to this bill, but would it apply to a 
number of other things? How do we determine the public 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

interest? How do we create that balance? That’s something that 
I will watch with rapt attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some other notes about this Bill No. 43. It adds new regulations 
making authority so the ministry can require operators to put up 
the financial assurance, as I’ve noted, for high-risk projects 
such as those projects near waterways and drinking water, and 
requires operators to file emergency response plans. I think 
that’s something that’s really, really important. 
 
Of course, as has been noted by myself here today but others 
previously, the Husky oil spill was seen to be the cause of a 
one-time sort of an anomalous event, but those events do 
happen, so it is important that we are prepared in the event of a 
rupture. 
 
What happens if there’s a rupture in the middle of the night, 
near waterways, in a sensitive area? What is the response there? 
And I think it is important to not wait until after the fact to 
scramble and to get people in place, to actually have a plan 
ahead of time. It is something that is very important and it cuts 
down on those precious hours between detecting a spill or a 
leak and the cleanup, the cutting off at the supply, and all of 
those measures, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that that is really 
important to have those emergency response plans. And as has 
been noted before, there are some provisions within this 
legislation that the companies that are licensing would also have 
put some resources aside to deal with some of those emergency 
plans. So I think that that is something very interesting and 
something worth looking at. 
 
A couple of other notes that I’ll make. This bill doesn’t include 
flow line operators in the appropriation provisions for pipelines, 
and flow line operators will continue to expropriate land under 
The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act. So 
that’s something to look at, Mr. Speaker. That’s something that 
wasn’t undertaken with this bill, and it is certainly worth noting. 
 
So on the balance, increasing licensing and regulation to flow 
lines is something that is important. It’s, I would suggest, long 
overdue and has been . . . Really, the need for it has been 
highlighted by what we saw last summer. Certainly there have 
been other smaller spills in the province that have also 
highlighted that need, but I think everyone in the province will 
agree that the jeopardy of the drinking water of 70,000 people 
tends to put things to the fore in terms of getting interest of 
certainly this Assembly, but the people of Saskatchewan. So on 
balance, I’m happy to see those increased regulations. 
 
Something else that I will note, and I think has been noted by 
my colleagues as well, that last year, inspectors did 78 
inspections of pipelines in this province. As I’ve noted before, 
just in terms of scope of scale here, there are 80,000 pipelines 
alone that aren’t under regulation currently that would be 
brought in. And by comparison, certainly more people but 
similar land base in Alberta, that number was more than 2,000 
inspections. So there’s certainly room for improvement there, 
and that’s why we’ll be paying attention very closely to how 
this is resourced and how many people, how many inspectors 
are given the task of inspecting these very large number of 
kilometres of pipeline that we have in the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

So I think there have been a number of very interesting 
comments made by my colleagues and certainly the minister in 
the introduction of this bill as well as the observations and the 
concerns of the auditor that have been noted and, to a degree, 
addressed in this Bill No. 43. But I will watch with interest the 
continued comments of my colleagues as well as some of the 
answers, and that we receive the questions that are put to the 
minister and his staff in committee. But I think I have come to 
the end of my remarks here today and with that would move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 43. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today to enter into this debate on Bill No. 
44, An Act to amend The Water Security Agency Act. And it 
seems just me reading the title gets them worked up. I don’t 
know what’s up over there. 
 
I was going to mention that the tables have turned a bit here. I 
remember when the Deputy Speaker was the critic of 
Environment and I was the minister responsible for the 
Watershed Authority Act and how you’re amending this and 
some of the changes. And I’ll allude to them and how it’s 
interesting how time changes people’s opinions, I guess. I don’t 
know. But anyways it’s an interesting piece of legislation 
before us and a very important one, a hugely important one, and 
one that I know governments have worked hard at over the time 
of this province, right from the beginning. We are an 
agriculture-based economy in so many ways. 
 
And of course it’s how do we manage our water has been a big, 
big issue, both in a positive way — you know, we have an 
amazing system actually when we look at how we store water 
and distribute it here in this province — but also sometimes, 
and we know this is often the case, we have sometimes water in 
places where we don’t really want it to be. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And we have to first of all understand that, you know, the land 
was designed in a certain way and we have to live with it. And 
when you buy or acquire a piece of land, certain things come 
along with that. 
 
But this is a very important one, and it’s not an easy one. And I 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

appreciate the hard work, particularly of the people over in 
government land, who’ve worked hard to strive a balance 
between the ecological impacts and the agricultural impacts. It’s 
one of those situations where it takes, you know . . . And this is 
what nature is. It’s a terrific balance of what are our needs and 
what can we do, how we can make it fair. And of course this 
tries to do that. 
 
And while it’s a small bill, it’s been taking, I know, this 
particular government, and I look at different members over 
there who have been the ministers responsible, it’s taken several 
years to get to this point. I mean they have been in power 
almost 10 years — nine and a half years. And it’s one that has 
started, and it started many, many decades ago but it has been 
escalating, escalating as the size of farms grow bigger, as 
technology, you know, gets much more refined in terms of GPS 
[global positioning system], the size of farm machinery, that 
type of thing. 
 
And yet our understanding how important it is to have that kind 
of environment, that landscape that we have that can escape the 
major rainstorms, that can hold and control that potential 
flooding . . . And we see this as a potential answer. 
 
And so we have some concerns. It was interesting the other day. 
The minister actually gave one of the longest second reading 
speeches on this, so he really went to outline the details and I 
will actually reflect on some of those parts because again . . . 
You know, it is worthwhile, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 
have those kind of speeches because we can understand where 
they’re coming from and then our questions can be that much 
more focused, that much more pointed. 
 
But it’s one that I know, since we’ve come over to this side, the 
number of concerns that have been raised by people from rural 
Saskatchewan about farm land being flooded and nothing being 
done about it. And as my colleague talked about pipelines 
earlier, you know, you can have all the fancy regulations in the 
world that you want, but if you’re not going to have the 
supports to actually enforce them, then what’s the point? We 
see already that this government’s talking about a 3.5 cut either 
in salaries or in people, and that’s probably on top of if the 
positions haven’t been filled, will they be filled? And I think 
that’s really important that we have people in the right 
departments working because it’s hugely important to do that. 
 
So I just want to review some of the key points that stick out to 
me, and of course that’s the new section 70.1(2): 
 

Notwithstanding any other Act or law or any other 
provision of this Act, the corporation may make any order 
that it considers appropriate requiring the alteration or 
closure of all or any part of a pre-1981 drainage works 
without compensation to the owner of the drainage works 
or of the land on which the drainage works are situated for 
any losses or expenses sustained as a result of the alteration 
or closure. 

 
So we’re going back into the ’70s and the ’60s. And again, you 
know, it would be interesting to know — and this is one 
question for committee — you know, to see the intersection of 
the size of farm lands, farms, and how, you know, it hasn’t been 
a gradual increase over the course of time. There has been 

spikes over the course of the past century when farms, for a 
variety of reasons, whether it’s, as I said, better farm 
equipment, people leaving, economic pressures, that type of 
thing. 
 
But we know that in the late ’70s or early ’80s, farms grew. We 
know and we’ve seen that in the 2000s, in the economic boom 
that was happening in the mid-2000s, ’06 and ’07, and of course 
the technology at the time, farms grew, and the impact it had on 
the environment and particularly on water drainage. 
 
And if I remember correctly, in rural Saskatchewan I went to 
many of their meetings around the drainage and development 
folks, and they were all set up throughout rural Saskatchewan. I 
don’t know if they’re as active as they once were. I knew they 
used to have annual meetings and I was invited to hear their 
plans and what the kind of things were. Very interesting stuff. 
 
Of course one of the other big things that have happened, 
particularly during our era, was the whole issue around the 
watersheds and understanding the impact of watershed 
planning. And I’m not sure where that is, you know, in the role 
of all of this as well. I think that’s hugely, hugely important 
even on small watersheds and how they build into bigger ones, 
and this is all very, very important. And of course our 
knowledge is very much increased in this area, and it’s one that 
we need to take seriously, and it can be a win-win situation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Some people think that if you are considering 
all the information, that somehow somebody’s going to lose 
out. Actually we can all be winners and have more profitable 
farms, stronger farms, farms that aren’t at risk or vulnerable to 
the whims of nature. 
 
And I’m speaking about floods. I think of the one that happened 
down in southwest Saskatchewan back in, I think it would be 
2005 or ’04. But I’m trying to think of the name of the small 
village. It had so much rain overnight; it was just incredible. 
But that can happen. And . . . [inaudible] . . . going up also on 
another tour up in the northwest area of the province where a lot 
of forest had been cleared and the impact it had. 
 
The rains had come and just really then, just washed out from 
that whole area, washed roads out, washed culverts out. It was a 
huge, huge issue. And actually ironically that same area was hit 
I think about four or five years later, just because of the change, 
the impact on the changing landscape. And so this is a very, 
very important area that we take some time to get it right, but 
we have to move quickly. And I know for example this 
government has been raising and talking about this since 2012. 
But even before 2012, issues were being raised. We were very 
much aware that people were bringing concerns forward about 
the illegal drainage and what was going to happen because of 
that. 
 
And so this is a very, very, very critical issue. So they talked 
about going back pre-1981. Now the other interesting thing it 
says, section 70.1(4) is, “No action or proceeding lies or shall 
be instituted or continued against the Government of 
Saskatchewan,” and so on and so forth, including employees or 
former employees. It’s an immunity clause, but it just seems to 
be one that sort of sticks in people’s craw and it is an issue for 
sure. 
 



March 13, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

Now the other one that . . . And you know, it is interesting in 
this whole thing that the short title . . . well no, it doesn’t really 
talk about . . . The whole thing is about drainage works. But 
you’d think in this bill you would define what drainage works 
would be, but they’ve punted that off down the road. They’re 
going to put that into . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Yes, 
we’ll get it later, into regulations. And I just think if there’s one 
phrase that should have been defined here, is what is drainage 
works. That’s what we’re talking about. And if we’re not going 
to talk about that, then it leaves a big gap into what is it that 
we’re really talking about if they’re unwilling to define 
drainage works. And so I know that that could be then left to 
debate in this House, and that’s why you put things into 
regulations. And that’s a problem. 
 
The other one that I do want to say, and this is one that, you 
know, when you debate legislation, it’s often interesting what is 
said very subtly without a lot of fanfare or fireworks, and 
nobody really knows what is gone. So here is this new section 
84 and section 6. Section 84 is repealed and the following 
substituted . . . So what was section 84? Well section 84 was the 
Water Appeal Board. So we are now losing the Water Appeal 
Board. And I’ll go back into that a bit when I talk about the 
minister’s comments, but I know . . . And I’m interested in 
hearing — and maybe we’ll have questions in committee about 
this — who was it that really brought up that they wanted to get 
rid of the Water Appeal Board? 
 
Now I understand the minister talks about creating two more 
boards. One’s an advisory board and one’s a technical board. 
Now this is all very kind of interesting from a government that 
wants to do away with red tape and bureaucracy and stuff. They 
get rid of one board but then create two more. And so I’m not 
sure how that makes sense and whether people think that’s a 
great idea. But I’d like to know, where did that come from? 
 
And then it just basically goes to . . . so, landowner, if you’re 
out of luck and you want to appeal, in the old days you could 
appeal to the Water Appeal Board which were made up of some 
people who had, like, who had experience or technical 
knowledge, but also people of essentially your peers who were 
dealing with the same issue. But now if you want to appeal 
you’re going to go the Court of Queen’s Bench. And I just find 
it so interesting. Now, not only do we get rid of one board, 
we’ve replaced them with two, but now we’re getting lawyers 
involved. And not that I have a problem with lawyers. My 
seatmate is a lawyer and a fine, fine person. But I do have to 
say that I find it very interesting that now we’re getting the law 
involved. And even though this is the law, it used to be that you 
could go to the Water Appeal Board and that would resolve a 
lot of the issues. 
 
So I do have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. So I 
just have to say that I am interested to hear more about the 
disappearance of the Water Appeal Board. Because this is what 
the minister had to say of this. And I’ll be speaking to the folks 
at home about this because many of us may not know what the 
Water Appeal Board was. And this is one of the things that we 
fought hard for in 2005 because we thought this was an 
appropriate method for dealing with appeals, and it had been 
going on for many, many years. 
 
I don’t know who really came up with the idea originally, but 

the Water Appeal Board . . . And I’ll just quote here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is what the minister had to say the other 
day on March 6th: 
 

The Water Appeal Board, Mr. Speaker, is made up of six 
members from different constituencies across 
Saskatchewan, appointed by the Minister of Environment. 
Since 2003 there have been 138 complaints to the Water 
Security Agency, 31 of which were appealed to the Water 
Appeal Board. Only two cases out of 138 . . . [were] 
overturned, and five have been altered in some minor 
manner. 

 
So that sounds like not a bad record. It sounds like people had 
their voices heard, and it sounded like things were kind of 
worked out. And I’ll go on: 
 

This means about 1.45 per cent of the cases that went to 
the board for an appeal were overturned and the rest were 
either affirmed or dismissed. This data shows that since 
2003, 98.55 per cent of the Water Security’s decisions 
were upheld or altered in some minor way by the Water 
Appeal Board. With the removal of the formal complaint 
process, the ability to appeal to the Water Appeal Board 
will not be necessary and it will be removed. 
 
Appeals to the Water Appeal Board dealt with the Water 
Security Agency’s assessment of damage and follow-up 
orders during the formal appeal process. The proposed new 
request for assistance process does not assess damages. 
The assessment is whether disputed works are present and 
whether they have approvals. It’s quite black and white. 
Once Bill 44 is passed, the Water Appeal Board will 
complete the appeals before it but no new appeals will 
come . . . [with] it. 

 
Now I think that’s interesting. They couldn’t really change that 
to fit the new bill. They say it’s black and white because . . . 
Well this will be the question we have before us for sure, is 
what’s the value in getting rid of this and then instead replacing 
it with the two advisory boards? 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I’ll just continue down: 
 

In place of an appeal board, we will develop two advisory 
boards to support this strategy. One will be comprised of 
stakeholders representing the various interest groups, [of] 
which will be consulted on policy and development and 
refinement of the strategy as we move forward. The first 
advisory board will focus on . . . advice to the Water 
Security Agency on policy development to further our 
water management . . . 

 
Now we used to have a provincial watershed board that would 
do that. I wonder if it’s still around, or whether it’s been gone. 
 

The other board will be a technical review body to act as 
an independent appeal of some of the decisions relating to 
approvals. For example, if a landowner disagrees with 
adequacy of an outlet, they would have the ability to bring 
the technical work to a review body and the technical 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2017 

review body would use this information to determine if the 
outlet is adequate or not. 

 
So it’s a new forum. So I’m not sure whether . . . You know, 
it’s very interesting how this is going to work out, and I’m not 
sure whether it’s going to be as productive as the minister is 
hoping. I mean I hope that it does resolve a lot of the issues. It 
sounds like a bit of bureaucracy in terms of trying to get this 
done. 
 
The question that many people had is, the government really 
had tools all along and just weren’t using them and weren’t 
using the staff, and somehow didn’t quite have the courage 
really to deal with the issues that they knew were out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m not sure by passing this bill . . . And we’ve seen this 
before. I mean the one that comes to mind is the whole issue 
around climate change and the fact that they passed their bill 
many years ago about greenhouse gas emissions and then 
failed, or just sat on it for many, many years. 
 
And this could be another one of those situations where you 
pass a bill . . . And while this government has talked about 
moving quickly, we know that when they started the formal part 
of their process in 2012, it was many years before that they 
were being pressured. And it took what? Here we are, five years 
later, not moving all that quickly. And so we do have some real 
concerns about what this will really mean for rural 
Saskatchewan and what this will mean for farmers, both 
upstream and downstream, and the fact that land is being 
flooded, but also just the whole issue of proper watershed 
management here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have a lot of questions about this. I know that there’ll be 
members who want to speak to this in the House. 
 
Again you know, we’ve been calling for a comprehensive 
drainage strategy that has to be clearly based on the provincial 
watersheds that we have here in the province. The question 
about, you know, increasing the fines from $1,000 a day to an 
amount not exceeding $1 million a day, that’s an interesting 
one. Of course, as we’ve said, the question is resources, 
resources, resources. Will this government properly fund and 
backstop this so that people can bring forward concerns and 
they will get that work addressed and we could move on? 
 
And as I said, we’ll hear more about why this government is 
relying more on the Court of Queen’s Bench than simply 
through the Water Appeal Board. I mean it didn’t seem like it 
was the Water Appeal Board that was stopping things from 
happening here. 
 
You know, it’s funny. When you bring forward legislation, 
what you really want to do is fix problems and fix them so that 
they work well. You know the old saying: if it’s not broke, then 
don’t fix it, you know. So this is what I’m wondering: was it the 
Water Appeal Board that was the problem? What was the real 
problem with the drainage issues that we were seeing in rural 
Saskatchewan? From what we were hearing, it was . . . 
[inaudible] . . . (a) the insufficient resources to actually 
determine the issues that were happening out there, what was 
happening really in rural Saskatchewan, and (2) to really have 

the courage to act on the information that was present. 
 
And so will those two things change with this legislation, or is it 
just another go-round in the dance that many people are 
becoming very, very frustrated with in rural Saskatchewan? We 
don’t know. The interesting thing in that dance though, the 
government has created a bit of immunity so, you know, if 
you’re getting frustrated with who’s playing the music, you 
can’t sue them in this piece of legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency Amendment 
Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, The Water Security 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:06.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1637 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1637 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1638 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1638 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1638 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1639 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1639 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1639 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1641 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1641 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1641 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1642 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1642 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women of the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1642 
 Golfer from Moose Jaw Enjoys Winning Season 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1642 
 Red Cross Pink Day 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1643 
 The Battlefords Citizen and Junior Citizen of the Year 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1643 
 100th Anniversary of Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1643 
 Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame Inductee 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1643 
 Provincial Job Numbers for February 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1644 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1644 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1644 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1644 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 
 Resource Revenues and State of Provincial Finances 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 
 Drainage Issues and Water Management Strategy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
 Incidence of Crop Insurance and AgriStability Claims 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
 Government Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 
 Support for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 
 Provision of Emergency Services in the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1647 
 Recruitment of Social Workers in the North 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1647 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 



 

 Provision of Cleaning Services in Government Buildings 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 
 Supports for Health Care Workers 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Withdrawal of Statement and Apology  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Zika Virus Research at the University of Saskatchewan 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Question of Privilege  
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1650 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1650 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1654 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1657 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


