


















































November 21, 2017 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2979 
 November 21, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to introduce an important delegation that’s seated in 
your gallery. We welcome them back to the Legislative 
Assembly from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. No 
strangers to members on both sides of the House are Mike 
Natomagan, who is the mayor of Pinehouse — we’ll ask all the 
folks to give us a wave — Alex Ross, the community and 
business development director for Pinehouse; Walter Smith, 
who is in charge of training for Pinehouse; Conrad Misponas, 
who is the deputy mayor of Pinehouse; Al Felix, CFO [chief 
financial officer] for the Pinehouse business New North; and 
Greg Ross is also joining them. No stranger to members in the 
House and specifically one Member of the Legislative 
Assembly on this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are fortunate, very fortunate as a province to have the 
outstanding example of local leadership in the North that we’ve 
seen from Pinehouse. And we want to say, through you to 
Mayor Mike, we want to thank him for that leadership, 
encourage him in those efforts. They’ve been meeting with the 
Committee on the Economy and other officials of government 
to further the interests of their community and the surrounding 
area. I just want all members if they would to please join me in 
welcoming this distinguished delegation to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with the Premier in welcoming our good friends from 
Pinehouse, especially my brother Greg and his son Alex. 
They’re very dear to our family. And as I’ve said before, I think 
it’s — what? — 40 years ago Greg left to move up to 
Pinehouse. And as the family always said, he’ll be back in a 
year. Well 40 years is kind of a big stretch from a year, but he’s 
made it his home. He’s got a wonderful family up there and we 
just appreciate the friendship that his whole community has 
extended to Greg and his family, but to all of us. So thank you 
very much for coming down, meeting with us, and enjoy your 
time at the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 
and welcome our northern leaders here to the Legislative 
Assembly, join the Premier and other members that will be 
inviting some of our northern leaders and some of the business 
ventures and partnerships and the good things that they’re doing 
back north. 
 
I just want to welcome you as the critic for Northern Affairs, 

welcome to your legislature, and hope you have good meetings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce a guest to the Legislative 
Assembly today. To you and through you to all members, Mr. 
Speaker, please welcome, seated in the west gallery, Mr. Al 
Scholz, executive director of the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Agrologists, and Nicole Philp, who is a member of the SIA 
provincial council. 
 
The Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists regulates the 
profession of agrology in Saskatchewan by ensuring its safe, 
competent, and ethical practice. Founded in 1946, the institute 
is the self-governing regulator of all 1,700 registered agrologists 
and agricultural technologists in the province. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask that all members join me in welcoming Mr. Scholz 
and Ms. Philp to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to join 
the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming Ms. Philp and Mr. Al 
Scholz to their Legislative Assembly. I suspect that they are 
here to be here for first reading of the bill that we are expecting 
later on today. And it’s great to see you here, and I wish that all 
members would join me in welcoming you to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
be remiss if I didn’t stand and welcome my good friend, Al 
Scholz, to the legislature today. Al and I used to be neighbours. 
We built a fence together. I should say he built the fence; I just 
paid for half. 
 
But we used to motorcycle together. And Al and I haven’t been 
on our motorcycles for a couple of years, and I do miss those 
long trips together when we used to go down to South Dakota. 
So, Al, I hope we’re going to be able to get an opportunity to do 
that again in the near future. So I’d ask my colleagues in the 
legislature to welcome Al to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
for a slightly extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a very important group in your gallery today I’d like to 
introduce to all the members. They’re from the Multicultural 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

Council of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday, to kick off multicultural week, 
MCOS [Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan] hosted their 
annual multicultural honours awards at Wanuskewin Heritage 
Park. Some of the recipients of awards are here and folks that 
took part in it. So today MCOS’s executive director, Rhonda 
Rosenberg, is here. 
 
Bula Ghosh, on Saturday, was the recipient of the 2017 Betty 
Szuchewycz Award recognizing outstanding contributions to 
multiculturalism in the province. Bula works as an ESL 
[English as a second language] teacher in Swift Current. Her 
work extends far beyond the classroom and across our country, 
and we’ll hear more about that in a member’s statement in a few 
minutes. Bula is accompanied today by her sister Indra Datta. 
 
And also visiting us today is one of the nominees for the Betty 
Szuchewycz Award: Barb Dedi is up there. Many in Regina 
will know, Barb’s well known for driving . . . the driving force 
behind the Spring Free from Racism event held each year in 
recognition of the International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination. With Barb today is Sharon Pepin, who is 
also a long-standing volunteer on the Spring Free from Racism 
committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, through you and to all the members, I’d like to 
ask that all members join me in welcoming these multicultural 
advocates to the legislature today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to respond on behalf of the official opposition to the 
Culture minister’s introduction and just to say thank you very 
much to all the folks here from the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan. Executive Director Rhonda Rosenberg — a lot 
of great work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan in 
helping us to realize our provincial motto Multis e gentibus 
vires, “from many peoples, strength.” But also certainly to Barb 
Dedi, to Sharon Pepin, to the Datta sisters, to Indra, and Bula 
Ghosh, we say thank you very much for all that you do in 
making us a better province all the year through, be it in 
Multicultural Week or not. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to a member’s 
statement from the member from Saskatoon Centre concerning 
the awards that were held this past weekend up in Saskatoon as 
well. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
very important people to their Legislative Assembly and to say 
happy Multicultural Week here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 
all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to once again 
introduce a great number, 11 grade 10 students from the 
Yorkton Regional High School, under their teacher, Mr. Perry 
Ostapowich, who brings probably four or five, maybe six 
classes a year to the Assembly to introduce them here. As well, 
you know, it’s always encouraging when you speak to the 
students. They’ve got such a good understanding of this place. 
We can just have a good conversation and answer some 

questions. 
 
So as is kind of customary with this group, he encourages them 
to contact their MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
through any source they can, and they usually get a shout-out. 
So today I’m mentioning Dylan Ringdal, Katie Grobler, Evan 
Matatall, Massen Ziola, and Kyle Janzen along with the other 
group with them up there, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to 
welcome this great group of Yorkton Regional High School 
students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join 
with the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport to welcome these 
individuals in your gallery, one in specific, Indra Datta. Mr. 
Speaker, she’s been a great support, her and her husband Brian, 
to our family for well over 20 years, one of the most difficult 
times we’ve ever gone through. And Indra personally, plus her 
husband Brian, an amazing pediatrician in this province, that 
just goes above and beyond every day. So I just want to ask all 
members to welcome them and publicly thank them for all 
they’ve been to our family. Thank you, Indra. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens of the town of 
Maymont. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to reopen the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
the closure of the BNCC [Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre] 
took inmates far away from their families, which makes 
visitation difficult or non-existent at all. 
 
They point out that the closure of this centre hurt families of the 
inmates because the inmates were learning new skills and 
working with skilled employers to obtain employment upon 
release. They point out that the closure hurt elders within 
Buffalo Narrows because inmates helped the elders with odd 
jobs around the community, Mr. Speaker. And the closure of 
Buffalo Narrows left 15 people without work, which had a huge 
financial impact on their families and all local businesses. The 
closure of BNCC took away from inmates to get treatment and 
to obtain training tickets while here. 
 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Buffalo 
Narrows. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for survivors of 
domestic violence. Those who signed this petition wish to bring 
to our attention the following: Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of domestic violence amongst the provinces in Canada. 
Employers should be obligated to reasonably accommodate 
survivors of domestic violence in the workplace. Employees 
who are survivors of domestic violence should be able to take a 
leave of absence from their employment without penalty, and 
Saskatchewan must do much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
support for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is similar to what we’ve called for in our bill, 
private member’s Bill 605, which we do hope that the 
government will support and pass. Those who signed this 
petition come from Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. The 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to your attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties; and that people in 
Saskatchewan here deserve to live in a fair province where all 
voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And we know over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan Party 
has received $12.61 million in corporate donations, and of that, 
$2.87 million coming from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people. And we know the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit 
this influence and level the playing field by banning corporate 
and union donations to political parties. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 

from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals that signed this particular 
petition want me to draw these particular points to your 
attention: that the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the 
primary link that connects the southern part of the province to 
the North; that the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert 
has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
The individuals that signed this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the communities of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed the petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across this 
province; that the Sask Party hiked education property tax by 
$67 million while also cutting $54 million from the classroom; 
and that even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, 
our kids are actually getting less; and also that the Sask Party 
cuts mean that students will lose much needed supports in their 
classroom. This includes busing for kindergartners and 
programs to help children with special needs. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer, call upon the government to reverse the 
senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the excited member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Holodomor Memorial Week 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am excited. This 
week is Holodomor Memorial Week, and yesterday members of 
this Assembly and Saskatchewan’s Ukrainian community 
gathered to remember those who perished during the man-made 
famine that devastated Ukraine in 1932-1933. 
 
Holodomor means death by hunger in Ukrainian. In the 1930s 
Joseph Stalin imposed a man-made famine which killed up to 
10 million people. The Soviet government forced Ukrainian 
farmers to give up more grain, resulting in widespread 
starvation. A decree was implemented which called for the 
arrest and execution of any person, including children, found 
taking food from the fields in which they worked. Military 
blockades were erected around many Ukrainian villages to 
prevent transportation of food into the villages. During the 
height of the famine, Ukrainian people were dying at a rate of 
20 to 25,000 a day, and nearly one-third of them were children 
under the age of 10 years old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important for the people of Saskatchewan and 
around the world to reflect on this dark page in our global 
history. We remember the Holodomor victims and honour the 
survivors by ensuring that genocide is never forgotten. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
remembering this tragic event. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this House today to 
commemorate one of the worst atrocities in modern history. 
Holodomor, or death by hunger, was used to suppress the 
struggle for an independent Ukraine. From 1932 to 1933, the 
Holodomor was a genocide by starvation that killed over 
7 million Ukrainians. Alongside other atrocities of that era, the 
Holodomor represents a particularly dark period of humanity, 
one that we must remember so that we never forget and we 
never repeat. The Bitter Memories of Childhood monument in 
the southeast of Wascana Centre stands as a haunting memorial 
of the atrocity of Holodomor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is made stronger by generations of 
Ukrainians who have chosen to call our province home. On 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to again take this 
moment during Holodomor Awareness Week to stand with 
them and all Saskatchewan people in honouring the victims and 
supporting the survivors. 
 
[A moment of silence.] 
 
We remember them. Vichnaya Pamyat. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Geo-Memorial Honours La Loche Shooting Victims  
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today it 
was announced that two geographical features in 
Saskatchewan’s North have been named in honour of Adam 
Wood and Marie Janvier. Adam and Marie were victims of the 
shooting nearly two years ago at Dene High School in La 
Loche, and are being recognized for their bravery for helping 
students and colleagues during that tragic day. These locations 
hold special significance to both individuals. 
 
Adam Wood Memorial Landing is along a creek just east of the 
village. Adam was an avid outdoorsman who loved northern 
Saskatchewan, was a frequent visitor to what he and his friends 
called the landing, describing it as a little wooded area beside 
the creek that made a great place for a campfire. 
 
Janvier Point is a peaceful and serene place located on Saleski 
Lake just north of the village of La Loche. Marie was a 
long-term resident of the area, remembered by many as a caring 
and compassionate person who loved to help anyone in need. 
 
The place nominations for Adam Wood and Marie Janvier were 
brought forward by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 
and the Ministry of Education saw an outpouring of support 
from the community. Through honouring Adam and Marie’s 
memory in this way, we hope that it brings a small measure of 
comfort to the families, friends, and communities affected by 
this tragedy. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Honours Given During Saskatchewan 
Multicultural Week 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, from November 18th to the 26th 
we celebrate Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 2017. I was 
pleased to attend the 2017 Multicultural Honours Reception this 
past Saturday at Wanuskewin sponsored by the Multicultural 
Council of Saskatchewan, MCOS, where they honoured several 
special people including Bwe Doh Soe who received the 2017 
Multicultural Youth Leadership Award. 
 
Bwe arrived in Saskatoon as a Karen refugee in 2007. He 
continues his cultural practices and supports others in the Karen 
community. My colleague from Riversdale will have more to 
say about Bwe in the next few days. 
 
Bula Ghosh is the recipient of the 2017 Betty Szuchewycz 
Award. As an English as a subsequent language instructor in 
Yorkton and Swift Current, Bula has ensured that integration 
efforts go far beyond the classroom. She is active at both the 
local and national level, and she always shares the rural 
perspective. Bula has made it known that truth and 
reconciliation is very much part of her dream that she has for 
her community. 
 
I also want to recognize Zoey Pricelys Roy for being named a 
multicultural superhero, a fierce but gentle indigenous poet. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing Saskatchewan Multicultural Week, 2017 and in 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

thanking MCOS as they promote multiculturalism and we 
recognize our own motto, “from many peoples, strength.” 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday marked the beginning of Canadian Western 
Agribition. Since 1971, Agribition has worked to advocate for 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry to people all across Canada 
and the world. Last year alone the event attracted more than 
175,000 visitors, including 1,200 international guests from over 
75 countries, and it generated more than $56 million in 
economic activity. It has grown into the largest livestock show 
in the country and truly has become a testament to the strength 
of our province’s agriculture sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event is not only a trade show, but it offers 
educational displays and learning opportunities. More than 
8,000 students from across the province attended the event last 
year, providing a unique opportunity to influence the next 
generation of farmers, ranchers, and agriculture industry 
leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is proud to continue to support 
this event. Yesterday, the Minister of Agriculture announced a 
renewed partnership with Canadian Western Agribition, 
providing $200,000 in funding over the next four years. Mr. 
Speaker, with events ranging from the Agribition Pro Rodeo to 
goat yoga, Agribition truly offers something for everyone. 
 
On behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I want to congratulate 
the Canadian Western Agribition on all of the successes they’ve 
experienced in their 47 years of operation and I encourage my 
colleagues to take some time to check out this world-class 
event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Honours Given During Saskatchewan 
Multicultural Week 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I also had the privilege of bringing greetings to the 
2017 Multicultural Honours gala held at Wanuskewin Heritage 
Park. 
 
The annual event is held during Multicultural Week, and this 
year the theme was recognizing multicultural superheroes in our 
communities. These superheroes are individuals and groups that 
have demonstrated heroic qualities in ensuring that 
communities both big and small are welcoming to everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the attendees heard numerous examples of selfless 
service and generosity to the province. The 2017 award winners 
were Bula Ghosh who was the recipient of the 2017 Betty 
Szuchewycz Award for outstanding contributions to 
multiculturalism in Saskatchewan; and Bwe Doh Soe who was 
the recipient of the Multicultural Youth Leadership Award. 

Both award winners have demonstrated outstanding 
contributions to multiculturalism in the province and 
commitment to relationship building, reconciliation, and 
combatting racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan for organizing a great event and, Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask all members to join me in congratulating Bula and 
Bwe as this year’s multicultural superheroes. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

New Joint-Use School Opens in Regina 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government is 
again opening doors for the future leaders of our province. I am 
pleased to rise in the House today and announce that École 
Wascana Plains and École St. Elizabeth are now open in the 
Greens on Gardiner community right here in Regina. It has been 
wonderful to welcome the hard-working staff and students to 
this state-of-the-art facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this space is the heart of the community and will 
serve the ever-growing population we see right here in Regina. 
This modern learning environment could not be done without 
the success and hard work of our P3 model, which is saving the 
people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars. We are pleased to 
see the collaboration of school boards, communities, and 
educators to make these new, innovative schools a success as 
the builds finish on time and of course on budget. The schools 
have also a new 90-space child care centre available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the new schools that have opened this past fall 
are for the students, the staff, and communities as this 
government will continue to make education a priority in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating École Wascana Plains and École St. Elizabeth 
schools on a successful build and wish the students and staff the 
very best in their new schools. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Accountability and Privacy 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, while they’re busy changing and 
rechanging the definition of privatization, it seems the Sask 
Party have also secretly changed the definition of 
accountability. Yesterday we asked 12 questions, and the 
minister responsible for the topic we raised only stood four 
times to speak. That’s 4 out of 12, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s normal for the Deputy Premier or the Premier to, from time 
to time, answer for some ministers, but while the Deputy 
Premier answered three questions for other ministers, he 
answered neither of the two questions we asked him. The 
refusal to accept accountability is a growing pattern in that tired 
and arrogant government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] saw 
fit to question the Premier about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

Transportation Hub] scandal, and yet he scoffs at our questions 
on the very same topic. They refuse to come clean about what 
they know. They make getting public documents as difficult as 
possible, and they blocked key players like Laurie Pushor and 
Bill Boyd from testifying at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Premier and that party promised to be the 
most accountable ever, but now they won’t even answer simple 
questions. So, Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier’s new 
definition of accountability, and will he table it in the House? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Normally I try to 
pick out a few parts in the preamble if the question is not clear 
and try to answer those, but that’s hard to discern any questions 
there too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I heard the words accountability and transparency, and fair 
enough, Mr. Speaker. A lot of Saskatchewan people are talking 
about those issues and privacy issues today after we have 
learned that the NDP [New Democratic Party] have sent out, 
have spammed possibly thousands of Saskatchewan people, a 
text message, Mr. Speaker. Their text asks people to sign an 
NDP petition. The problem of course is that this is likely illegal, 
Mr. Speaker. Canada has anti-spam . . . Well the Deputy Leader 
is mocking the fact that this might not be within the bounds of 
the anti-spam legislation in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that legislation says you must have written or 
implied consent from anyone before you send them, spam them 
a text message. You can’t . . . And the NDP have said, well 
we’ve generated these text numbers randomly, Mr. Speaker. 
Well that’s the definition of spamming. Now I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, I understand the NDP have walked this back, but it 
looks very much like they’ve broke the law. Question number 
one for the members opposite would be, how did they get the 
list, private citizens’ cellphone numbers? How did they get 
them, and what are they doing with that list right now, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, big shocker, no answers on the 
GTH. Mr. Speaker, with the GTH, they say they gave 
everything to the auditor but now we’re finding out that 
Highways doesn’t always try that hard to find emails or 
documents, and they don’t always release the ones that they’re 
supposed to. That’s why it’s a problem that the Premier is using 
a partisan server or even Gmail for government emails, and why 
it’s a problem that his office said his email was broken when it 
wasn’t. 
 
We know the Finance minister used her private emails to skirt 
the rules, and now her government emails are literally 
disintegrating. But we know how she feels about it: “Blah . . . 
blah . . . blah.” Mr. Speaker, this is another Sask Party scandal 
in the making, but the minister responsible for all government 
emails says she doesn’t even care. She even refused to answer 
the journalists’ questions. Her DM [deputy minister] was sent to 
the rotunda to do her job for her. 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier prepares to leave, how does he feel 
about breaking their commitment to be the most accountable? Is 
this why he’s refusing to fire the Minister of Education even as 
she continues to make excuses instead of sincere apologies? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is some questions that 
have presented themselves today in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Leader of the Opposition just had the 
chance to answer them. For weeks now, she’s been asking 
questions, her colleagues have, and in the spring session as 
well, the former leader, the member for Rosemont, was asking 
questions about privacy and transparency. 
 
We’ve learned that the NDP have somehow obtained the private 
cellphone numbers of potentially thousands of Saskatchewan 
residents and they’re sending out what, by definition of the 
anti-spam legislation in Canada, is spam, Mr. Speaker, in 
contravention of the law. Mr. Speaker, I think if the member is 
interested in transparency and privacy issues, she ought to 
explain to those Saskatchewan people . . . One, I understand, 
has already made a complaint to the CRTC [Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission]. She’ll 
need to explain, the NDP will need to explain, why they have 
those private cellphone numbers. 
 
She might also want to explain why, when you click the link on 
this particular text, it takes you to the member for Regina 
Rosemont, only one of the leadership candidates. That’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. Is he running to be the NDP leader, or 
perhaps a Nigerian prince? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Support for Indigenous Education and Employment 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been three weeks and the 
Minister of Education still refuses to accept responsibility for 
her words. This weekend, Prince Albert Grand Council Chief 
Brian Hardlotte added his voice to all those across the province 
who are wondering what exactly the minister meant when she 
denigrated treaty education and even compared it, of all things, 
to communist Russia. 
 
Chief Hardlotte asked the minister to reaffirm her support for 
the indigenous education protocol. Mr. Speaker, she’s restated 
the government’s position but not her own. And after watching 
her performance when she scrapped NORTEP [northern teacher 
education program] and then how she’s spoken about treaty 
education, it’s no wonder that Chief Hardlotte and many others 
would like some clarity. 
 
Will the minister take the opportunity now to apologize directly 
for her comments, not for any confusion or misinterpretation 
she may blame others for, but for her own damaging 
comments? And will she clarify what her personal position is 
on treaty education and the indigenous education protocol? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

are elements in that preamble that simply are not true. And 
saying something enough times and imputing motive enough 
times simply doesn’t make something so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I reiterate again my apology, my commitment, our commitment 
to ongoing mandated treaty education. That commitment is 
clear. We were the first province in Canada to mandate treaty 
education in the curriculum. We established the First Nations 
and Métis adviser position who reports directly to the deputy 
minister of Education. We partnered with the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] to coordinate a learning 
resource evaluation program to identify materials that address 
First Nations and Métis content and perspectives, treaty 
education, and residential school experience. And we developed 
an online resource for teachers to access learning materials 
about TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to be done but we will move 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, that minister and by association the 
whole caucus has broken trust with Saskatchewan. And the 
Saskatchewan Party has a lot to do to rebuild trust, to show true 
commitment to reconciliation and to indigenous education. 
 
Last year the Premier was good enough to join us in our 
ongoing call for equal funding for all students in Saskatchewan, 
both on- and off-reserve. Now the federal government has still 
refused to keep their promise to close that education gap. This 
premier likes to pick fights. He likes to pick fights with mayors, 
with the Prime Minister. Well we’re losing a billion dollars 
each year because of the Aboriginal education gap, not to 
mention the harm it does to kids growing up on-reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier pick the right fight? Will he put 
his words on commitment to indigenous education into action? 
Will he ensure that all students are equally funded and send the 
bill to Ottawa, take the fight to where it belongs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are important numbers that relate to this question — 45,900 
First Nations living off-reserve were employed in September. 
That’s over 30 per cent since 2007 and this relates, of course, 
very directly to education and results of education, Mr. Speaker. 
Under the NDP, Aboriginal unemployment rates peaked when 
19.4 per cent of Aboriginal people were unemployed as of 
March 2006. Twenty per cent of all adult basic education 
funding is for on-reserve training, Mr. Speaker. That’s $5 
million. For 2017-18 our government’s providing 61.7 million 
in funding for First Nations and Métis education and 
employment initiatives; 486 million since 2007. 
 
And the numbers roll on: 17 million estimated funding targeted 
this year to First Nations and Métis initiatives and institutions, 
5.1 million for the joint task force on improving education and 
employment outcomes, 3.8 million for First Nations and Métis 
achievement fund, 600,000 for summer literacy camps targeted 
primarily at remote northern communities — all in an effort, 

Mr. Speaker, to close that gap. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Drainage at Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste seems to know no bounds. 
Since 2009, drainage problems caused by a lack of maintenance 
at the GTH are causing headaches for local landowners. James 
Farley is one of those landowners, Mr. Speaker, and he’s here 
today because he’s run out of options. Because of 
mismanagement at the GTH, he has had 40 acres flooded and 
the government is offering no help or answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH’s drainage system was supposed to 
prevent flooding from happening on the neighbouring land. But 
while the GTH’s finances have been going down the drain, the 
lack of maintenance at the GTH means that the water is not. Mr. 
Speaker, the flooding is getting worse and the Sask Party 
government is doing nothing while the GTH’s drainage system 
falls further into disrepair. Why has this government allowed 
this serious problem to get so bad, and why have they failed to 
do anything to help the neighbouring landowners? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment, 
the GTH, SaskPower, and SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. I want to thank 
the member for the question. I’m not familiar with the issue that 
she’s raised on behalf of Mr. Farley. I believe she mentioned 
that he is in the House, so we’d be very much interested in 
getting some more information and trying to address this 
problem as directly as we can. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, from the beginning, local 
landowners like Mr. Farley have been hearing the government 
promise to maintain their drainage channel. But like the facts 
and the witnesses and the documents at the centre of the GTH 
scandal, the Sask Party have done nothing to help the water 
flow. There has been no maintenance since the year 2009, and 
every year local landowners are losing more and more acres to 
flooding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand that the GTH is busy dealing 
with the fallout of the Sask Party’s scandal and 
mismanagement, and they’re desperately looking for people to 
move in. And we’re still all waiting to find out what the 
company called Brad will bring to the table. Because failing to 
maintain infrastructure is actually making everything worse, 
and it will cost us all more in the long run. 
 
When will the minister work with the GTH to make sure this 
issue is resolved once and for all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

want to thank the member for her question. As I said in my first 
answer, we’ll follow up directly, not only with Mr. Farley to 
hear his concerns first-hand but also follow up with Global 
Transportation Hub to find the answers that Mr. Farley is 
looking for and that the member has raised. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this problem is eight years old 
and the minister is offering now to look into it? The Sask Party 
hasn’t made good on their promises at all, and the landowners 
need more than just promises, especially since his government 
has a habit of mismanaging or causing a major scandal with 
almost everything they touch at the GTH. 
 
Now I can understand if the Environment minister might be 
reluctant to weigh in on the drainage issue because the 
government has failed to properly address drainage concerns 
raised by farmers and municipalities across the province. But if 
this is the government’s own land, and like everywhere else 
across the province no action is taken, the problem is only 
going to get worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask again: exactly when will the minister work 
with landowners, the Water Security Agency and the GTH and 
the city of Regina and Highways to solve the drainage issues 
causing problems for nearby landowners? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to Mr. Farley’s specific issue, I’ve 
already committed twice that we’ll follow up immediately with 
the Global Transportation Hub to get to the bottom of the 
questions that she’s asked on his behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I will, while I’m on my feet, take a moment to 
remind the member that there are two former Environment 
ministers sitting on that side of the House. And she will know 
that drainage has been an issue that has not been addressed — 
up until this government introduced new legislation and 
regulations — for 35 years in this province. This a 
long-standing, ongoing issue for this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it was action on this side of the House that is 
beginning to rectify situations, to work with drainage networks 
across the province, and frankly to address an issue that had 
been ignored for over 30 years in this province. And she knows 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, across the province 
Saskatchewan people were hit this year with the hike to their 
property tax bills. The Sask Party knew the property 
assessments were coming. They knew before their budget came 
through. 
 
Communities like Estevan contributed a lot during the boom, 

but are now feeling the pain from the economic downturn, and 
the Sask Party isn’t making that any easier. In fact they cut their 
funding and raised the percentage of their house and property 
that is taxable from 70 to 80 per cent. Now the people of 
Estevan are forced to pay even more taxes, and they’re based on 
the value of their home at the peak of the oil boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the government continues to refuse to 
provide any assistance to these communities, will they at least 
consider moving to a one- or two-year assessment cycle, like 
other provinces have, to help lessen the impact on communities 
like Estevan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we first 
formed government, we committed to reducing the EPT 
[education property tax] so that education funding would be 60 
per cent from the GRF [General Revenue Fund] and 40 per cent 
from the EPT. We actually went beyond that and the split was 
65 per cent GRF and 35 per cent EPT. We have returned EPT 
funding to a level to meet our campaign commitment of a 60/40 
split. I would also add that residents of Saskatchewan have 
saved $1.3 billion in property tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, across the province people are 
struggling to make ends meet, and the Sask Party’s tax hikes are 
making it worse. Municipalities are doing their best but they’re 
struggling after the cuts and the PST [provincial sales tax] hike 
too.  
 
Last night I had the opportunity to meet with Estevan’s mayor 
and council. They had to make the difficult decision to close 
their arena because they can’t afford to fix it enough to keep it 
open. Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to help the people in their 
community with the Sask Party tax hike, and they’re trying to 
plan for the future. But when they asked, the government told 
them they would not know the status of their grants-in-lieu until 
the next premier is selected in January. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister pay attention? Cities, 
towns, villages, all of Saskatchewan’s municipalities are trying 
to deal with the Sask Party cuts and start their budget process 
for next year. So why can’t the minister provide them certainty 
now and commit to no more cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister . . . Whoa. I 
recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t 
know where to start with that, or whether there was a question 
there. I’m not sure. But as I said, we’ve moved back to a 60/40 
split on the EPT and the GRF. And as I said when I met with 
city mayors, we are reviewing the grants-in-lieu and we will 
have answers for them shortly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do care about the municipalities, even 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

Prince Albert for that matter. We include all municipalities. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Treaty Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister a 
number of questions that she refused to answer. She’s accused 
of calling treaty education into question and drawing 
equivalencies between the experience of Western Europeans 
and indigenous people. She needs to accept responsibility for 
her words. Instead, Mr. Speaker, she has said that she is sorry 
that other people misinterpreted her and that she is sorry that we 
are confused. Mr. Speaker, that is simply not an apology, and 
it’s a further insult to those who were offended and to all those 
who heard or read what she said. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask again: if the minister can’t stand in her 
place and take full responsibility for her own words, why does 
she think that she deserves to be the minister in charge of our 
kids’ education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have said there is no equivalency. And I repeat: there is no 
equivalency. Mr. Speaker, the apologies I have offered were 
intended and continue to be intended unequivocally and 
comprehensively. If anyone was in doubt that this government 
is committed, that I am committed to ongoing treaty education, 
which was never in doubt, let them rest assured it will continue, 
Mr. Speaker. I refer back to the gracious assessment by Chief 
Bobby Cameron when we spoke two weeks ago that I remain 
committed to teaching treaty, that we remain committed to 
teaching treaty, and we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that there is a great deal 
of doubt, and that doubt remains. And it’s in no small part due 
to the minister’s inability to actually apologize for the words 
that she said. I will take her at her word that she has apologized 
for the false equivalency between indigenous people and her 
ancestors. But will she apologize for comparing treaty 
education to Bolshevism? And will she finally apologize to the 
teacher that she so publicly attacked? And will she affirm her 
personal commitment to treaty education in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. The commitment 
to treaty education remains, as we have said now and as I have 
said and will continue to say, Mr. Speaker. And I can only say 
again that what was intended was a respectful submission in 
this House on a range of topics covered in the Throne Speech, 
including math and coding and French. And no parallel was 
ever intended — the words that have been put in my mouth 
otherwise — because those words were simply never uttered, 
Mr. Speaker. As I say, saying something enough times and 
imputing motive enough times doesn’t make something the 

case, Mr. Speaker. Again our commitment, my apology, to 
ongoing, mandated, treaty curriculum in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s record is simply 
much different than the one that she proclaims. Yesterday she 
laid out a couple of programs that show the government’s 
commitment to indigenous education. But, Mr. Speaker, she 
forgot to mention that they cut $1.2 million from indigenous 
advanced education programs, cut $3 million from job training 
for indigenous people, and dismantled NORTEP, an education 
program that was run successfully for and by people of the 
North for decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she’s bragging about a 1 per cent increase in 
graduation rates — 1 per cent. Again that happened despite, not 
because of, any action of that minister or this government. Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister acknowledge the government’s and 
her own record? And if she can’t see it, will she just resign? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, we take the improvement in 
graduation rates very seriously. It is progress. It is a start, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are proud of that. And that is something that 
has been overseen by this government. And as I say, proud of 
the commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite mentioned the North. And a 
major priority is that we of course begin to heal following the 
terrible tragedy of January 2016. Last week I met with the 
director and members of Northern Lights School Division and 
we informed them, Mr. Speaker, that we are moving ahead with 
the Dene High School renovation project in La Loche. That is 
an important step in the healing process, Mr. Speaker, under 
this government. 
 
Otherwise, since ’07 we’ve increased funding to northern 
school divisions by 28.5 per cent. The operating grant to 
Northern Lights alone has increased by almost 30 per cent. The 
number of teachers has increased by almost 10, EAs 
[educational assistant] by 19 per cent, social workers by more 
than a hundred. Clear commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Information Technology Services 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, first we had a Premier who told 
the House his email wasn’t working for two weeks. Then we 
found out there was no record of any kind of that. Now we have 
a minister who said she didn’t care whether it happened or not. 
So much for ministerial accountability, Mr. Speaker. Neither 
the minister nor the Premier seem to be at all concerned with 
their government technology supposedly stops working. 
Yesterday, instead of answering my first question, the minister 
gave a terrible answer to an entirely different question. Then the 
Deputy Premier ranted for her. Then the minister declined to 
speak to reporters altogether. 



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

So I’ll ask her again: can the Minister of Central Services 
update the people of Saskatchewan on what work her ministry 
has done to fix the problems with the Premier’s government 
account? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the members go on 
and on over there with respect to, you know, that I said I didn’t 
care. Mr. Speaker. You know, it has nothing to do with the 
subject matter. It has to do with their disingenuous comments 
that occurred afterwards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are very proud of the service and reliability provided by 
ITO [information technology office]. I’m certain that the 
members opposite, because they were, or some of them were, in 
government with the quality of service that we actually receive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
However temporary service disruptions do occur, even in the 
very best of systems, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of things 
that could cause such glitches. Some recent examples of service 
requests to the IT [information technology] desk include issues 
with a McAfee update, customers receiving bounce-back 
messages due to a misconfiguration on a spam blocker, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re very proud of the service delivered to 12,000 customers 
in the Government of Saskatchewan with a 99.8 per cent 
success rate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Question? Question period? 
 
The Speaker: — No more questions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2)/Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 99, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 99 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member next to me 
said it should be at the next standing of the Assembly, but it 
should be the next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to break tradition by 
moving that Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading on Bill 103 . . . be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 

Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 104, 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General that Bill No. 104 be now introduced and read 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 105, 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 105 be now introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Item no. 8, the 
Hon. Mr. Morgan. Oh, I’m sorry. First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — In spite of the overeagerness of the 
Clerk, Mr. Speaker, next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of 
Death Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that Bill No. 106, The Missing 
Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 106 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:30] 
 

The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Just very quickly, Mr. Speaker, a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll hear your point of order. I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 
question period, the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota, in reference to comments by the member 
from Saskatoon Meewasin, stated that he was using statements 
that “simply were not true.” Mr. Speaker, that’s language that is 
plainly unparliamentary, and I’d ask you to call on that member 
to withdraw that comment and to call her to apologize to this 
House. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 
comments and apologize. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 44 through 53. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled responses to questions 
44 to 53. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
request of the House to move a number of motions of 
condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCE MOTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
expectation, as it has been I think, members of the House, for 
whenever we’ve been occasioned with these motions of 
condolence, that we will provide those motions individually for 
each member and give other members the opportunity to speak 
to the specific motions. 
 

Gordon Gray Currie 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The first motion of condolence is in 
memory of Gordon Currie. Mr. Speaker, Gord Currie passed 
away at the age of 93 earlier this year and is well known, not 
only in our capital city here in Regina where he made his home. 
He was very well known across the province for his coaching 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

exploits. Mr. Speaker, I would offer as well to members of the 
House that he was well known right across our country and 
beyond the borders of Canada for his contribution to sport and 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was also well known for a great sense of 
humility that he had about him. He was a football legend in our 
capital, to be sure. But as Rob Vanstone who is a well-known 
sports columnist for the Leader-Post said, he didn’t act like he 
was a legend or that he knew he was, that rather he acted with 
genuine humility. Vanstone interviewed Gordon Currie in 2012, 
and this is what Mr. Currie had to say of the concept of legacy: 
 

Legacy is very important. It’s important for a family, a 
community and a nation. It’s especially important for a 
sports team. 
 
A legacy gives a foundation from which you can build and 
grow. A legacy adds stability and a sense of purpose. It 
stimulates a special kind of pride and it makes you feel 
fortunate to belong — a pride enriched with that 
all-important, appropriate degree of humility. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a wonderful quote from a pretty amazing man 
who managed to describe better than I could ever, though I’ve 
tried in the past, to explain how you can have a pride of place 
and you can have a pride of team and yet you can still be 
humble about that. Those two things perhaps seem to conflict 
on the face of the matter but Gordon Currie actually proved . . . 
If you ever have had a chance to speak with him, and I had the 
honour to chat with him a little bit, he proved that those two 
things not just co-existed but were really meshed if the context 
was right, if the consideration by the individual is right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shelly Riffel is a former student at Campbell 
Collegiate and she wrote the Leader-Post when Mr. Currie 
passed away. She recalled her time in grade 9 when she was a 
relative newcomer to Campbell. Shelly didn’t feel comfortable 
attending one class. She had recently moved from Ontario and 
she was unfamiliar with the subject matter and so she would 
escape, she said, to the washroom and she would stand on a 
toilet so that no one could see her feet. Well Gord Currie 
figured out what was going on, and he knocked on the door of 
the bathroom stall and asked Shelly to come out. Shelly thought 
she was in really big trouble, but as she recounts in her letter, 
Principal Gord Currie smiled, introduced himself, and took her 
on a tour of the school, noting that Campbell has so much more 
to offer than that bathroom cubicle. Mr. Speaker, there are 
many, many anecdotes. There are many stories of teachers and 
students and players about the kind of man that Mr. Currie was. 
 
I was a summer student working in this very building when I 
had the chance to first meet him. He was a minister of the 
Crown at the time, in the PC [Progressive Conservative] 
government. He served as an MLA, as members will know, 
from 1982 to 1987. He had a good and kind word for everyone. 
No wonder players responded to him the way they did. His 
winning record is legendary in junior football, Mr. Speaker, and 
I would dare say that the success of the University of Regina 
Rams program today would trace its foundation to the record of 
Gord Currie. 
 
He served in a number of different files in cabinet, Mr. Speaker, 

but I can only imagine what it was like for the leader of his 
party at the time to realize that someone of the character and 
stature of Gord Currie was prepared to run for that party. Mr. 
Speaker, we all seek to attract people to run who are dedicated 
to service, who have that right balance of pride in place and 
humility, who have accomplishments to look, to reflect upon 
and for others to reflect upon, and who are just trustworthy. 
And he was given a number of cabinet duties on account of the 
trust that he had earned from his colleagues and from the then 
premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other members will want to chat about, say a few 
words about Gordon Currie. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 
move this motion and then give way to those members who 
wish to enter this condolence motion discussion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Gordon Gray Currie, who passed away on 22 February, 
2017 at the age of 93, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1982 to 1987, representing the 
constituency of Regina Wascana for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. Mr. Currie served on Executive 
Council in several capacities, including as the minister of 
Education, the minister of Continuing Education, the 
minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, the 
minister of Science and Technology, and the minister of 
Telephones. 
 
Mr. Currie was born in Semans, Saskatchewan. He 
attended Notre Dame College and received a Bachelor of 
Education degree at Mount Allison College in New 
Brunswick. He was also a lieutenant in the Royal Canadian 
Navy in World War II. Upon his return to Regina, he was 
hired at Balfour Technical School to teach history and 
promote sports. 
 
He continued his coaching career with the Balfour 
Redmen, the Regina Red Sox, and of course the Regina 
Rams. His contribution to sport have been formally 
recognized in a variety of ways. Currie Field, the home of 
the Regina Red Sox, was named in his honour. He was 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame in 
1978 and the Canadian Football Hall of Fame as a mentor 
in 2005, and he became a member of the Order of Canada 
in 1979. 
 
Mr. Currie is survived and sadly missed by his three sons, 
Bob, Doug, and Jim, and their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — We’ll take the motion as read. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

enter into this condolence motion and to pay tribute and thanks 
and condolence with respect to Mr. Gordon Currie. 
 
Gordon, as has been mentioned by the Premier, is survived by 
his sons, Bob, Doug, and Jim, a granddaughter, and many other 
extended family members. 
 
Gordon was born in Semans, Saskatchewan and went to Notre 
Dame Collegiate in Wilcox and later received his education 
degree at Mount Allison University. Gordon was also a World 
War II veteran, serving as lieutenant in the Royal Canadian 
Navy. 
 
Gordon was a well-known and respected member of the 
community right here in Regina. Everyone who knew Gord 
knew his passion for teaching, as evident by the many years he 
spent at Balfour, and of course, Gord’s passion for sports as a 
coach for the Balfour hockey and football teams and the Regina 
Rams. It was as football coach at Balfour where Gordon led the 
team to eight provincial championships in 13 years. As coach, 
even more impressively, the team once won 40 straight games 
in a row. Later he coached the Regina Rams from 1965 to 1976, 
earning the team six national titles. 
 
Gord also had a passion for baseball and the Regina Red Sox, 
where their home diamond of Currie Field is named in his 
honour. Gordon was well recognized for his achievements in 
coaching and his ability to mentor and encourage young people. 
Before he was elected as an MLA he was inducted into the 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame in 1978, received the Order 
of Canada as well in 1979. Later he was inducted into the CFL 
[Canadian Football League] Hall of Fame as a mentor. 
 
After receiving the award for Amateur Coach of the Year in 
1976, Gord spoke of his passion for coaching, saying, “I 
wouldn’t trade a minute of it for anything in the world. You 
don’t put a value on the things I’ve gained: the friendships, the 
fun, the involvement with young people.” 
 
Gordon was elected to represent the constituents of Regina 
Wascana in this House in 1982. He was able to use his passion 
for education as the minister for Advanced Education; 
Education; Science and Technology; and later, minister 
responsible for SaskTel. 
 
He was a mentor to many in this community and this province 
and left a legacy in this city that will be felt for decades to 
come. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a privilege too to join in on this condolence motion. I want to 
thank the member from Regina Wascana Plains, who would 
normally join in, but she yielded the floor to me to say a few 
words regarding Gordon Currie. 
 
I didn’t know Gordon real well, but I can tell you that I knew 
him well enough that I wanted to stand in my place today and 
talk a little bit about his impact, I guess maybe a little bit in my 
life, but also talk about some of the stories that I’ve heard 
regarding Gord Currie from a couple of different levels, through 

family members. We have a mutual friend that knew Gordon 
very well that I also knew quite well, and some of the stories 
came from her as well as a couple of former football players 
that played under Gordon Currie when he was the coach of the 
Rams. 
 
I quickly looked up the name and checked on Google as Gordon 
Currie and looking at all the accomplishments. But it’s funny 
when you look at those accomplishments, and there are many 
— whether it’s national titles, whether it’s the Order of Canada, 
whether it’s his, you know, his influence in teaching — it really 
doesn’t tell you a whole lot about the person. And the person is 
far more impressive than the accomplishments even though he 
accomplished so much. 
 
And he was really about relationships, and he built relationships 
with people. Anybody that ever came into contact with Gordon, 
I believe all said the same thing: what a gentleman. What a kind 
and caring gentleman. And it didn’t matter whether it was on 
the football field, which could be a very aggressive setting, to 
the classroom, depending . . . 
 
You know, one of the things that Gordon did, was instrumental 
in, was the development of Cochrane High School. He was the 
principal in Balfour and also Campbell, but he also was 
instrumental in the development of Cochrane High School. And 
Cochrane High School was really a high school that was set up 
maybe a little bit before its time. It often brought in students 
that weren’t fitting into the normal day-to-day routine or 
curriculums of the mainstream schools. And he welcomed those 
. . . He developed that because he could see a need for that. 
 
He was the main developer of Cochrane, and he could see the 
need because he made those relationships with kids that weren’t 
maybe necessarily always the stars on the football team or 
baseball team that he dealt with, but were maybe struggling in 
school a little bit, as the story as the Premier just mentioned. He 
was able to see that and build those relationships and then see 
that there was a need for perhaps a different education setting; 
still, you know, making sure that they were able to receive the 
education they needed, but perhaps in a little different setting 
than the mainstream that most were going through. So he was 
instrumental in that. 
 
I think a lot of that stems from . . . And I didn’t certainly know 
him in his early years but, you know, I always think any person 
that attended — some would say survived — Notre Dame in the 
early years . . . You know, he was a Hound. He was a Hound 
from Notre Dame, and those early years in Notre Dame or in 
Wilcox, Saskatchewan aren’t quite what you see if you go to 
Wilcox, Saskatchewan now. 
 
Those early days were tough days under Père Athol Murray. 
And no doubt, you know, some of his character that was built, 
that was demonstrated in years to come were developed in those 
early days of going to Notre Dame high school at Wilcox, 
where their dorms were literally granaries that weren’t being 
used on a farm and hauled into Wilcox. And that’s where they 
stayed through the winter. You can imagine on a day like today 
or yesterday with the wind howling and at 20 below, there 
wasn’t a whole lot of firewood that was going to keep that 
granary warm where they stayed. 
 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

[14:45] 
 
But it was that character that was built in him. And then to think 
of him moving on from there — going to university of course, 
getting his degree, but serving in the navy — and some of the 
conditions that he would have gone through in those settings, 
those really built, I think, the character that so many got to see 
in later years through Gord’s coaching and through his 
education, through the education system. 
 
And then as well, I also know that through his political years — 
although it wasn’t as long as perhaps some like the member 
from Cannington, thank heavens — but through his political 
years and, you know, the respect that I think, you know, the 
civil service had for the minister, that the education system had 
because he had been a teacher and now as an Education 
minister. But you know, just talking to people that knew him 
well through those times, he was so well respected. And he 
didn’t do it by being forceful, and he didn’t do it by being 
intimidating, and he didn’t do by being aggressive. He did it by 
being Gord Currie. And that is just a really unique trait that he 
had. 
 
You know, and it’s amazing, as I said, the accomplishments. 
Some were touched on, but eight Manitoba-Saskatchewan 
junior league championships. He coached for 11 years. That’s 
not a bad record. Eight Saskatchewan-Manitoba championships, 
seven Western Canadian championships under the Rams, and 
six national titles. Pretty darn impressive. 
 
And as I said, one of the fellows that I know fairly well played 
football for him. He came from Milestone. There’s a few, a 
number have came from Milestone, but you know, not a real, 
known as a football program. They were big guys. So they 
came in and they started playing with the Rams, and they will 
all talk about how Gordon Currie welcomed them and made 
them feel comfortable.  
 
I mean, it’s not always the most comfortable, probably a little 
intimidating coming from a six-man program to then to be 
playing with the Regina Rams, and how it would be pretty easy 
to go to that first practice and say, this is not for me; I’m 
moving on. But he had that welcoming attitude that made 
people want to stay and probably achieve more than they ever 
would have achieved had they walked away. And it was that 
type of relationship that he built, you know. As was mentioned, 
Sports Hall of Fame here in Saskatchewan in 1978, the Order of 
Canada in 1979, and the Canadian Football Hall of Fame in 
2005 — pretty major accomplishments for Gordon Currie. 
 
And the one quote that I just want to read because I think if you 
look at so many of the accomplishments, they are impressive, 
but it’s about the relationships that I think Gordon would want 
to be remembered for. And this one quote here, this bit of a 
paragraph, talks about his success in the coaching: 
 

There really are some great memories. Sure, you remember 
the cups, but it’s the relationships that count. Why would 
anyone coach year after year — and most of it is volunteer 
work — if all there is . . . [at the end] is a cup? It’s just a 
pot. If you don’t walk away with more than just a cup, it 
has been a hollow, shallow activity. Because of the 
relationships, you walk away with a life experience that 

never leaves you.  
 
That was Gordon Currie. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I stand 
today to join with the Premier, and the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Indian Head-Milestone, entering 
into this motion of condolence regarding the passing of the 
former member for Regina Wascana. He was predeceased by 
his wife of 57 years, Shirley, and as has already been noted, he 
leaves to cherish his memory his sons Bob, Doug, and Jim and 
their families. 
 
In the notice of his passing, the family wrote, “It is with 
profound sadness, but deep gratitude for a life well lived, that 
we announce the passing of Gordon Currie . . .” And certainly 
we’ve heard much evidence of that to this point today. He was 
the son of a Pool elevator agent and, as has been mentioned, 
was born near Semans and, as son of an elevator agent, did a 
fair amount of moving around southern Saskatchewan and other 
parts of Saskatchewan. He later attended, as has been noted, 
Notre Dame in the era of Père Murray and went on to become a 
celebrated educator. 
 
Gordon Currie also, as has been mentioned, served as a 
lieutenant in the navy during World War II. But as we’ve heard 
today, he is perhaps best remembered as an exceptional coach 
and exceptional mentor, one of those who dedicated a good part 
of his life and his career to the promotion of sport and the 
betterment of children. He enjoyed success as a hockey coach, a 
football coach, and a baseball coach. And of course the Currie 
Field, the home diamond of the Regina Red Sox, bears his 
name. 
 
Elected in 1982, Mr. Currie filled several roles, including as the 
minister of Education, and his list of accomplishments is very 
long. A member of the Order of Canada, inducted to the 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame, the Saskatchewan football 
hall of fame. And upon his induction to the Saskatchewan 
Sports Hall of Fame this was noted: although his record as a 
coach is impressive — he was at one time noted to be the most 
successful amateur coach in all of Canada — his success was 
more than just his win-loss record, a win-loss record as we’ve 
already established was almost unparalleled. But his real legacy 
is that those who played under him learned what desire, 
courage, ambition, and fair play can accomplish. 
 
That was a life well lived indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’d 
like to offer our thanks for his service to the people of Regina 
and the people of this province, and express our sincere 
condolences to his family. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The item before the Assembly is a 
motion of condolence for Gordon Currie, moved by the 
Premier. Will the members take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Jack Charles Klein 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to move a motion of condolence in respect of Jack Klein who 
also passed away earlier this year. Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I 
move the motion though, I have some personal reflections, 
again based on my time working here in this building as a 
summer student and then a little bit later on in another capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as someone who is keenly interested in politics, I 
tried to learn as much as I could from a distance about ministers 
of the government of the day and frankly, members on the 
opposition side as well, and perhaps how they went about their 
affairs and what they might be best known for. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you that in the case of Jack Klein, at least as 
regards the discussions that some of the younger people 
working in the building would have had, it was thought that his 
physical stature did not match his standing in this place, in this 
House, or possibly in the cabinet although we wouldn’t have 
been privy to anything there obviously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can remember Mr. Klein’s very, very effective efforts in this 
House. I think, if I’m remembering right, when I would have 
been first in this Legislative Assembly, he would have just sat a 
few chairs over and was very, very effective, I would say, in 
defending the program of the government of the day and 
perhaps turning the attack sometimes to the other side of the 
House. 
 
He was pretty passionate, is certainly my recollection, and that 
should surprise no one when you consider his bio and the things 
that he achieved prior ever to running and coming into this 
place. He was a well-regarded, highly regarded business person 
who found success in some difficult forms of business, a 
seasonal business for example. As we’re about to hear in the 
motion, he ran the Sunset Amusement Park as an 
owner/operator. And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re running a seasonal 
business in this province — it’s dependent on the summer 
months — there’s a certain amount of courage that would be 
required and stamina that would be required and business skill, 
I would say, in addition to the other business ventures that he 
was involved in. And here again I can understand why a leader 
of the party of the day would seek someone like Jack Klein out 
to be a candidate to run for their party because of their obvious 
involvement in the community, because of, in the case of Mr. 
Klein, his success in the insurance and real estate business and 
some of the other commercial ventures. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while he was in this place, and I would 
say after that as he pursued other related businesses, he was a 
strong advocate for Saskatchewan’s tourism industry. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think all of us in the province understand the great 
potential that remains, that exists even today, unmet potential 
yet in terms of our tourism assets, even though we’ve been 
about the business of developing those opportunities now for 
some time. Back when Mr. Klein would have been here in this 
Legislative Assembly, there would have been even more work 
to do, and I want to acknowledge the fact that here was a man 
that was very passionate about what this province had to offer 

not just other Canadians but the rest of the world in terms of a 
tourism destination. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s worth noting on a day like today that 
notwithstanding his fiery efforts that I witnessed first hand in 
this place and his willingness to turn back partisan attacks with 
maybe some partisan attacks of his own, he had a reputation for 
reaching across party lines. He had a solid reputation for having 
close friends in other parties. He delivered the eulogy at the late 
Liberal Senator Davey Steuart’s funeral. That’s worth noting, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here and it speaks to that kind of 
bipartisan or non-partisan approach he took when he was 
outside of this room and when he was outside of this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker. And his character and conduct in that regard is 
something that perhaps should be an example for all of us. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move the following motion 
and give way to other members that may want to offer a few 
remembrances, some tributes of Jack Klein. I move the 
following: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and his province. 
 
Jack Charles Klein, who passed away 8 June 2017 at the 
age of 81 was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1982 until 1991, representing the constituencies of Regina 
North and Regina South for the Progressive Conservative 
Party. Mr. Klein served on Executive Council in several 
capacities including as the minister of Tourism and Small 
Business, the minister of Urban Affairs, minister of Trade 
and Investment, minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, and minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. 
 
Mr. Klein was an enthusiastic businessman with vast 
professional experience. He purchased his first restaurant 
in 1957. He operated the Sunset Amusement Park from 
1964 to 1978, was a real estate broker from 1969 to 1980, 
and operated Leisure World from 1977 to 1982. After 
serving in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Klein moved to 
Mesa, Arizona and operated an automotive lubricant shop. 
He retired in 1999 to Kelowna, British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Klein is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 60 
years, Shirley, and their five children, Mark, Cathy, Brad, 
Luke, and Michael and their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
the Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take the motion as read. The Premier has 
moved the motion. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
enter into this condolence motion and to pay tribute and thanks 
and condolence with respect to Mr. Jack Klein. Jack is survived 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

by his wife of 60 years, Shirley; children, Mark, Cathy, Brad, 
Luke, and Michael; and seven grandchildren and eight 
great-grandchildren. 
 
Jack was born in 1935 in Weyburn. Before his time as an MLA, 
Jack was well known in Regina as a businessman owning many 
small businesses from a restaurant to an amusement park and a 
small chain of hobby stores in the city. He was also a real estate 
broker in the city and was president of the Regina real estate 
board and served on the board of the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association. 
 
Jack was elected to the legislature in 1982 and was an MLA 
until 1991, first as the member for Regina North, then later as 
the member for Regina South. He served Saskatchewan as a 
minister in many different roles including as minister of 
Tourism and Small Business, minister of Urban Affairs, 
minister of Trade and Investment, minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, and minister of Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Referred as the feisty MLA for Regina South by one reporter, 
Jack was well known for being a hard worker and for his frank 
speaking style, both inside and out of the legislature. One 
example of this was when, as minister responsible for Tourism, 
he was asked why someone would choose to visit Saskatchewan 
over BC [British Columbia]. Jack bluntly replied, “Once you’ve 
seen one mountain, you’ve seen them all. The mountains just 
get in the way of a good view.” Somewhat ironically, Jack did 
retire in Kelowna where he lived until his death, surrounded by 
mountain views. 
 
Jack enjoyed curling and golfing and he and his wife enjoyed 
many golfing vacations throughout his retirement. They 
enjoyed spending winters in Arizona and Hawaii and later 
retired to Kelowna where he loved spending time with his 
children and his grandchildren that he loved dearly. We know 
he will be missed. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Sorry. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
enter into this motion of condolence. I must speak about Jack 
Klein. I didn’t know Jack very well. I met him once and we 
were at a dinner together. We sat at the same table. And I 
remember trying to figure out exactly . . . I was probably just at 
the end of high school, trying to figure out exactly what he did 
for a living and what an MLA was. And he told me that, you 
know, at some point maybe you’ll be interested in this type of 
career as well. And I went, no, I don’t think so, Jack. But here 
we are. 
 
There is a piece about Jack and his service. I think that . . . And 
his service has been immense for this province in regards to 
serving both Regina South and Regina North. And I was talking 
to some of my colleagues and going, what would the divisions 
of Regina North and where does Coronation Park sit in the 
grand scheme of this? And there is some overlap and I think 
Rochdale is a piece of this as well. 

But also Regina South — we had Regina Pasqua, I believe, as 
part of that and Regina University. So that’s where the divisions 
were. I was interested in the fact that he had a number of 
portfolios in Executive Council and as minister of Tourism and 
Small Business, minister of Urban Affairs, minister of Trade 
and Investment, minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, 
minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. And 
that in and of itself, Mr. Speaker, speaks to his commitment and 
service to this province. 
 
Out of particular interest though, some of his ventures I ended 
up going to and frequenting on a number of occasions. One was 
the Sunset Amusement Park. And I’m not sure if everybody 
remembers that in the city, but it was a place for young people, 
for teenagers to go and enjoy, and I did enjoy it. It was an awful 
lot of fun, and some of the other amusement pieces. 
 
But Leisure World hobby stores is where I got my first kite and 
flew it until I got it tangled in the power lines. But other than 
that, I remember going back to his store and saying, my kite got 
caught in the power lines, and he ended up cutting me a pretty 
darn good deal on my second kite because he just seemed like 
that type of guy. 
 
But again it is my pleasure to have an opportunity to talk about 
an MLA that served this province. And it is a deep sense of loss 
and bereavement and my condolences to his wife, Shirley, of 60 
years, and his children. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll leave it 
there. But I again thank you, Mr. Klein. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Robert Wayne Mitchell 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
over a year ago now, Bob Mitchell passed away. Mr. Speaker, I 
have been . . . occasion to chat with a few now retired 
politicians and some current politicians of all different stripes, 
about Mr. Mitchell. And there seems to be almost an urgency 
on the part of those folks when they talk about Mr. Mitchell, an 
enthusiasm and an urgency to get out as much as they can about 
their positive impressions of Mr. Mitchell. As I’ve mentioned, 
it’s true of New Democrats that I’ve asked, that I’ve talked to 
about him or I’ve had occasion to discuss his time here, and it’s 
true of those who did not share his party affiliation. 
 
We’ve already talked a little bit about the gentleman, Gord 
Currie. It’s that descriptor, “gentleman,” I’ve heard readily and 
often used in respect of the former attorney general, Mr. 
Mitchell. 
 
I think there is also a geniality there that others have remarked 
to me that also transcended any partisan divide that might have 
existed between Mr. Mitchell and others in the Assembly, a 
good sense of humour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been told, and I think the record will show, 
that he had a very effective way of dealing with question period 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

in the House. He would perhaps be as disarming as any who’ve 
ever been in the place because of his consistent approach, his 
penchant for complimenting — and pretty effusively from what 
I have read — complimenting those that are questioning him no 
matter, no matter how angry or outraged the critic might have 
been or how upset with the government of the day was. And 
you know, Mr. Speaker, we know that that’s not always the 
easiest thing to do. Sometimes it’s a lot easier to meet the tone 
of the question for the answer . . . for the tone of the answer to 
meet that of the question. 
 
And I also think that ability to hear past what might be the 
rhetorical attack from the other side to the question that was 
asked, and then to compliment the individual asking the 
question notwithstanding how upset they might have been, I 
think that tells us a little bit about the person. I think that does 
speak to the fact that there is a geniality about an individual like 
that, a gentlemanly quality in the case of Mr. Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from the record, from his time in 
government and prior and after government, he had a passion 
for First Nations people in this province, for their interests, for 
their well-being, and for their education, and for justice issues 
concerning Aboriginal people in our province. And that shone 
through I think in his work, in his actions, and in his spoken 
word. 
 
I’m told he was an avid golfer, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been told that 
by some of his former colleagues, including former Premier 
Romanow and others. But it never got in the way of the work 
that needed to be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hope it is the experience for our families, of all the members 
that are gathered, that they might hear of us what we have all 
heard, what I’ve heard, about Mr. Mitchell in a very 
non-partisan sense: that much like Mr. Currie, who he was as a 
person transcended any roles he had in this building for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, any answers he may have given, 
any speeches he may have given in this place; that the person 
that was Mr. Mitchell came before any of that and is front of 
mind still today for those who worked with him and were, on 
occasion, opposed to his efforts sitting on the opposite side of 
the legislature. 
 
And so I move: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Robert Wayne Mitchell, who passed away on 18 
November, 2016 at the age of 80, was a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly from 1986 to 1999, representing the 
constituency of Saskatoon Fairview for the New 
Democratic Party. Mr. Mitchell served on Executive 
Council in several capacities, including as the minister of 
Justice and Attorney General, the minister of Labour, the 
minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, 
and Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Mitchell was born in Preeceville. He graduated from 

the University of Saskatchewan with degrees in law and 
economics. Prior to becoming a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Mitchell served as the director of legal 
services for the federal Department of Labour and the 
Department of Regional Economic Expansion in Ottawa, 
and as a labour relations expert for the International 
Labour Organization of the United Nations in the 
Caribbean. On returning to Saskatchewan, Mr. Mitchell 
served as deputy minister for the provincial Department of 
Labour from 1974 to 1979 before co-founding the 
Mitchell-Ching law firm in Saskatoon. After leaving 
politics, Mr. Mitchell went on to work as head negotiator 
for the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, as it 
was named at the time, and to chair the Saskatchewan 
Public Complaints Commission. 
 
Mr. Mitchell is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Sandra, and their six daughters: Janet, Roberta, Stephanie, 
Shannon, Donna, and Alison, and their families. In 
recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to members 
of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — We’ll take the motion as read. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
enter into this condolence motion and to pay tribute and thanks 
and condolence with respect to Mr. Bob Mitchell. Bob is 
survived by his wife, Sandra, his daughters, Janet, Roberta, 
Stephanie, Shannon, Donna, and Alison, 17 grandchildren, and 
five great-grandchildren. Bob Mitchell was born in Preeceville 
in 1936, and was raised on a farm near Sturgis. He graduated 
from the University of Saskatchewan with degrees in law and 
economics and spent many years as a lawyer in Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
He had a long and successful career before politics, working in 
Ottawa for the Department of Labour and in the Caribbean as a 
labour relations expert under the United Nations. He was a 
deputy minister of Labour in Saskatchewan in the 1970s where 
he was proud of the progress he helped make towards helping 
working people in this province. He later founded the 
Mitchell-Ching law firm in Saskatoon with his partner Don 
Ching, and chaired the Key Lake inquiry, and was also 
appointed as chief federal negotiator for the Nunavut land 
claims. 
 
It was Bob’s time as Chair for the Key Lake inquiry that opened 
his eyes to the poor living conditions of northern communities 
and caused him to want to strive to do better. He had the 
opportunity to visit many northern communities and said it was 
an experience that he would never forget. 
 
Bob’s passion to help others and to make a difference was what 
led him to being elected as the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview. 
And he was very proud to serve as their MLA in opposition 
from 1986 to 1989, and in government from 1991 until he 
retired from politics in 1999. During his time in government 
Bob served as minister of Human Resources Labour and 
Employment, provincial secretary, minister of Justice and 
Attorney General, minister of Labour, and minister of 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. Bob was 
immensely proud of his work as a politician. In his 1986 
maiden speech shortly after he was first elected Bob noted that 
the main reason he got into politics was for his children. He 
wrote: 
 

I am also here, Mr. Speaker, because my six children are 
going to live in this world for a long time after you and I 
are gone, and their children are going to live after them. 
And it would be irresponsible of me not to do what I could 
in order to make things better for them and help ensure that 
they have a good . . . [fortune]. 

 
Bob was a proud feminist, a champion for women’s rights and 
human rights. He was a strong believer in equality and believed 
in everyone’s right to be treated with respect. One of Bob’s 
most proud achievements was amending the Human Rights 
Code to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation, a 
move that has made this province a more fair and equitable 
place for many. 
 
He continued to serve the province after his retirement as Chair 
of the Public Complaints Commission from 2006 until 2014. 
Bob died this year after a short illness at age 80 and will be 
missed dearly by his friends, family, and former colleagues as 
well as his party. Thank you. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to join in this condolence motion. Mr. Speaker, I knew 
Bob Mitchell as an MLA, as a Justice minister, and a cabinet 
minister with a number of portfolios that I have held since that 
time. But mostly I knew him as an individual. He was a man of 
honour and integrity. He practised law in Saskatoon. I had files 
with him. No doubt he was somebody whose word was his 
bond. You did not have to wait for the confirming letter or the 
confirmation to come back. If he told you that’s the way it was, 
that’s the way it in fact was. 
 
He served as Justice minister for nearly five years. He was well 
known across Canada and had huge respect at 
federal-provincial-territorial meetings. After his retirement from 
provincial politics, the NDP government appointed him to chair 
the Saskatchewan Public Complaints Commission, which is the 
body that deals with complaints against municipal police 
officers. 
 
When the Saskatchewan Party formed government in 2007, Bob 
had the expectation that he wouldn’t be renewed, or asked to 
leave. His term was running out about the same time as the 
election. He came to see me early on after the 2007 election and 
asked if we were amenable to granting him a personal favour 
and leaving him in place for a few months so that he could chair 
a complaints committee meeting that was being hosted in 
Saskatchewan a few months later on. We agreed, but the fact of 
it was I actually had no intention of replacing him because I had 
a huge amount of respect and support for his competence in his 
role as Chair of the Saskatchewan Public Complaints 
Commission. He stayed there for the rest of my time as Justice 

minister and for several years thereafter under my successor, 
who was the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
He truly was, Mr. Speaker, somebody that rose above partisan 
politics. He chose to retire from that role in 2014 of his own 
volition, not as a result of having been nudged, and gave us a 
significant amount of notice so a successor could be found. I 
want to take this opportunity to thank him for his service in that 
role. I was unable to attend his funeral but would like to use this 
opportunity to express my condolences to his entire family, but 
especially I want to mention his daughter, Janet Mitchell, who I 
worked with during my time at the Ministry of Education where 
she’s employed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join in certainly paying tribute to a man that served not 
only this Assembly very well but the people of Saskatchewan, 
and served the people of Saskatchewan very well, I might 
reiterate, in the sense that I’ve had the opportunity to serve with 
Mr. Mitchell in this Assembly and certainly from my vantage 
point — I sat across from him — he was always very respectful. 
He was always very calm, and he was also very, very focused in 
what he did. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as one sits in this Assembly often through 
time you grow to admire many people, people that have graced 
this great Assembly of debate and democracy. And one such 
person that I grew to admire a great amount and in great 
significance in the role that he played in my future was none 
other than Bob Mitchell. 
 
I remember when he retired from politics and he was asked by 
FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] to help 
them in some of his abilities to work for them on some of their 
fronts. And I remember him telling me that he was very, very 
excited to go to work with the First Nations communities and 
that he was absolutely thrilled that they would see him in that 
light and that they would actually hire him to work for them. 
And I can tell from that that this is a genuine person that really 
cared about people and really cared in a sense of showing 
utmost respect to as many people as you possibly can. 
 
Now I was kind of taken aback by that notion, Mr. Speaker, 
because Mr. Mitchell was a man of many accomplishments. As 
I said in the Assembly, I certainly admired him from my 
vantage point while in opposition. And often he’d make very 
kind comments — things like, I think you should come home, 
and things to the extent of, we need you over here. That kind of 
language and words, Mr. Speaker, does have an effect on 
somebody that first of all admires you, and I think he also had 
the effect of reaching out, as many people have indicated, 
across political lines to talk to people as human beings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points that I would raise 
earlier is that it was not his ability nor his kindness that were his 
strengths, but I think his humility. And like I mentioned, when 
he was asked to work for the First Nations, he was really, really 
proud to be given that opportunity. He was very humble in 
saying that from the perspective of being employed by them 
that he would . . . Like I said, he told me that he couldn’t 
believe that they would hire him. Well, Mr. Speaker, not only 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

was he a great legal . . . he had a great legal mind, but he 
certainly had the respect of many Aboriginal people throughout 
the province, Métis and First Nations alike. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I obviously benefited from watching him in 
the Assembly. I also benefited from watching how kind yet 
calculating he was in this particular place. I also watched him 
show a great degree of humility and humour and kindness, but 
as well making sure that there was progress made on some of 
the things that he fundamentally believed in. 
 
And the fact that some of the accomplishments named in this 
Assembly earlier, Mr. Speaker, those are things that he didn’t 
count on for the rest of his life, but he used as experience. And 
being a former cabinet minister and accomplished politician 
were just simply tools to him that he would use to help others. 
And that is a great tribute to who Bob Mitchell was as a man. 
 
In my closing comments, I offer my sincere sympathy to his 
family and tell them that from the northern perspective, from 
the Ile-a-la-Crosse perspective, I thank you for Bob Mitchell’s 
service to the public because it touched many people’s hearts 
and minds, and I was one of those individuals that were 
impacted by his life. 
 
And my last recollection of seeing Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Speaker, 
was on the lawn of this Assembly when there was a tribute to 
Blakeney, a statue or a tribute of Blakeney’s service to 
Saskatchewan, and I saw this man walking up. His steps were 
short, although hurried, and you can tell that this older person 
was bound to come and go to that site and pay tribute to this 
individual. So I stopped him and I said, excuse me, sir. Where 
are you off to in a rush? What I didn’t know, Mr. Speaker, was 
that was Bob Mitchell that was in a hurry to get to the ceremony 
in which they were going to honour Blakeney. And the 
ceremony didn’t happen that day, but there’s a number of 
people that made their own trek and I think he was part of that 
older group, the wiser group that wanted to, in their own way, 
travel to the site where Premier Blakeney was honoured. 
 
And for him I can tell, Mr. Speaker, that he was very happy to 
be able to go there, walk the distance to pay tribute to his 
former boss. He didn’t recognize me because of his age, but I 
recognized him after I stopped to say hello. And, Mr. Speaker, 
you can see the twinkle in his eye and the happiness in his voice 
that he made this journey to pay tribute to his former colleague, 
and some may call him his boss, Mr. Blakeney. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this is something that I think Bob Mitchell did for 
himself, for his own peace, for his own country. 
 
To his dying days, his last few days . . . and I believe it may 
have been his last visit to the Assembly. It was shortly after that 
I heard he had passed. But right from the day he started till the 
day he struggled to walk to pay tribute to his former colleague, 
Mr. Blakeney, he was a great human being. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll always remember it, not only the first time I met him, but 
his kindness to me in the Assembly and his last trip that I met 
him on his way to pay tribute to the former Premier Blakeney. 
So on that note, I offer our sincere sympathy to the entire family 
of such a great man. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s often 
said that it’s a privilege or an honour to participate in different 
debates, and it couldn’t be more true in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
And you think about the rights and privileges that we enjoy as 
members of this Assembly and one of them is, I think, one of 
them that’s right up there in terms of the importance, Mr. 
Speaker, is the ability to participate as an Assembly to come 
together as legislators here and to offer up a few remarks of 
remembrance and condolence to those who have gone before 
and whose work that we benefit from, whose shoulders we 
stand upon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly when I think of Bob Mitchell, he was a guy that 
brought a lot of talent to bear, as has been reported. A 
gentleman, was as congenial as they come, almost had one of 
those countenances that sort of beamed in terms of that smile, 
and did a lot with that for the people of Saskatchewan. And had, 
you know, a lot of great things happening out in labour law, 
human rights law, federally, internationally, but his biggest 
impact of course was here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you think about the times during which Mr. Mitchell 
served, having been elected in 1986 and then I believe having 
stepped out of partisan politics, I believe it was the summer of 
1999, Mr. Speaker, perhaps ’98 — anyway, the 12 years that he 
served — went through some pretty significant chapters in the 
history of this province. And through that he had some 
incredibly heavy responsibilities and throughout all of that . . . I 
had occasion to talk to someone that served each and every one 
of those years with him earlier today. I’m speaking of the 
former member from Nutana, Pat Atkinson. And she said that 
for all those years and through all those highs and lows on the 
trail, Mr. Speaker, that she can recall precisely one time that 
she’d seen Bob lose his temper. And she couldn’t remember 
precisely whether or not it was at her, but the mind will 
continue to wonder on that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I certainly had the pleasure of knowing Mr. Mitchell when I 
was in the youth wing of the Saskatchewan New Democrats 
when I was a long-haired young know-nothing. But of course 
. . . I think I was 22 at the time, Mr. Speaker. Of course at that 
stage of your life, you know everything. You’ve got the 
answers ready and in vigorous supply. And there was an issue 
of the day where I and some of my friends — you know, fellow 
young New Democrats from the University of Regina campus 
club — had an opinion on an issue of the day and we demanded 
a meeting with the minister of Justice. We got that meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, and of course we came in there guns ablazing, making 
our points forcefully, emphatically. And as the Premier was 
reporting earlier, it wasn’t just a tactic in question period. It was 
some of the most agreeable disagreements I’ve ever been party 
to, Mr. Speaker. We stated our opinion. He thanked us for the 
time, and it was a great exchange. We didn’t change his mind 
one darned bit, but we certainly felt like we’d had a fair hearing. 
And we had. Because Bob Mitchell was, as has been said and 
can’t be said enough, was a gentleman, had a sense of honour, 
had a sense of decency that we can’t get enough of in this 
public life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So it was last year at this time that many of us gathered to send 
Bob Mitchell on and, you know, it was a packed house at the 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

funeral home. And it’s always something to see those kinds of 
gatherings, Mr. Speaker, because it’s like the clan comes in. 
And I use that in the Highland sense of the word, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of everybody gathering in to mourn the loss of a good 
one gone on. And again to see that family there, to see Sandy 
and the girls. And you know, I’ve had the privilege of serving 
as Janet’s Member of the Legislative Assembly in past, and 
again someone that’s quite forceful on public affairs. But to see 
all those families and his grandkids. There’s the one grandson 
that, you know, has earned his red serge as a Mountie, and just 
the pride, the love, the no doubt many great talks around that 
kitchen table, Mr. Speaker, that was so readily on display. 
 
And again it bears comment, Mr. Speaker. Pat Atkinson was 
telling me that not only was Bob in a household with Sandy and 
six girls, but even the dog and the cat, they were female as well, 
Mr. Speaker. It certainly, I think, bears some explanation for the 
feminism of Mr. Mitchell and the well-informed position that 
he took on many of these issues again through a lot of different 
passes in the history of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again it’s a real honour and a privilege to 
participate in this debate to say a few words of the importance 
of an individual like Bob Mitchell to all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. As has been well stated around, you know, 
either side of this partisan divide, or First Nations, non-First 
Nations, Mr. Speaker, indigenous people, north, south, Bob 
Mitchell was a gentleman, had a sense of honour, and we are 
better for the participation in public life of Bob Mitchell. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join in with my colleagues from both sides of the 
House here and pay my condolences to the Mitchell family on 
the passing of Bob Mitchell and, as has been noted, a true 
gentleman and a real strong contributor to Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to base my remarks, though, on my own experience as a 
minister of Labour and now the critic of Labour, and the 
contribution he made to the lives of working men and women 
here in Saskatchewan. And I base my research on my comments 
really on the book that I kind of use as my reference for all 
things labour here in Saskatchewan. In fact I’ve often told 
Labour ministers, you should read this book. It’s On the Side of 
the People. It’s a labour history of Saskatchewan. It goes back 
to the first organized labour in Cumberland House in the fur 
trading days and right up to the 1990s. And of course it’s very 
interesting. Bob Mitchell had no fewer than 10 references in 
that book because he was such a strong force for change for 
working men and women here in this province, and he really 
truly was on the side of people. He was in their corner. 
 
It talks about his early inspiration, the famous labour lawyer, 
George Taylor. Bob would go down to the Court of Appeal and 
watch George Taylor do his presentation to the Court of 
Appeal, and he was inspired by that. As was noted, that he went 
to . . . And this must have been in his early 30s that he was the 
director of legal services for the federal Department of Labour 
and then went on to work for the International Labour 
Organization in the Caribbean. 
 

I had the good fortune of going to some meetings in Geneva 
around the ILO [International Labour Organization], and of 
course many of us will remember the work around the ILO as 
it’s been presented here in Saskatchewan. But what an 
inspiration it must have been for him as a young person in his 
30s to bring that back, that knowledge back to work in the Allan 
Blakeney government under Gordon Snyder, which would have 
been one of the . . . if not the best Labour minister we’ve ever 
had in this province, and the work that he’s done around trade 
unions, the work that he’s done around labour standards, the 
work that department did around occupational health and safety. 
And I think about bringing Bob Sass up from New York and the 
work that he did, and how Bob Mitchell may have played some 
role in that — I am not sure — as well as being a true 
gentleman, very, very humble. 
 
But Gordon Snyder talked about Bob Mitchell in saying when 
Gord would get the compliments, well deserved, about the work 
that he did, it was because of his staff and that he had the best 
staff in the public service. But he said that . . . He called Bob 
outstanding, and that really that was the reason he was able to 
do so much. Gord Snyder was the Labour minister for all the 
years of Allan Blakeney, and Bob was his deputy minister for 
half that time, for five years from 1974 to ’79. But Bob was 
talking about Gord Snyder and said he was the best cabinet 
minister he ever knew, because he had a strong sense of mission 
and did his homework and made sure he got it done. 
 
And I can think, when you look back and I look back as a critic 
and as a former minister, the four pieces of legislation that we 
have, or the three that are really the big ones — The Trade 
Union Act, The Labour Standards Act, and The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act — the steps forward we took in this 
province to lead the country and lead North America really was 
because of the good work that Bob did in his inspiration. 
Because he had a much bigger world view of social justice and 
what was right, what was fair, and how workers would be safe 
in their workplace. 
 
So it was no surprise in ’91, when the NDP were to come back, 
that he was first choice of so many in Saskatchewan that he 
should be the Labour minister, and he did for a few short years. 
And there were challenges of course, as we have noted, in those 
years. But I have to say that he really was on the side of people 
and he was in their corner, and people across this province are 
so thankful for Bob Mitchell. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour 
to speak to a truly honourable person that served our province 
and served many within our province, someone who is truly 
decent, and someone whose work advanced and expanded and 
protected the rights of many within our province. 
 
You know, I offer condolences as well to his wife, Sandra, at 
this time, as well as the entire family. Of course, he passed a 
little more than a year ago, and that family came together at the 
funeral that was noted by the member for Regina Elphinstone, 
and it really was a beautiful display of love and care and 
kinship. A big, large family, many friends, many past 
colleagues that came together to celebrate a life that deserved 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

celebration — a life that bettered our province and a life that 
bettered the lives of many within our province. 
 
It’s fair to say that Sandra herself is a brilliant person and an 
engaged citizen in every sense of the word, and a great political 
mind, and that they were a tremendous team. And so we offer 
our best to Sandra at this time. 
 
Certainly I knew the legacy and the accomplishments and the 
service of Bob Mitchell in a formal sense within this province, 
but we also knew the family. They lived just up the street from 
my in-laws and were family friends. And right to the late days 
of Bob Mitchell’s life, he was engaged in the discussions of this 
legislature and the issues of the people of this province in a 
sharp, caring, and compassionate way. 
 
Certainly Bob Mitchell was someone that served our province 
with incredible distinction, someone who was a principled 
leader both within this legislature but within the community as 
well — both before he served in the Assembly and his life 
afterwards as well working with the FSIN and as an engaged 
person on so many fronts. 
 
You know, as an MLA, as a cabinet minister, as a lawyer, as a 
feminist, as a champion for human rights, for indigenous rights, 
and for working people, he left his mark. He left his mark on 
legislation and the province that we all love. Certainly he was 
an incredibly honourable minister of numerous portfolios; 
certainly Justice and Labour stand out. And he continued to 
serve after he departed this Assembly, as I mentioned, serving 
the FSIN and doing some very meaningful work together on 
that front. 
 
He also loved sports — he loved golf; he loved hockey; he 
loved football; he loved baseball — and built many 
relationships and friendships on those fronts as well and was 
known to, you know, to hit the sports page first but read the . . . 
of course the entire paper front to back and be engaged in all 
aspects of life within our community. 
 
But above all else, Bob was known as somebody who was 
honest, who was earnest, who was ethical, and a bridge builder 
in his roles as minister and also in his roles in building our 
party. And I know it was clear, when you watched the 
celebration of a life at a funeral like Bob’s, that you have 
somebody that built some incredible relationships province 
wide and across political divides. So I offer my sincerest 
condolences to the family, to loved ones, and to friends. And 
you know, it’s my honour here today to briefly express thanks 
and recognize the exceptional life of Bob Mitchell, a life that 
left a mark on our province and certainly one that bettered the 
lives of many, and certainly leaving a legacy that continues to 
live on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
enter into this condolence motion. I did not know Bob Mitchell 
personally but I wanted to express my condolences as the 
current sitting member of Saskatoon Fairview. In preparing my 
remarks, I reached out to Linda Zemluk who worked as Bob’s 
constituency assistant from 1996 until he retired, and remains a 

constituent in Saskatoon Fairview. I wanted to get more of a 
sense of who he was as a person. 
 
Bob had already been an MLA for 10 years when she started 
working as the CA [constituency assistant], but Linda describes 
him as being very committed and caring. Linda described Bob 
as being great to work for, always there for constituents, being 
compassionate, and having a big heart. She told me that when a 
constituent came into the office with a problem she would call 
Bob and he would immediately know what to do and let her 
know how she should take care of the issue. Linda described 
Bob as the best boss she ever had. She also told me that Bob 
loved to golf. 
 
I would like to thank Bob for his hard work for the people of 
Saskatoon Fairview. Bob served the constituency of Saskatoon 
Fairview for 13 years as a New Democrat. Former premier and 
now chancellor of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 
Roy Romanow, described Bob as follows — I’m quoting the 
StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker — “He was a very humane, very 
decent, very honest, very fair-minded partisan politician.” Roy 
Romanow also talked about how Bob was an integral part of the 
small cabinet appointed to shepherd the province through hard 
financial times. 
 
Pat Atkinson was elected alongside Bob in 1986 and she also 
spoke in the StarPhoenix earlier this year about Bob being a 
very kind person who found ways to help people across the 
province despite a period of severe austerity, and helped set the 
stage for Saskatchewan’s economic recovery. I also spoke with 
Pat in preparing my remarks for today. She said to me, “He was 
such a kind gentleman, and always kind to people. I will 
remember his kindness always. He didn’t have a mean bone in 
his body and he was smart, smart, smart.” And she applauded 
Bob’s work to prohibit discrimination based on sexual 
orientation in The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
 
I consider it a great honour to be part of this tradition of service 
in working for the good people of Fairview. Mr. Speaker, I read 
through Bob’s maiden speech in this Assembly. In 1986 Bob 
described the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview having a 
great number of working people, retired and elderly people, 
indigenous peoples, and new Canadians. The diversity he 
described, Mr. Speaker, resonates with me today, nearly 31 
years later. 
 
And I can see his heart and passion as I read his words. He 
spoke of his family, and I quote: 
 

I am also here because, Mr. Speaker, my six children are 
going to live in this world for a long time after you and I 
are gone, and their children are going to live after them. 
And it would be irresponsible of me not to do what I could 
in order to make things better for them and help ensure that 
they do have a good future. 

 
He goes on to say in his closing remarks: 
 

And all I hope is that we in this Assembly, and in other 
Assemblies across the country, are able to do everything 
we can to ensure that my daughter, and all of our daughters 
and all of our sons, have the life that it is possible for them 
to have if we bring enough wisdom to the tasks that are 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

before us. 
 
[15:45] 
 
I think Bob’s passing is a strong reminder to all of us of what 
our focus can and should be in this Assembly. I would like to 
thank Bob’s wife, Sandra, and his six daughters, Janet, Roberta, 
Stephanie, Shannon, Donna, and Alison, as well as his friends 
and extended family for their patience in allowing him to 
exercise such an active political life. He will not be forgotten. 
 
The Speaker: — Take the motion as read. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Roger Parent 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is . . . It will be a 
year ago next Wednesday that I stood in my place, and other 
members stood in theirs, to pay tribute to Roger Parent who we 
lost on the 29th of November of last year. I can hardly believe 
that it’s been a year already since we lost Roger. It’s 
underscored or made even more surreal perhaps by the fact that 
we were at a funeral yesterday in Melfort to say goodbye to 
Kevin Phillips. 
 
And I want to, on the record, thank the Leader of the 
Opposition and the member for Lakeview and the member from 
Saskatoon Centre for attending . . . driving all of that way to 
attend that funeral. That I know meant a lot to not just Kevin’s 
family, but also to your colleagues on this side of the House. 
 
We had a similar gathering just over a year ago at a church in 
Saskatoon. Again it was surreal for all of us on this side of the 
House to say goodbye to Roger, who had only weeks before 
complained about this chronic back pain that he had and how he 
couldn’t find any relief from that, until finally, after several 
visits, it was determined that he was battling something much 
more serious. And then, even then we on this side of the House 
thought we would have more time. I thought I would have more 
time, based on the information I had, to maybe visit him in the 
hospital. And then he was gone, and we had a call similar to the 
one that we had last Tuesday morning. 
 
And so though it’s already been a year, it’s very fresh. And 
members on both sides of the House have taken to their feet to 
express condolences and tributes to Roger and the kind of 
individual he was. Mr. Speaker, what I tried to reflect on in my 
wholly inadequate remarks on that day in this House was the 
fact that Roger, in addition to everything that commended him 
to all of us on a personal level — the family man that he was 
and the friend that he was and his interest in outdoor sports and 
hockey and all the things that we enjoyed visiting about — in 
addition to all of that, which frankly is far more important than 
any of the work that we do here or prior to our time here, he 
was a constituency man. 
 
He was one of those people who was more than happy, who 
was honoured in fact — his words, not mine — to serve, to be 
the MLA for Saskatoon Meewasin. He ran four times. We knew 

he had a passion for it. He was successful on two of those 
occasions but ran four times in a seat that’s always hotly 
contested. For a while there when Roger was running, it was 
basically a three-way split. It was a very challenging 
constituency to win. 
 
And so as I think all members in the House understand, whether 
it’s a difficult seat, a more challenging seat, or perhaps that’s 
one that’s considered “safe,” the formula’s the same — you 
door knock. And when you’re tired of door knocking, you door 
knock some more. And you hear from people directly. And it 
takes a special kind of person to want to do that repeatedly, four 
times in the case of Roger, twice successfully, but in between 
elections to go out with a group and door knock some more. 
And members on this side of the House would have door 
knocked with Roger and his team. 
 
And you know, there’s something that’s pretty instructive as 
well about the people, the volunteers that surround a Member of 
the Legislative Assembly, that would want to go out in all 
manner of weather, in between elections, and door knock. 
Consider that they are volunteers, Mr. Speaker. Consider how 
they must have felt about that man, about Roger. They felt that 
his place was here. They felt they wanted his voice for their 
area, for their neighbourhood, for their constituency, in this 
place. And they were prepared to put their money where their 
mouth was and door knock and volunteer in any way they 
could. And I think Roger is well known to all of us to have had 
an amazing group around him, which tells us a lot about the 
kind of individual that he was. 
 
And there are passions that he had, especially with respect to 
economic development, that leave a footprint still today on the 
government, on our growth plan that we have for the province, 
something that he felt very, very strongly about. I think I 
remember his maiden speech in the legislature that I referenced 
when we lost Roger, when we first met that day after Roger’s 
passing. He laid out some pretty specific plans and they were 
related to the economy. 
 
Roger was one who believed strongly that that’s the prime 
objective of government, is to create the right environment, the 
right climate so that an economy can grow because all the other 
stuff that we might want to do in health care and education and 
infrastructure and social services and taking care of those who 
are most vulnerable, every other activity, is dependent on the 
ability of a government to afford it. And the ability of a 
government to afford it is dependent on a tax base, and the tax 
base is dependent on the economy. And so that was the issue, in 
a general sense, that he championed the most, especially around 
the issue of procurement. 
 
Roger’s passion, especially in the last few years, was about 
ensuring that Saskatchewan businesses actually had a level 
playing field so they could compete for procurement 
opportunities. He was particularly concerned about the policies 
in other provinces and some advantage, either intended or 
inadvertent, that were conferred upon companies in those other 
provinces when they would compete for work in Saskatchewan. 
And I think Roger appreciated the importance of trade and open 
procurement across the country, but he wanted it to be fair. 
 
And you know, I remember meeting with Roger and we would 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

talk about these things, and I’d go back to officials and say, 
well here’s a concern. And officials would report back and say, 
well there’s just not a lot of clear evidence about these kind of 
practices or policies in other jurisdictions that would create the 
situation that Roger was concerned about. And I would share 
that information back with Roger and he would just be all the 
more determined. He would go out and talk to the companies 
and demonstrate, find the proof that there was something that 
we needed to be dealing with in the interests of fairness. 
 
So he was a big picture . . . Roger had the big picture in mind 
when it came to the economy, but he remembered as well the 
importance of working with current employers, small 
businesses in the province, and he was a champion for their 
efforts. 
 
And so over this last year, I know members have talked about 
him. We’ve been nostalgic about Roger because of how quickly 
he passed and how sudden it was and premature obviously — 
the same age as Kevin, 63 years of age. So we miss him still 
and we will always miss him. As has been noted here, I think by 
members on every side, on both sides, you can’t help but the 
collegiality of this place, in a caucus, turn into something more 
familial, something like a family. And so we still mourn the loss 
of Roger, our colleague and family member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that we have all said some things about 
Roger here relatively recently, within the last year, but I know 
some other members want to offer a few more thoughts on this, 
a day of condolences, and so I’ll give way to them and I’ll do so 
by reading the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Roger Parent, who passed away on November 29, 2016 at 
the age of 63, was a Member of the Legislative Assembly 
from 2011 until his passing. He represented the 
constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin for the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Mr. Parent held a certificate in mechanical engineering 
technology from the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology and a certificate in business 
administration from the University of Saskatchewan. Prior 
to becoming a Member of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Parent was a business consultant that worked with a variety 
of organizations developing Aboriginal businesses around 
the province. He was also involved with a number of 
organizations, including the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Association, the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, and the Saskatoon homelessness initiatives 
partnership.  
 
Mr. Parent is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Sheila, and their four daughters. 

 
May I just interrupt the reading of the motion to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it was at our most recent Saskatchewan Party 
convention in Saskatoon was the first time I’d seen Sheila in a 

very, very, long time. And it was wonderful that she was there. 
It was for the luncheon that was held on the Saturday of the 
Saskatchewan Party convention. She was looking great, and I 
told her that. She seemed well but I asked how she was doing 
and she said that it was still very hard. 
 
And it’s a reminder for all of us, I think, a reminder in the case 
of Kevin’s widow, April, and their family that . . . And I need to 
remind myself of this, that as the months go by, it’s very 
important that we continue to reach out to those who have lost 
because their pain lasts and lasts longer perhaps than it is front 
of mind for all of us. And so a day like this in the legislature I 
think at least serves to remind me and maybe others that if there 
is someone who has lost as these friends have, like Sheila has, 
and their kids have, their daughters, then we should make a 
practice of reaching out to them more regularly and on into the 
future. 
 

Mr. Parent is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Sheila, and their four daughters, Shanaya, Melissa, 
Jennifer, and Rebecca, and their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
allowing me to enter into this condolence motion and to pay 
tribute and thanks and condolence with respect to Mr. Roger 
Parent. Members on both sides of this House were saddened by 
the death of Roger Parent nearly a year ago today. Roger is 
survived by his wife, Sheila, children Shanaya, Melissa, 
Jennifer, and Rebecca, and four grandchildren. 
 
He attended the University of Saskatchewan and SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 
He also was a business consultant and a board member of the 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Association, the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and was involved in the 
Saskatoon homelessness initiative partnership. 
 
Roger was elected as an MLA for Saskatoon Meewasin in 2011, 
and he was re-elected again in 2016. During his time in the 
legislature, Roger served as the Vice-Chair on the Human 
Services Committee and sat on the Private Bills House 
committee as well as the Special Committee on Traffic Safety. 
 
Roger was a strong advocate for his community. He loved 
living in his constituency of Meewasin. He was also a strong 
advocate for improving the lives of young people and for 
eliminating homelessness. He dedicated much of his time, Mr. 
Speaker, to volunteer work, working on homelessness 
initiatives with the provincial government and Aboriginal 
organizations. Roger’s work helped lead to the creation of 
Infinity House, which helps single mothers escape the sex trade. 
Roger’s advocacy and volunteer work earned him the 
Commemorative Medal for the Centennial of Saskatchewan in 
2005. 
 
Roger’s diagnosis of cancer and his death last fall was a shock 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

to all of us in the House. His diagnosis was unexpected as 
Roger had been conducting his legislative duties throughout 
most of last fall’s session. 
 
The Premier has noted before that Roger was a constituency 
man, and he preferred to advocate for his community rather 
than focus on personal aspirations of holding higher profile 
positions in government. Roger was humble, a family man who 
loved his children and grandchildren, and his presence in this 
House remains missed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know he is missed by his family and his friends 
and members on the government side of the House, and he’s 
missed by members of the opposition as well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 
honoured to say a few words about Roger Parent, who served 
his constituents so well in Saskatoon Meewasin. He served 
them from 2011 until his untimely passing. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Roger and I shared an office together, so in the short time that I 
was an MLA, I got to know Roger. And he was always a very 
supportive person, always offering a comment, always trying to 
encourage me on what to do. And the Premier spoke about door 
knocking. And Roger, that was one of the things that he 
instilled in me, that there’s social media, there’s a lot of 
different other ways to contact people, but door knocking is 
truly the way that you get to meet people and gain their respect. 
So Roger definitely implanted that on me, and so I want to say 
thank you for that. 
 
When Roger and I shared our office together, his CA, Gwen . . . 
One of the largest concerns that Roger had when I asked him if 
he’d like to share an office, he wanted to make sure that she was 
looked after. He wanted to make sure that if the wrong person 
that I hired would affect his constituency and his employee . . . 
And you know, that’s Roger. He was always concerned about 
the people around him, and it’s important for me to say that. 
And of course I miss him as a friend as well. 
 
I first met Roger while I was out door knocking in Saskatoon 
Westview and Roger . . . At that time I was just door knocking. 
I wasn’t a candidate or a nominee. And Roger instilled a lot of 
confidence in me and made me believe that yes, I could be an 
MLA and yes, you know, I could learn the ropes and stand in 
this very honoured spot. So again I owe him thanks for that. 
 
But my favourite memory of Roger is probably when I think 
about him speaking about his family. He was always . . . Family 
was so near and dear to Roger and, you know, whenever you 
would sit down for a minute, the first thing he would always 
bring up would be his family and what he’s planning to do this 
weekend or what he’d done last weekend or how his 
grandchildren, you know, what they had done. So it was just 
very important to him. And he just always found time for 
family and always instilled the importance of family. 
 

And on Thursdays, Roger, if you asked him, you know, do you 
want to stop around and have lunch, you know, when session 
ends, it was always absolutely not because Roger wanted to be 
out of this place and back with his family. I think he had one 
foot on the side of his desk and the moment the session end, he 
was out the door. And that speaks to Roger as well, is, you 
know, he wanted to get back to what really mattered. He got 
home and he would make supper by the time he got home. So 
you know, he wanted to be out there. That was his commitment 
to his family. 
 
Roger also worked very hard for his constituents and spent a 
good part of his summer door knocking and making sure that he 
was connected with his community. And he always . . . The 
other passion that Roger had was hunting and fishing. And you 
know, if he wasn’t talking about family, he was talking about 
hunting or fishing and all of his excursions and how everything 
worked out for him. 
 
I wish I would’ve had more time to get to know Roger and to 
enjoy more of his humour and his wit. Roger had a silent wit 
about him that was just fun to be around. And so I want to wish 
Sheila and I want to thank Sheila, you know, for allowing time 
for Roger to be here. You know, I know she would’ve rather 
had him at home but Roger made his commitment to his 
province, to his family, that he would do what he could to make 
this a better province, and we all owe him a thanks for that. 
 
And Roger is missed by all of us in this Legislative Assembly, I 
think on both sides of the House. He was an honourable man 
and I think everybody . . . I can speak for all of us when we say 
that we all miss him. But most of all, I’d like to say that I was 
proud to be Roger’s friend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just have a few 
brief comments on the condolence motion for Roger Parent. 
Roger and I were both part of the class of 2011, as you were 
yourself, Mr. Speaker. And it is really . . . When we do these 
condolence motions for people who have lived a full, long life 
and had a retirement and had a life outside after politics, that’s 
one thing. But when we are acknowledging someone that we 
remember who was still here a year ago and died too soon, that 
is something that makes these condolence motions particularly 
poignant. 
 
And I just want to share a couple of thoughts and 
remembrances. My first experience door knocking was actually 
in the riding of Meewasin when I was out with Frank Quennell 
just before the 2011 election. And Frank had a certain panicked 
look in his eye. He knew that this was going to be a really tough 
election. And we worked hard, Frank worked really hard. But 
Roger Parent wanted that seat, and Roger Parent earned that 
seat, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly know the amount of work 
that it takes to take a seat over from an incumbent, and Roger 
did that with a lot of hard work and determination, and I would 
say, with style. 
 
Roger, you know, looking over his maiden speech and his 
speeches and reply to the Throne Speech, very proud of being 
from Meewasin, very connected to his community, to the river 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

itself in Saskatoon, and certainly was very proud. One of the 
things that struck me was his connection to the Métis 
community. I know that was very, very important to him. And 
his public service for that community was one that he really lit 
up when he spoke about it here in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I appreciate the opportunity for us as a community of 
legislators to give these condolence motions and share our 
thoughts and remembrances of colleagues. As I say, when 
someone dies too soon and they are actually a sitting member 
who leaves us, that’s a little harder to consider and a little more 
close to the heart, obviously, because these are our colleagues. 
We are all colleagues in this building. 
 
And so on behalf of, you know, our official opposition, I’m 
very pleased to be able to just rise and give a few thoughts 
today about Mr. Roger Parent and sincerely send condolences 
to his family, his wife and his children, and his community. 
And we definitely lost him too soon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to enter this debate. It seems like I’ve been standing up too 
many times to talk about members in this House. I have been 
here a long time and there has been a number of ones I’ve 
spoken to. And they’re all hard — Kevin, Roger still. You 
know, he used to have an office just down from my office. And, 
you know, a year ago . . . I still look for him to be in that office 
as I come in because he was always there, always there before 
me. I was never one to get here too early. 
 
He was a dedicated constituency man, which has been said. I 
mean, if we talked, it was always about the constituency. I 
helped him door knock, and I know that he went out, he told 
me, once a week to door knock in his constituency. And I 
thought, that is somebody that really cares, really wants to 
know what’s happening on the doorstep. And it speaks to how 
he won that constituency — he worked hard at it. 
 
He worked hard previously. I only knew him in political life. I 
did not know him prior to my election. I had known him prior 
to his because he was involved in the party. He was involved in 
the Meewasin constituency for a number of years. He had ran 
for us and was unsuccessful at first but never gave up and 
always trying and always wanted to make this a better place, 
like the Premier had said, very business-oriented. And always 
wanted this province to grow, and he was proud of when we 
reached over the 1 million mark. 
 
You know, one of the many things I will remember him is his 
dedication to hockey, the Montreal Canadiens. He would tape 
the games, tape them all, especially in the playoffs, and not 
want to know the score. For me, I want to know what’s 
happening. If we were in committee, I’d be like wanting a page 
to run out and like, what’s the score? Or if some member would 
say, the score is . . . If Montreal was playing Boston, there was 
a certain member on the opposite side, he’d only tell me if 
Boston was winning. He wouldn’t let me know the score if 
Montreal was. 
 
But Roger would always be wanting to put his hands over his 
ears or look down so he wouldn’t know the score. When he 

watched that game, he told me he wanted not to know the score, 
and a lot of times he would watch it the next day. And I’m like, 
how can you hold that in? Like I’ve got to know like now 
what’s happening. And if they lose, I definitely don’t want to 
watch it. But he was . . . I remember that in him. We’d have that 
discussion many times. I’d say, you taping it? Yes, and don’t 
tell me the score, he’d say. Do not tell me the score. So we had 
many discussions about hockey. He was very passionate about 
that. 
 
Hunting was another one. When he came by the town of 
Bladworth, if he seen moose — and we have quite a few moose 
along kind of through that corridor — and he would, ask if he 
was ever drawn if he could hunt on my land and hunt deer. And 
I always said sure. But he’d always tell me, “I seen two moose 
today,” as he was coming in. I’d say, “Yes, it’s probably the 
same two that I see every day when I’m farming out there.” 
They kind of . . . They cross the highways because I have land 
that borders the highways. And I know he was an avid hunter. 
He would talk about that quite passionately. 
 
You know, it’s hard to . . . You know, when we get up here and 
. . . You know, when I was younger, I always thought I was like 
10 feet tall and bulletproof, but as you get older and you start 
losing friends, you start realizing about your mortality and 
what’s important in life. And you know, naturally it’s always 
family that comes first, and Roger always put his family first. 
He always talked about them. They were very important to him. 
That was the most important thing in his life. 
 
I know when we would talk, you know, because our offices 
bordered one another, always talking about his wife and his 
family and his children, and those were the biggest joys of his 
life. And that’s something that as members, you know, we 
shouldn’t forget. Sometimes you’ll get wrapped up into the 
House business here, but . . . You know it’s been happening, 
you know, with this year and last year. It really strikes home 
that we’ve lost just recently two very close family members. I 
just want to express my condolences and sympathy to the 
family of Roger, and I miss him and still miss him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Well I’m glad the House Leader got up and 
spoke first because it made me smile. So hopefully this is a little 
easier to enter in the condolence motions. Maybe not. 
 
I didn’t know Roger before the 2000 election. And actually the 
first day I met him was when we sat down and were doing our 
training on the first day. And it was a big room. There was lots 
of us in there and all the new folks. And we’re kind of sitting 
around and getting to know everybody. It was a little scary. And 
we made it through. And then Roger and I ended up with 
offices across from each other and we talked.  
 
But Roger and I didn’t talk about work a whole bunch. I knew 
he had a riding like mine. It was hard-fought to win; it was 
close. But we talked about family. We talked about family. 
Both of us started having grandkids about the same time and 
we’d sit back at the back here and we’d compare notes. We’d 
be talking back and forth and we’d show each other pictures of 
our grandkids and we’d talk about how they were doing, 
whether they were up walking yet, whether they were teething. 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

It showed me what a man he was because family was important. 
His job was very important to him, but he did his job for his 
family to make . . . 
 
[16:15] 
 
I’m going to skip on to his love of golf. Roger, unlike me, was a 
little smaller of stature. And I’ve golfed with a few members on 
this side of the House, like the member from Walsh Acres, 
who’s a fairly large lad and the former Roughrider, Minister of 
Sports, Culture and Recreation, and those two can hit that ball a 
ton. Roger, for a little guy, could hit that ball. And I golfed with 
both him and the member from Walsh Acres once. He could hit 
that ball as far as the member from Walsh Acres. And I’m like, 
“How do you do that? I’m like twice your size.” And he said, 
“Well head down, knees bent, arms straight. Watch.” And over 
and over and over again, I remember watching that ball. It was 
straight 99 per cent of the time, down . . . And it was amazing 
how he could generate so much power. And I’d try and hit it 
like him and my ball would go that way, and then it’d go that 
way. 
 
And we talked about family when we played golf. Family. We 
became family. We became friends. We became more than just 
guys that worked together. We talked about his love for 
hunting. I love to hunt as well. I’m again, like golf, I wasn’t 
quite the shot he was and he’d been hunting a little longer than 
me because he might have had a hair or two that was a little 
more grey than me. He’d been doing it a little while longer. But 
he talked about hunting and hunting from tree stands and doing 
it from a horse when he was a kid. And we talked about our 
Métis heritage. We talked about the difference in growing up 
because he was a little older than me, just the difference how 
we were treated. 
 
One thing he liked talking about a lot was he had a cabin, and 
he worked on that cabin quite a bit. I have no idea how he 
organized his time to door knock and spend time with his kids 
and work on his house. I’d been to his house a few times and 
the yard work he did and the deck he built and his dogs and all 
the work he did on top of all his constituency work and the 
work he did for the province and then the work he did on his 
cabin. And it was like, when do you sleep and spend time with 
your family and his grandkids? And it was all, it was . . . He 
was literally a dynamo. That man just didn’t quit and right up 
till the end, It was, it was shocking. 
 
I remember him calling me and he was like, “Well I’m going to 
drive to Saskatoon.” And I’m like, “You’re what?” “I’m going 
to drive to Saskatoon.” And I said, “You can’t do that.” And he 
said, “Yes.” So I said, “Phone me when you get there.” He 
didn’t make it all the way. He had to pull over and stop and rest, 
but he drove to Saskatoon before he went into the hospital. It 
just showed me his strength of character, his heart, and most of 
all, his love for family. He didn’t want to burden them to have 
to come down and drive him home. So he made it home and, 
you know, then he was gone. 
 
And I just want to end with, he was a very good family man. 
That was the most important to him. Everything he did centred 
around that. So I also want to end my condolences to Sheila, his 
daughters, and his grandkids. And thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I too would like to add a few words to this 
tribute to Roger, and it’ll be fairly quick. But he always wanted 
to get home to his family, and as soon as his duties were done in 
here, he did leave fairly quickly from the parking lot. He’d be 
the first one here in the morning, but he would leave fairly 
quick to see his family. 
 
And the one day it was storming in Saskatchewan, and I knew 
he was going to be hitting the road before I did, and I gave him 
a call just to see how the roads were. And he was pulling into 
Saskatoon, and he was like, “It’s not bad, other than, you know, 
there’s that one hill right before the valley going into 
Blackstrap,” he said. “There’s a little hill before. Just slow 
down and you’ll be okay.” And sure enough, as I made my way 
back to Saskatoon, that was a terrible snowdrift, for whatever 
reason, over the one section. I knew exactly what he was 
referring to. And to this day, every time I travel back to 
Saskatoon, I think of Roger when I go over that little hill, and 
Sheila. 
 
So with that, is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Duane Weiman 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the 1982 general election in 
the province of Saskatchewan was obviously quite historic 
because of the scale of the change that occurred on that late day 
in April in 1982. There had been, for some time, a consistent 
party in government over more than a decade that preceded that 
general election. And of course things changed, and it wasn’t 
necessarily a close result in the end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it has been noted by people more learned than I am in 
terms of political science, that there would be a number of 
constituencies in that election that no one would have believed 
would have changed parties. But, Mr. Speaker, the gentleman 
whom we next want to honour, who passed away on the 4th of 
September in 2015 at the age of 69, was someone who won one 
of those constituencies that would have thought to have been, 
you know, that word, “safe.” That is a dangerous word for all of 
us to ever utter, but still others who observe, pundits would use 
the word. And I’m sure Saskatoon Fairview, especially after 
that decade, would have been considered one of those seats safe 
for the incumbent government. 
 
Duane Weiman, however, he ran hard anyway, and obviously 
ran hard to win. I’m not sure if the nomination was contested or 
not prior to 1982. I wouldn’t be surprised if it wasn’t, just 
because the seat would have been thought to be very, very 
difficult for the party to win, the PC Party at the time. I’m sure 
they had a narrower focus. I’m sure they were focused on a 
certain number of seats to try to earn a majority government, to 
earn a win in the election, and Saskatoon Fairview, I would 
wager, was not on that list. 
 
And so I often wonder about that. I mean we’ve had 
experiences, I guess here on a more contemporary basis, where 
I can actually talk to members who may or may not have really 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

truly believed that they would sit here one day. But I would bet, 
based on those discussions, I would wager that Duane didn’t 
much care for what the pundits would have thought about his 
chances in Saskatoon Fairview. He had obviously sought a 
nomination, contested or otherwise, and he was going to be — 
together with his team and his family, with his family’s support 
— about the business of trying to win in the way that we all try 
to win, try to earn the support of neighbours and friends and 
find a seat here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And often when that happens, when someone is successful even 
with those, perhaps, those odds stacked against that person, 
often they are able to serve only one term, and that was the case 
for Duane. He only served in the Legislative Assembly from 
1982 to 1986. But I have to believe this: again, and it’s not 
borne of a direct discussion that I’ve had with Mr. Weiman or 
even his family, but I have to believe that when you would have 
worked that hard to win a constituency that was probably not 
considered to be prime ground for your electoral prospects, I 
have to believe that you relished every moment you got to be 
here. 
 
And I do remember, again from my time period mostly as a 
summer student, I remember the members that sat on this side 
of the House at the time, but I don’t have . . . I never had a 
direct relationship or even, I don’t believe, a direct conversation 
with Duane who we honour here today. But he would have 
come every day to work. He would have probably remembered 
all of the people that told him he would never sit here, that what 
he was doing was impossible. But he ran anyway and ran 
earnestly, and then would have had the chance to serve and I 
think would have relished every moment. 
 
It is, we are told, how he also met the obligations, the duties, 
and the desires of his faith. He was a devout Roman Catholic 
and a dedicated teacher prior to him running in politics. 
Apparently he told people as a teacher — and I’ve heard other 
teachers say this — that he felt he had the best job in the world. 
Christian ethics and English were among the subjects that he 
taught and had a passion for. 
 
And I would note that in Duane’s obituary, it was noted that he 
“. . . lived his life with a happy heart, touching everyone he met 
with his humour, wit, and caring.” Would that be said about all 
of us, that we would live with a happy heart and that we would 
touch others around us. 
 
And so today we also honour Duane who passed away, as I’ve 
noted, in September of 2015. Notwithstanding what may or may 
not have been told to him about his chances, his name is in that 
roll of members. He would have signed it that day and carried 
out his duties, I know, with industry and with honour. And so it 
is the right thing for us to do then to acknowledge that on this 
day of condolence and to make sure that his family understands 
how much value that we place, the current generation of MLAs 
place, in all who have served before us, in what Duane was 
prepared to do in the way of public service. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me to move this 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Duane Weiman, who passed away on September 4, 2015 
at the age of 69, was a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly from 1982 until 1986, representing the 
constituency of Saskatoon Fairview for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. During his time as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Weiman served as Legislative 
Secretary to the minister of Finance and the minister of 
Education. 
 
Prior to being elected, Mr. Weiman was a teacher. After 
serving in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Weiman returned 
to the Greater Saskatoon Catholic School Board as an 
educator and chaplain at Bishop James Mahoney and E.D. 
Feehan high schools. He was active in his parish and 
enjoyed travelling throughout Canada, the United States, 
Europe, and China. 
 
Mr. Weiman is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Delores, and their two children, Kari and Paul, and their 
families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

The Speaker: — Take the motion as read. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
allowing me to enter into this condolence motion and to pay 
tribute and thanks and condolence with respect to Mr. Duane 
Weiman. 
 
Duane is survived by his wife, Delores; his daughter, Kari; his 
son, Paul; and his four grandchildren. 
 
Duane received his education degree from the University of 
Saskatchewan and spent decades as a teacher with the 
Saskatoon Catholic School Division. And it was his passion for 
education that led him into politics where he served as the MLA 
for Saskatoon Fairview from 1982 until 1986. Duane 
passionately advocated for more schools in his constituency, 
and in particular a high school which, at that time he said, was 
much needed in his constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. His 
passion for education called him back to the classroom, and he 
cited that as a motivating factor for why he chose not to run for 
re-election in 1986. 
 
[16:30] 
 
He was a softball coach. He was president of the Pacific 
Heights Brownies and Girl Guides, and he spent over 20 years 
on the boards of St. Mary’s and Affinity Credit Union. Duane 
was active in his church, serving as Chair of the St. Mary’s 
parish council and St. Peter the Apostle parish council. And he 
enjoyed escaping Saskatchewan winters in Arizona. 
 
He is greatly missed by his friends and family and, on behalf of 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

the official opposition, we wish to extend our condolences to 
the them. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into the motion of condolence today to remember Duane 
Weiman. Duane was an MLA for Saskatoon Fairview from 
1982 to 1986. The current member has asked me to put on 
record his condolences to the Weiman family. 
 
He was born in Bruno. He was a teacher with the Saskatoon 
Catholic school system and made the statement publicly any 
number of times that he thought that teaching was the best job 
in the world. 
 
He was a strong member, and he was elected in the 1982 Grant 
Devine sweep which took at that time all of the seats in 
Saskatoon. Interestingly he ran against Bob Mitchell in that 
election, who we also spoke about earlier today. Mr. Weiman 
didn’t run again, and Mr. Mitchell handily won the seat the next 
time around. So Mr. Weiman would have the privilege of 
saying he was the only undefeated Conservative member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
He was a caring man. He had an incredible sense of humour. I 
met him a few times during the early days of the Devine 
government. There was a lot of sharing between the 
constituencies, joint fundraising and such like. And he was 
someone that was always happy and upbeat, but clearly he 
missed teaching and wanting to go back to it. 
 
He was a loving husband, a father, a grandfather; no doubt 
going to be missed by his family and the province that he 
dedicated his time to. So on behalf of the government MLAs, in 
particular the member for Saskatoon Fairview and myself, or 
the member that has got part of his seat now, I want to wish our 
deepest condolences and sympathy to the family and wish them 
all the best and thank them for the support that they gave to 
Duane Weiman during his time as an MLA. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
enter into this condolence motion. I did not have the pleasure of 
knowing Duane Weiman very well, but I wanted to express my 
condolences as the current sitting member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. I appreciate the words shared here today. Even 
though I did not know Duane very well, and even though he 
belonged to a different political party, I felt a sort of kinship 
toward him when I was preparing my condolences for today. I 
think knowing that we had served the same community feels 
like this close bond. 
 
But Duane also worked as a teacher and chaplain at E.D. 
Feehan, where I attended high school. I looked back into my 
high school yearbooks and confirmed that he worked at E.D. 
Feehan until I was in grade 11. I would like to say that although 
I didn’t spend a lot of time in the chaplain’s office, I do 
remember him being a fine and caring man working to create a 
positive atmosphere in our school. 
 

I would like to thank Duane for his service to the fine 
constituents in our area, both as an MLA and in his work with 
Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools. I would also like to thank 
Duane’s wife, Delores, and his children, friends, and loved ones 
for their support over the years. It is an honour to be part of a 
great tradition of service, working for the good people of 
Fairview. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I’d like to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the official records of the tributes to the 
bereaved families in memory of the deceased members. 

 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 2017-18 provincial budget, the government 
announced the suspension of SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

grant for education savings] grant payments as of January 1st, 
2018 as part of the province’s plan to address its fiscal situation. 
Mr. Speaker, this bill will suspend SAGES grant payments for 
the eligible contributions made after December 31st, 2017; 
disable the accumulation of the $250 per year carry-forward of 
unused SAGES grant room during the suspension period. It will 
also be retroactive and deemed to have come into force as of 
January 1st, 2018. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the SAGES 
regulations that allow subscribers and financial institutions up 
to three years to apply for SAGES grants will not be active 
during the suspension. 
 
Due to the connection between the SAGES program and the 
federal government’s Canada Education Savings Grant, some 
features of SAGES will remain in place to reduce disruption to 
the Canada education savings plan trustees and subscribers. The 
SAGES program will continue to function for subscribers with 
existing SAGES grants in their RESPs [registered education 
savings plan]. Mr. Speaker, these amendments will allow for 
simplified future program reactivation. 
 
These amendments will not affect SAGES grants already paid 
out. That being noted, the SAGES grants already paid out must 
be managed and monitored to ensure they are being used for 
their intended purpose. Therefore the Ministry of Advanced 
Education will continue to pay annual administration costs of 
between 400,000 to 600,000 to the Canada education savings 
program to cover transactions that will continue during the 
suspension such as the education assistance payments. 
Beginning in 2018-19, anticipated annual savings to the 
program are projected to be approximately $7.6 million. There 
will be an estimated one-time cost of $60,000 in 2017-18 to 
implement changes related to the suspension of SAGES grant 
payments. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, trustees offering SAGES were consulted 
by the Advanced Education officials and by the Canada 
education savings program at an annual meeting on June 28th, 
2017. A key objective for these amendments is to minimize 
disruption for trustees who have invested in the system changes 
to offer SAGES and allow for future SAGES reactivation to 
occur seamlessly. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
move second reading of this bill. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 94. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 
the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
wanted to give initial comments on Bill 94, and I would point 
out to the people of Saskatchewan that this is further evidence 
of how the Saskatchewan Party government have mismanaged 
great opportunity that the people of Saskatchewan expected 
from this government and have been very, very disappointed 
with some of these cuts to education, not only to our children, 
Mr. Speaker, but to some of our young, aspiring students and 
more so to the universities. And the list goes on as to how this 
government has slashed budgets left, right, and centre. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is not information that the Saskatchewan Party all 
of a sudden came into. Mr. Speaker, they knew this two or three 
years ago and yet they hid all this information from the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

And I want to point out that Bill 94, in the ’17-18 budget year, 
2017-2018, the Saskatchewan Party announced that the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings would be 
suspended. And this is where obviously, Mr. Speaker, the 
program provided a grant that matched 10 per cent of the 
subscriber’s or the parent’s RESP contributions up to a 
maximum of $250 per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made it harder for families to 
save for their children’s education while at the same time, as I 
mentioned, they made massive cuts right across the board — 5 
per cent from post-secondary institutions who are now faced 
with cutting services for students and increasing fees. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a quick quote from a press 
release of the government, and this is dated March 22nd, 2017. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am directly quoting from the press release by 
the Saskatchewan Party government. And I quote: 
 

“Our government’s focus is on students,” Advanced 
Education Minister Bronwyn Eyre said. “We must ensure 
that they continue to have access to high quality, accessible 
education.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister that has made some 
very discouraging comments as to her view on how treaty 
education’s impacting not only our students, but many of the 
people’s perception of First Nations across this province. And 
this is an example, Mr. Speaker, how on one hand they promise 
to do better and then a scant six, seven months later, they are 
starting to cut programs. They are starting to eliminate the 
opportunities for people to learn more about each other’s 
culture and language and traditions. And this is typical of the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I would tell the people of Saskatchewan, you 
need to expect more of this kind of cost-cutting that they’ll be 
doing because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they hid all the bad 
news in the months before the election. And as soon as the 
election hit, Mr. Speaker, and they got their majority, then out 
comes the bad news. Out comes the bad news and this is exactly 
the kind of bad news that parents were not expecting. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that many middle-class families 
struggle to keep their kids in school. They obviously need to 
have these kinds of supports in place given the rising cost of 
food, the rising cost of power bills thanks to the Sask Party and, 
Mr. Speaker, all the taxes placed on everything from children’s 
clothing to home insurance. This is another load for 
middle-class families to bear, and this is all thanks to the Sask 
Party’s scandals, mismanagement, and waste. 
 
So we have a lot more discussion and comments on Bill 94, so I 
move that we adjourn the debate on Bill 94, The Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 94. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
and Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and 
Amendment Act, 2017. This bill will repeal legislation that has 
become outdated or obsolete. Mr. Speaker, we find that certain 
pieces of legislation become obsolete as laws evolve, new 
legislation is introduced, and new government programs are 
implemented. 
 
This bill will repeal these pieces of obsolete legislation, which 
fits with the government’s ongoing commitment to ensuring 
that our province’s laws remain modernized and up to date. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill is housekeeping in nature and the proposed 
repeal of these pieces of legislation will not have a substantive 
impact for stakeholders. For example, legislation such as The 
Marriage Settlement Act, The Parents Maintenance Act, and 
The Trading Stamp Act have been confirmed as being very 
outdated and obsolete. Some of these were even before I was in 
law school. Other legislation such as The Income Tax Act have 
been replaced by entirely new Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in preparing this bill, Justice officials have worked 
closely with officials from other ministries to confirm that their 
proposed repeal of legislation is suitable and will not have any 
impacts on stakeholders. Justice officials will continue to work 
with other ministries to identify any other and further pieces of 
legislation that may become suitable for repeal in the future. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 95. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to give 
initial comments again on Bill 95. This is obviously, as the 
Deputy Premier alluded to, the fact that some of the language in 
some of these bills is older than his locker here, Mr. Speaker. 
So there is indeed an opportunity and a need to update and 
modernize anything of that age, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s important that on Bill No. 5, An Act to repeal and 
amend miscellaneous Statutes and make consequential 
amendments to certain Statutes, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill 
talks about legislation that repeals several Acts and, yes, there is 
housekeeping amendments on others. The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2003 is repealed, and obviously, the 
same for The Income Tax Act and The Penalties and Forfeitures 
Act, Mr. Speaker, as a result of The Child and Family Services 
Act that was introduced to replace those previous Acts. There’s 
also Acts that are going to be directly repealed like The 
Closing-out Sales Act, The Community Bonds Act, The Home 
Energy Loans Act. 
 
[16:45] 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker, a section of The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act has a section repealed related to 
public disclosure and the confidentiality requirements in the 
Act, something our office obviously will be looking into 
further. There is some housekeeping to clean up a section never 
proclaimed in The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, 2010. 
There’s a section in The Power Corporation Amendment Act 
that relates to recourse for payments owed. 
 
Of great interest, Mr. Speaker, is the repeal of the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan bill. We know the government stopped funding 
Enterprise Saskatchewan in 2013. It took them four years to get 
over their embarrassment and hope that people forget about that 
particular failed venture, Mr. Speaker. We all know that this is 
the Premier’s pet project, so it must be hard to see it go, 
certainly from his perspective. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he’s still appointing members to the board, 
despite having no staff, no website, and no mandate. And in 
2007, Bruce Johnstone wrote for the Leader-Post, and I quote, 
“Enterprise Saskatchewan Premier-elect Brad Wall’s vision of 
how to manage the province’s economic development could be 
the biggest achievement of his administration, or it could be his 
biggest flop.” Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear where we landed on 
this one. And we can thank the outgoing Premier for that very 
early mistake. And this bill, of course, tries to sweep the 
memory of people of Saskatchewan of the failed Enterprise 
Saskatchewan effort, and we will certainly have a lot more 
comments as it regards to this particular bill. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, again most of the amendments are 
just minor and housekeeping in nature, but the two or three 
points that I raised earlier we do want to spend some time on 
that. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 95. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 95. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act 

Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la 
Convention de La Haye) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Choice of Court Agreements 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act. 
 
This proposed uniform bill provides for the implementation of 
the Hague Convention on Choice of Court Agreements. This 
convention establishes rules for parties to an international 
contract from participating nations to choose the court 
jurisdiction where disputes under the contract are to be 
determined. Mr. Speaker, supporting choice of court provisions 
in international contracts will help prevent litigation in multiple 
jurisdictions where a dispute arises in an international contract. 
 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

The key provisions of the Hague Convention are as follows: 
 
Firstly, a choice of court agreement must be respected by the 
courts of a contracting state unless the contract in dispute is null 
and void under the laws of that contracting state. That is article 
no. 5. 
 
Secondly, any court not chosen must decline to hear the case or 
suspend or dismiss proceedings unless limited exceptions apply, 
which is found in article 6. 
 
Thirdly, any judgment made by a designated court must be 
recognized and enforced in other contracting states except in 
very limited circumstances, which is found in articles 8 and 9. 
 
Fourthly, the parties to the contract retain contractual freedom 
regarding the application of the convention to their contract. 
The Government of Ontario has introduced similar 
implementation legislation and the federal government is 
recommending the passage of implementing legislation by the 
provinces to facilitate Canada’s accession to the convention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hague Convention aims to save time and 
expense both at the outset of proceedings, when jurisdictional 
disputes commonly arise, and after a judgment is given, when 
parties seek to enforce a judgment abroad. 
 
As an exporting province, increased certainty in what court will 
be chosen to determine disputes between parties to an 
international contract will be of significant benefit to the 
Saskatchewan business community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 96. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously as the minister has certainly alluded to in his opening 
comments, this particular bill makes the Hague Convention of 
June 2005 on Choice of Court Agreements law in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what the Hague Convention on Choice of Court Agreements 
was designed for, Mr. Speaker, was to offer greater certainty for 
those involved in business contracts in international litigation. 
These rules relate to the jurisdiction agreement in civil and 
commercial matters and recognize the judgment given by a 
court of a contracting state designated in the choice of a court 
agreement. Ontario has a similar law from March of 2017. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what this particular bill and the 
choice of court agreement really dictates how parties from, say 
for example, Saskatchewan, if they enter into agreement with a 
country like Germany, some business person or some company 
decided to go into these particular agreements and form 
different companies and joint venture opportunities, there’s 
always a place and time that we talk about which courts would 
be recognized if there was a case where a disagreement 
occurred or there was a lawsuit, a potential lawsuit. How would 

this business move forward and which court they would 
recognize and choose as to how they would mitigate some of 
their concerns, or certainly if there was a matter where there 
was a lawsuit involved or the partners wanted to go separate 
ways. 
 
We have to make sure that in these ventures that companies 
have that opportunity to determine which court, which 
jurisdiction that they would go to in the event that their 
company got into some kind of legal trouble or they wanted to 
break up their partnership. Which court would you go to? 
Would you go to the Saskatchewan court? Would you go to the 
Canadian court? Would you go to that country’s court? This bill 
obviously is designed to try and figure out which choice of 
court that would be identified through these agreements, in 
agreement with the two parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s something that’s new obviously to Saskatchewan. As 
I said at the outset, Ontario has a similar law from this past 
spring. And this is something that we have to certainly pay a lot 
of attention to because, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that we 
obviously want, Saskatchewan people to succeed. And part of 
our success is that we open up markets; we open up new 
opportunities. And that not only goes within the country of 
Canada but also goes to North America and also goes right 
across the world because, as we all know, the world is certainly 
a much smaller place when you talk about international trade, 
and a lot of international trade talks about partnership. 
 
So it’s important to determine these rules off the start, to tell the 
parties that you must both agree to which court that you wish to 
go in the event that you have a dispute in your business 
relationship. Which court will you recognize? As the example I 
used, is it the German court, or is it the Canadian court? Is there 
some overlying Saskatchewan court that would be of an appeal 
to both parties? These are the questions the bill would hopefully 
answer. This has a lot of international law and certainly 
international agreements that will come into effect, so this has a 
lot of repercussions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would certainly bring reference to the fact that as we 
move down this path, be very, very careful. Because if you look 
at NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] and how 
President Trump wants to redesign NAFTA, Mr. Speaker, we 
do have a court. It’s called the World Trade Organization, in 
which we have these processes where we can appeal certain 
trade laws that are being contravened by the US [United States]. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that process takes a long time. So we hope 
that these bills do not mimic what’s going on with NAFTA and 
President Trump because obviously it’s hurting our economy, 
especially the export market communities such as 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’ve got to be very, very careful, Mr. Speaker, that when 
we sign these kind of agreements and talk about a court process, 
that it’s well defined, well understood, agreed to from the 
outset. And, Mr. Speaker, we hope it’s not onerous like the 
World Trade Organization when they’d hear Canada’s appeal 
when countries such as the US try and place unfair penalties 
against our trade as a country. 
 
So I think it’s important that we pay very close attention to this 
bill. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 96, 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act of 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 96. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I’ll start again, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. This bill accompanies the 
bilingual The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 to make amendments to this 
English-only bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, arbitration may be a viable option for the 
resolution of some family disputes. However the current Act 
does not expressly permit arbitration in family disputes, nor 
does it include revisions to facilitate arbitration in family 
disputes. 
 
In order to offer arbitration as a possible avenue for resolution, 
the bill establishes a framework for the arbitration of family 
disputes. The bill defines family arbitrator to ensure that any 
individual acting as an arbitrator in a family dispute has 
experience not just with arbitration but specifically in the family 
law realm. 
 
The bill expressly considers how an arbitrated award will be 
varied or updated when there has been a change in 
circumstances and includes appeal provisions. Where these new 
provisions do not address a specific issue, the general 
arbitration revisions in the Act will apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Arbitration (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 97. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
Bill 97, as the minister explained, the arbitration amendment 
Act, 2017, what it does, Mr. Speaker, it sets out a definition for 
a family arbitrator to deal with a family law dispute. It’s very 
important that people understand the definition of arbitrator and 
arbitration agreement remain the same. And there’s section that 
is added that allows for arbitration on family disputes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a family dispute can involve parts of The 
Children’s Law Act, The Family Maintenance Act, The Family 
Property Act, or the Divorce Act. There’s a trend to divert 
human disputes to arbitration, which can be a more beneficial 

process to those involved. We will have some questions about 
the access to arbitrators and arbitration, and we’ll certainly have 
some questions to the minister about the implementation of this 
process at committee. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously one of the things we want to point 
out is that if there are ways and means in which the government 
can help and assist and to cushion the blow in the event that 
there is a family dispute or there is a family law dispute, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s important that we understand that this is a very 
traumatic time for not only the couple, but certainly if there’s 
children involved, this can become a very difficult time in their 
lives. So it’s important to be able to put processes into place in 
which, Mr. Speaker, that there’s perhaps a more timely option 
for people to go through an arbitrator, as opposed to courts, to 
provide some solution. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that process 
could provide a lot of the legwork necessary to make the court 
proceedings a lot less traumatic and long. Mr. Speaker, I might 
add, this may be obviously a benefit to families, and we have to 
determine that, and the best way to determine that is to study 
this very well, look at it very closely, and ask the questions of 
the minister at the appropriate committee stage because I’m 
certain many of my colleagues will have a lot of questions on 
this. 
 
The only point I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is we need to 
talk about the social services aspect as it pertains to children 
and custody of those children. Although it may be in a different 
Act, this certainly has some impact on this Act. So we need to 
have those discussions and see how it could certainly . . . how it 
could be connected as well. 
 
So again, we’re very pleased to have the information on Bill 97. 
We have a lot of questions on this matter. So on that note, I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, the arbitration 
amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 98. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
recessed until tonight at 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2979 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2979 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2980 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2980 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2980 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2980 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2981 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2981 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2981 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2981 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holodomor Memorial Week 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2982 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2982 
 Geo-Memorial Honours La Loche Shooting Victims  
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2982 
 Honours Given During Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2982 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2983 
 Canadian Western Agribition 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2983 
 New Joint-Use School Opens in Regina 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2983 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Accountability and Privacy 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2983 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2984 
 Support for Indigenous Education and Employment 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2984 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2984 
 Drainage at Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2985 
 Funding for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2986 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2986 
 Support for Treaty Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2987 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2987 
 Information Technology Services 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2987 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2988 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 



 

POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2989 
CONDOLENCE MOTIONS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 
 Gordon Gray Currie 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2989 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2990 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2991 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2992 
 Jack Charles Klein 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2993 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2993 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2994 
 Robert Wayne Mitchell 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2994 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2995 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2997 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2999 
 Roger Parent 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3001 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3002 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3002 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3003 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3003 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3004 
 Duane Weiman 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3004 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3005 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3006 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3006 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3006 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3006 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3007 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3008 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3008 
 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3008 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3009 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3010 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3010 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


