


















































November 21, 2017 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 15B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3011 
 November 21, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock and 20 seconds, we 
call this House back to order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse 

(résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Justice and Attorney General.  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. This bill amends 
The Children’s Law Act, 1997, The Family Maintenance Act, 
1997, The Family Property Act, and The Queen’s Bench Act, 
1998 to add provisions to recognize and promote early dispute 
resolution. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to encouraging 
early dispute resolution methods in family law matters for the 
timely and cost-effective resolution of family disputes. In some 
cases an out-of-court or early dispute resolution mechanism 
may be more appropriate in resolving family disputes, as they 
can achieve a fast result, be more cost effective, and have less 
of an emotional toll on the parties. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan encourages parties to use 
out-of-court dispute resolution processes for family disputes 
where appropriate. Parties to disputes need to be aware of the 
range of options available for early settlement and to maximize 
these opportunities to reduce the financial and emotional cost of 
separation. 
 
The proposed amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 
will require parties in certain family law proceedings to make 
efforts to resolve disputes through an approved dispute 
resolution process before proceeding with the court process. 
Parties will be encouraged to attempt resolution through an 
out-of-court dispute process before filing an application with 
the court. Where pre-pleading attempts to resolve a dispute are 
not feasible or do not occur, parties will be required to 
participate in an approved dispute resolution process 
immediately after the close of pleadings. 
 
Unlike in regular civil actions before the court, parties to a 
family law dispute are not required to participate in mandatory 
mediation. This new process will require the parties participate 
instead in a form of dispute resolution. This may include 
mediation, but could also be satisfied by using the services of a 
collaborative lawyer, having attempted arbitration, or other 
forms of out-of-court resolution that will be prescribed in the 
regulations. 
 
The new provision will create exceptions in certain 
circumstances on application to the court or another prescribed 

person. For example, where there is a history of violence, a 
child has been abducted, or a restraining order is in place, a 
party may seek an exception. 
 
Where parties choose mediation, they will be required to use the 
services of a family mediator. The qualifications for this special 
type of mediator will be set out in the regulations. Family 
mediators will have special training in family law and have 
enhanced knowledge of the conflicts that may arise in and the 
intricacies of family law disputes. 
 
The proposed amendments will amend The Children’s Law Act, 
1997 and The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 to ensure that, 
where mediation is pursued under those Acts, a family mediator 
with that additional training is used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Children’s Law Act, 1997 will 
also include revisions respecting parenting coordinators. 
Parenting coordinators can offer parties in high conflict 
relationships an avenue for resolution that does not involve 
more court applications. Parenting coordinators are trained 
individuals who can help parties navigate the interpretation of 
an existing order or agreement such as parenting time, pickup 
times and locations, and holidays. Parenting coordinators will 
not create or change parenting arrangements, the division of 
parenting responsibilities, custody, or access to the child. The 
bill will set out when the services of a parenting coordinator 
may be used, the types of determinations the parenting 
coordinator may make, and the minimum training and practice 
criteria an individual will need to qualify as a parenting 
coordinator. 
 
The proposed amendments will amend each of The Children’s 
Law Act, 1997, The Family Maintenance Act, 1997, and The 
Family Property Act to add a definition of family arbitrator and 
a specific provision respecting the use of arbitration for disputes 
under those Acts. These provisions will not require but will 
encourage parties who would like to use arbitration instead of 
the court process to proceed towards resolution in that venue. 
 
Amendments are also made in an English-only bill to amend 
The Arbitration Act, 1992 to include provisions respecting the 
arbitration of family law disputes. Amendments are made to 
The Children’s Law Act, 1997, The Family Maintenance Act, 
1997, and The Family Property Act to include provisions 
respecting the arbitration of disputes under those Acts. 
 
This suite of family law amendments will assist to promote 
alternate dispute resolution methods in family law matters for 
the timely and cost-effective resolution of family law disputes. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved first reading of Bill No. 98 . . . be now introduced 
and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 
join debate tonight on this first go at Bill No. 98, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

Amendment Act, 2017. In terms of providing a larger role for 
family mediators and dispute resolution, certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a developing field, you know, continues to develop in the 
field of law generally, but as regards family law, and certainly 
in being good to the parties and arriving at a resolution that is 
livable and not marred or scarred by the adversarial nature of 
some of these proceedings, we think that mediation has a lot to 
recommend it. 
 
In terms of providing the different definitions for family 
arbitrator, family mediator, substantiating the role of what is a 
mediator, that’s of course as it should be and well matches this 
developing area of law. 
 
I guess in terms of how the question of evidence in a mediation 
session not being admissible in court proceedings without 
consent from all parties being given, we’d be interested to find 
out a bit more about that. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I guess one thing that begs the 
question is, what particular work of consultation has been done 
with the sector, with mediation practitioners? We certainly 
know that there have been a good number of mediators that 
have done some great work at the very highest ranks of the 
Ministry of Justice, so we have some reassurance in that regard. 
But we of course don’t want to leave these things to 
supposition. We’d like to find that out from the minister in 
particular. 
 
In terms of the cost involved, again if you can get to a 
resolution earlier, that of course would seem to have all sorts of 
reasons to recommend it, Mr. Speaker. Again not protracted 
legal conflicts, Mr. Speaker, generally aren’t great for any 
circumstance, but particularly as regards family matters under 
the law. And in terms of what the projected cost savings are for 
this, we’ll be interested to see what the capacity there is in the 
system and what, if any, sort of ramping up will be required in 
terms of mediators and the family arbitrator, as designated 
under the legislation. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, just the broader question of what this 
does for access to justice issues in terms of, again if you’ve got 
the resources as an individual or as a family, generally these 
matters aren’t as pressing. But if these improved solutions or 
improved means by which to arrive at a resolution in these kind 
of conflicts, if the financial barrier is still there, it’s not much of 
a solution, Mr. Speaker. So what sort of allowances, what sort 
of anticipation is made there for the broader access to justice 
issues that this may entail? 
 
But on the whole, Mr. Speaker, as you might imagine, there’s 
some work of consultation that we’d like to do with the sector, 
with the experts in the field, and in that regards we’ll set about 
doing that work. And I know that others of my colleagues will 
have more to say on this bill, but we’ll certainly endeavour to 
get that work of consultation under way in the sector. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 98. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 84 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 84 — The 
Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Good evening, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise to this House and again turn to the Bill No. 84, The Income 
Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017. And the bill 
before us that we’re debating is one that will implement, as the 
minister said, certain business income tax initiatives that were, 
of course, announced in the Throne Speech, were, of course, 
were highlighted in the budget that we saw in the spring where 
it increases the general corporate income tax rate by a half a 
point, 12 per cent, in January 2018 and it also cancels a 
previous change to decrease the rate to 11 per cent in July 2019. 
And the dividend tax credit rate is being increased for 2018 to 
reflect the increase in the general corporate income tax rate. It 
increases the effective dividend tax rate from 10.75 to 11 per 
cent. 
 
And now one of the interesting things is there’s also, and this is 
one that I think that has been noted, is the threshold is being 
changed. The small business threshold is being changed from 
500,000 to 600,000 as of January 2018. 
 
So this is interesting that we find ourselves here tonight in this 
debate, and there has been people, members before, and I do 
want to comment on some of those observations that have been 
made. It is interesting that we are here. In just a few short 
months, we’ve seen several examples of how they’ve realized 
that their budget that they delivered was not as well thought out 
as it might have been, and the impact that it was having was 
reckless in many ways. And here we are having to debate this 
here tonight. 
 
And it is interesting. We see other examples. The one we’ve 
had questions on, particularly around the PST [provincial sales 
tax], the increase that my colleague had heard many times on 
the doorstep in Fairview in the by-election. 
 
And people could rightly make a connection between the dots 
with that increase in the PST on several items that were hard 
hitting to families, whether it was children’s clothing that was 
exempt before, or restaurant meals where we saw an increase in 
the cost of going out for a meal. It was sort of a bit of a tipping 
point but it was also, for many of us who . . . We have people 
who work in the service industry. All of a sudden because of 
that there was a loss of jobs, and the number I think was 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

something like 2,000 jobs that we saw in that sector because of 
these kind of actions this government had taken without really 
thinking through what the impact would be. And here we have 
this that we’re talking about tonight. And we really need to 
make sure when we present a budget that we act on 
well-thought-out initiatives that have as few unintended 
consequences as possible. 
 
[19:15] 
 
I found it interesting. We’re seeing one radio show in the 
morning now, the different members that are running for 
leadership from the other side are being interviewed. And one 
of the questions that the member from Silverspring, who’s 
running for leadership, was asked: so what were some of the 
examples that you would do differently if you could redo that 
budget? And of course he talked about the PST on insurance. 
And of course that is one they’ve heard loud and clear, loud and 
clear, that they had not thought through all the way what the 
impacts would be on that. 
 
And interestingly, though, interestingly he referenced the Vicq 
report, which I thought was very interesting, because I know 
that this side over here quite often likes to blame us in some 
weird, twisted way that it was our fault for whatever. So I think 
that my colleague here and I were blamed for the increase in, or 
the cut to The Income Tax Act for small businesses, I think, in 
the spring because we had made some comments about the 
Vicq report, because that was our work that we had done. 
 
And so we had a copy of the Vicq report. And of course it’s a 
very well-thought-out piece of work that talked about how we 
need to have a suite of tax incentives and taxes that reflect 
practices in Canada so we are competitive, but that we’re not 
giving away the store either, and not causing unintended 
consequences like we’re seeing in so many fields, so many 
fields. 
 
So I found it interesting that the member from Silverspring was 
thinking of the Vicq report. I happen to know Jack Vicq. Jack 
Vicq and I had served together on the Meewasin board. He’s a 
thoughtful, thoughtful fellow and really researches his work 
completely and thoroughly. And it would be interesting to see 
what he means by, what the member from Silverspring means 
for that, and what his thoughts would be on this. 
 
So we’ve had several people talk about this. And I think it’s one 
that I know CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business] is very, very interested in. And we know what their 
comments are, that they appreciate the threshold and the move 
on that. So we’re cognizant of that. 
 
My colleague from Athabasca spoke about the billion-dollar tax 
cut that we saw because of mismanagement on the other side. 
And here we have these folks rethinking some of their 
initiatives, which I think they really, really have to do. 
 
And of course as I said, my colleague from Fairview talked a lot 
about what the reactions were on the doorstep in August and 
September in the by-election, when people actually saw the 
actual impact of their tax increases and tax cuts that these folks 
have put together. And so that was really tough. And I have to 
say, and it’s really important, when my colleague from Prince 

Albert, when she talked about her own personal connection to 
these cuts and what she has found that to be. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that many people want to get 
on the record on Bill No. 84, The Income Tax (Business 
Income) Amendment Act, 2017. It’s one that we will probably 
all want to have a few words on that, but at this moment today 
I’d like to adjourn debates on Bill No. 84. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 84. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
wade into the debate tonight on Bill No. 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017. There’s a few things that are taking 
place in this Act, Mr. Speaker, and including the creation of a 
new provincial park, changing some park boundary 
descriptions, changing some forestry terminology, clarifying 
authority to evict for alcohol-related offences, and some 
housekeeping around language clarity and gender references. 
 
I’ll focus the bulk of my comments around the new provincial 
park as that is actually what the minister did as well. So the 
government is proposing its second provincial park in the last 
20 years. There was a new park proclaimed in 2013 I believe, 
the Blue Heron Provincial Park, and this one is going to be, 
well at the moment is called the Porcupine Hills Area 
Provincial Park, although that’s only a temporary name, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know from my own experience of growing up here in 
Saskatchewan, provincial parks have been a big part of my life 
and my family’s life, Mr. Speaker. We used to camp when I 
was a small child. I’m the youngest of seven kids, and camping 
was the big holiday for us, Mr. Speaker. It was affordable, and 
it was lots of fun. My mom actually talks about our trips to 
Candle Lake and heating my baby bottle up on the campfire 
actually, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I remember some of those trips. We had a big red station 
wagon, and we’d all pile into that station wagon, probably not 
wearing seatbelts. Although my dad was a police officer, and I 
do remember being like on the cutting edge of starting to wear 
seatbelts, but I think, in my early years there was no seatbelt to 
be had in that red station wagon. 
 
I have fond memories of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . One of 
my colleagues is suggesting perhaps they let us ride on the roof, 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

and I suspect that that was entirely possible with seven kids and 
two adults in that car. But I remember that red station wagon 
and being at Candle Lake and one of my sisters starting out in a 
tent and then being terrified of bears and moving into the red 
station wagon at night. 
 
I remember growing up, my big memory as a child is Candle 
Lake, but for my own kids, Danielson Provincial Park. My 
19-year-old Hennessey, her first camping trip ever was to 
Danielson Provincial Park when she was about three months 
old. 
 
Pike Lake and Blackstrap have been important, as someone 
who lives in Saskatoon. Those are parks that we make frequent 
day trips. And actually Pike Lake — I have a Boler trailer, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m not a very adept backer upper with my Boler 
trailer — I really appreciated at Pike Lake the ability to drive 
through my site and park on the one occasion that I stayed 
overnight and didn’t have to worry about backing my little 
trailer in. So provincial parks I know play a huge role in many 
of our lives here in Saskatchewan, and I know that’s where I’ve 
developed my love for the outdoors, for camping, for hiking, for 
canoeing. 
 
So at first blush the thought of a new provincial park is a really 
great idea, or sounds really good on the surface. But we have to 
stop and think about the impacts it might have to others, 
including concerns that are raised by indigenous peoples here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So a new park could be a 
wonderful thing and protecting land is really great, but if it’s a 
. . . We need to make sure we do a full and meaningful 
consultations. 
 
The Supreme Court has laid down the duty to consult. It’s been 
articulated fairly clearly that that’s a necessity. And I know the 
minister in his comments, in his second reading comments said 
that they’ve been consulting since 2011 on this particular park. 
And he actually . . . I’m interested . . . I know in committee this 
will probably be raised, but he in his second reading comments, 
the minister raises a unique nine-step, raises the fact that the 
ministry used a unique nine-step process to consult with First 
Nations and Métis communities. Well I’d be interested in 
knowing a little bit more about that nine-step process and a little 
bit further on what indigenous communities are thinking. 
 
I know the day that the bill was first read there were some folks 
in the gallery from Key First Nation. And it seemed, Mr. 
Speaker, by the comments in the House, that these were folks 
who were completely on board with this park. And later on in 
the rotunda when they were doing media, one of the comments 
from one of the folks who was here, one of the leaders from the 
Key First Nation pointed out that it was going to happen 
anyways, that he believed that the park was going to happen. So 
they had decided they better fully engage in this process. 
 
But I would flag some concerns that the duty to consult isn’t 
just a one-way conversation where the ministry . . . it’s going to 
happen and so First Nations or indigenous people are then 
asked to give input at that point, Mr. Speaker. It needs to be full 
and meaningful. I know they acknowledge that there’s some 
concerns about burial. This is also a place where gathering of 
medicine is something that’s really important to this particular 
First Nation, so we need to make sure that those issues are 

resolved. 
 
But we have a bill before the House, so this is always a case of, 
well you’ve consulted and you’re going to continue to consult, 
but you actually have a bill that will be passed by the spring 
establishing a new provincial park. So there are some concerns 
that clearly there are folks who don’t feel like their needs and 
concerns have been met. 
 
And I know, with the previous park in 2013, from talking to my 
colleagues from the North, that there are some First Nations 
who felt that they were not fully included in the consultation 
process. And the input that they gave wasn’t fully 
acknowledged, Mr. Speaker, which is a huge issue, especially in 
this time of . . . We’ve had truth, Mr. Speaker, and now we have 
reconciliation or we should be having reconciliation. With the 
calls to action we need to, I think we need to take that 
reconciliation lens when we, quite frankly, embark upon just 
about everything. Whether it’s education or the drafting of bills, 
that lens of reconciliation should be applied. And so I just want 
to flag some concerns there. 
 
I also find it interesting that the government is talking about its 
commitment to provincial parks and expanding that land, but in 
the last two years, for example in the 2016 budget, there was 
the budget cuts to five urban parks around Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And then in this last budget, in the ’17-18 budget, 
there was the cut to the Meewasin Valley Authority. They lost 
almost half of their funding, more than $400,000, which is a big 
deal. But the other piece which was really important is the lack 
of . . . the government taking the statutory requirement for 
funding away from the legislation. 
 
So up until this last spring, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
requirement that the province and the university . . . It was a 
partnership, well I guess a tripartite partnership of sorts between 
the university, the city of Saskatoon, and the province around 
the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
And anybody who . . . I know you live in Saskatoon and know 
and appreciate how important the river valley is to Saskatoon 
and to the province. It’s about conservation. It is about 
recreation. There’s beautiful canoe launches, the opportunity to 
walk and enjoy the trails, and it’s also about culture, Mr. 
Speaker. So on one hand here we’re talking about the 
government willing to expand provincial parks, but on the other 
we’ve seen urban parks take a huge hit from this government, 
Mr. Speaker. So that is a huge concern for me. 
 
With respect to this bill as well, some of the other things I had 
mentioned in it were the park boundary descriptions. And the 
minister points out in his second reading that there’s several 
park boundary descriptions which are being brought forward for 
minor amendments, including Christopher Lake protected area, 
Candle Lake Provincial Park, Danielson Provincial Park, and 
Greenwater Lake Provincial Park. So these changes relate to 
some future planning around roadway widening work, canal 
expansion, and description corrections. And there’s a few items 
of boundary clarification which “. . . the park description 
requires improved wording to more clearly describe the 
boundary.” 
 
[19:30] 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

And I know my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has worked 
in that area around, as a lawyer, with land descriptions in her 
work with the federal government, and pointed out how 
technology has changed and our ability to map and know more 
clearly as time goes on with things like GPS [global positioning 
system], you can better identify some of that land. That’s an 
ongoing process. 
 
And so this is not a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, just something, the 
usual course of business that I guess over the years will, as we 
continue to refine those processes, those will change as well. 
 
A third amendment, as I mentioned earlier, is the forestry 
terminology amendment. The minister points out, this is an 
administrative amendment to provide a new definition of timber 
to replace the term “Crown timber” removed from The Forest 
Resources Management Act.” He points out that “The forestry 
amendment also provides clarification that timber harvesting 
within parks can be authorized under both The Forest 
Resources Management Act and The Parks Act, depending on 
the type of project.” 
 
And a fourth amendment here, Mr. Speaker, clarifies the 
authority to evict for alcohol-related offences. So in the long 
weekends I believe it is, actually May long weekends, the 
ministry establishes an alcohol ban. And the Minister points out 
that, consulting with Justice, they’re “. . . proposing a minor 
adjustment to close the gap to support an enforcement officer’s 
ability to carry out the annual alcohol ban.” 
 
I think many of us . . . I don’t think it was such an issue for me 
when I was a little younger, but for those of us who go parks 
with our families, that there are always those who over-imbibe, 
and it can have an impact on everybody. Campsites are one of 
those things, it’s communal living and you need to figure out 
how to live respectfully with your neighbours. 
 
So with respect to this alcohol ban, it adds “. . . clarification that 
an enforcement officer may evict for contravention of the 
annual alcohol ban as is currently supported by The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulations Act.” And he points out that the ban is a 
last resort and usually officers try to apply warnings and tickets 
before they go so far as to evict someone from their camping. 
 
And the fifth part of the Act is around housekeeping 
amendments, around language clarity and gender references, 
which I’ve spoken to many times. I always appreciate moving 
to gender neutral language in bills, and I know in my time here 
that’s happened quite frequently. 
 
Again, the big piece of this Act is the creation of the new 
provincial park. I just want to flag something else too. So we 
have the temporary name of the provincial park and, at this 
point in time, the Minister has pointed out that local 
jurisdictions and Aboriginal communities will be given a 
chance to suggest what the park should be named. But I think in 
the spirit of reconciliation and as this is a . . . Clearly this land 
plays a role in indigenous people’s past and present, Mr. 
Speaker, that it would be a very good thing to think about an 
indigenous name. But that said, I know I’ve flagged some 
concerns with our indigenous people who may not even want 
this park to go ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But with that, I know I have colleagues who will be adding 
further comments to this bill, and I know that there’ll be lots of 
questions in committee. But with that, I’d like to move to 
adjourn debate on Bill 76, The Parks Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 76. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 77, 
An Act to amend certain Superannuation Acts. And this one is a 
very important one, as any superannuation or pension Act is, 
because it’s the kind of legislation that we hope is in place and 
is pretty solid and bulletproof when we approach the golden 
age. And we all are looking forward to retiring, and we don’t 
want to see the kinds of things that happened. And we’re 
worried about . . . The Sears employees comes to mind right 
away, what those folks are going through in terms of their 
pension. And after giving many, many years to your workplace, 
and you hope your pension is in fact solid and will be able to 
carry you through the remaining years in a level of dignity that 
you can feel pretty good about. And so this is one — An Act to 
amend certain Superannuation Acts. 
 
This one really, it seems to focus on The Liquor Board 
Superannuation Act. And I would like to just reflect a bit on the 
minister’s comments. I always find that insightful and a good 
place to start to launch some of the questions. We know that it 
is the practice of ministers to come in with prepared comments 
so that these are comments that are pretty solid. The department 
or the ministry has taken a lot of time to make sure these are 
crafted in a way that, if they need to be looked back at in the 
future, that they can get some clarity around some of the issues. 
 
So the second reading speech for the miscellaneous statutes 
amendment Act was just on November 6th of this year, 2007, 
and it talks about the fact that . . . The Finance minister talks 
about, “The first amendment proposed in this bill, Mr. Speaker, 
is to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act to designate 
the minister responsible for the Act as the sole member of the 
. . . Superannuation Commission . . .” or the commission that’s 
known for administrating the day-to-day goings-on of The 
Liquor Board Superannuation Act. 
 
Now it is interesting that we see with some of the other Acts 
that in fact they’re expanding the boards, but here we have it 
just being one member. So it will be interesting to know why 
that is the case. Now it may be that it’s the number of people 



3016 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

that are involved with this, and it’s becoming a smaller and 
smaller number. But at any rate, the commission is responsible 
for the administration of The Liquor Board Superannuation Act, 
or the plan, and the day-to-day administration. 
 
So just to be clear, I had said the day-to-day goings-on. And I 
should say the day-to-day administration is actually delegated 
to the Public Employees Benefits Agency, PEBA, which makes 
a lot of sense, because when the plan now is closed to new 
members . . . It has been for several years, some 40 years, since 
1977. And as of March 2017 there was only two active 
members. Now I understand my member from Fairview thought 
there might be three, but clearly the numbers are dwindling. 
 
And so they had looked at both, and both members are actually 
eligible to retire. And they’ve taken a look. They’ve had 
somebody come in and take a look at their governance, and this 
is what they’ve come up with, you know. So it sounds like this 
is something that, while that was five years ago, the 
independent consultant thought this was very, very important, 
because at this point it’s really the issue of paying the pension 
and not so much as collecting the payments. So it’s very, very 
important. 
 
The minister goes on and talks about a second proposed 
amendment, and that is to allow the restricted retirement 
options, or we call them RROs, I guess. I don’t actually call 
them that because I don’t really talk about them too much. But 
we are entering the land here, and I have a few of these I will be 
talking about, acronyms. And it is really something when you 
start to get into the world of acronyms, especially related to 
pensions and superannuation. 
 
So they’re talking about limiting or restricting the kind of 
options that are available. So that’s one thing to be watching 
for. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, you know, I talked about that there were 
two active members; that as of December 31st, 2016 last year 
there are 177 retired employees in the plan. 
 
So the plan is . . . The Act before us just really focuses on the 
governance issues, and that makes sense as the plan starts to 
really . . . has less than 180 people engaged in it. It’s at the point 
now, a very mature plan where it’s essentially just paying out, 
and they want to make sure it’s still solvent, that it’s still a 
good, solid plan for those 180 people, or 179. And of course 
that’s a major, major concern. 
 
And so we will probably have some questions in committee 
when we talk about this with the Finance minister about making 
sure pensions are solid, that these kind of things are planned 
well, and that there is not the issue of unintended consequences, 
especially with so few, so few people involved. We want to 
make sure we’re doing the right thing. 
 
And, you know, of course we are seeing the privatization of 
liquor board stores too, so that’s also limiting the number of 
people. And I don’t know what kind of impact that has. It won’t 
have an impact on this because this plan was closed 
approximately 40 years ago, but on future plans. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment on Bill 

No. 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment Act, 2017. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m speaking to 
a few of these bills in order. They have a common theme. It’s 
about pensions or superannuation plans and things like that. 
And so when you start to look at them, this is the bailiwick, the 
wheelhouse of the Minister of Finance to make sure these 
pensions are solvent and that they’re in good shape and that we 
can rest assured that people will be looked after in what we 
often refer to in their golden years after contributing for many, 
many years. 
 
And so this Act is a little bit more lengthy. There’s more to it. 
And of course what’s interesting, and I always find it interesting 
when the minister, especially in this case, she does give quite 
lengthy notes, which is good because I feel that we can 
understand the bill before us. And this is very important to 
understand. This is a defined benefit pension plan. So in many 
ways, many people would think of this as a very good plan 
when you have a defined benefit plan as opposed to a defined 
contribution plan. This is the kind of thing that many workers 
strive for, and actually in many ways, during their working 
career, make sure that, because they want to retire with dignity 
and rest easy that they will be able to have their needs met, will 
forgo significant wage increases to make sure that their 
pensions are in good shape. 
 
And in this case, the minister talks about as of March 31st, there 
were close to 25,000 plan members in the municipal 
employees’ pension plan and 737 employers participating in the 
pension plan. So when we talk about the employers and 737, 
you wonder how could there be that many in Saskatchewan 
when we talk about municipal. But these are really — and as 
the minister identified — employees of schools, rural 
municipalities, cities, towns, colleges, villages, and libraries, 
and a variety of other municipal-level employers. 
 
So that’s the level that we’re talking about, not at the provincial 
level but at the municipal level. These folks have the option of 
participating in this. And this shows how important when you 
have 25,000 members participating in this plan and 737 
employers. 
 
One of the interesting things that I found was that in reviewing 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3017 

the notes of the minister was that they were going to expand the 
composition of the commission. They were going to increase it 
by two. So as I was just reflecting on the Liquor Board when 
they were closing it down . . . But of course this one is active. 
This one is not closed out. This one, I don’t know if it’s 
growing. It would be interesting to know whether it’s growing 
in terms of membership, where it’s at with that. That’s the kind 
of question we’ll have in committee. 
 
But they are increasing the composition by two members. And 
as the minister says, one member is to be appointed by 
employers who employ firefighters and police officers, and the 
other is to be appointed by the Saskatchewan local of the 
Canadian Union of Public Employees or CUPE that represent 
what we call the MEPP or municipal employees’ pension plan 
members. And so I think that’s a good thing to see and glad to 
see that they’re on the board. 
 
[19:45] 
 
So some of the things that we are looking for that the minister is 
putting forward, we would have a question is . . . Well first I 
want to talk about the framework, the consultation, and 
unintended consequences, because this seems to be quite 
lengthy and quite extensive. So we will be consulting with the 
firefighters, the police officers, CUPE, and others. Are these the 
kinds of things they’re looking forward to seeing? And has 
there actually been the kind of consultation process that we 
should see? 
 
For example, this is . . . I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker. And the 
minister says, I quote: 
 

This Act, Mr. Speaker, proposes to eliminate the 
portability of the pension benefit for members eligible for 
pension upon termination of employment. Moving lump 
sums of money out of the plan at retirement is a financial 
drain on the pension plan and is in contradiction to the 
steady stream of payments the plan is funded to provide to 
members in retirement. 

 
So we get that. Moving funds is a pressure and how big of a 
pressure that is, we need to know and understand. The question 
I have would be, what is the exact meaning of that sentence, 
“. . . proposes to eliminate the portability of the pension 
benefit . . .”? What is the meaning of that? 
 
So some of these get very technical and we want to make sure 
we understand fully, we understand fully with our eyes wide 
open as we’re moving forward in this so there are no surprises, 
that we understood that this is the kind of thing that the minister 
intended, and that the employees are okay with. Because as I’ve 
said quite often, especially at the municipal level employees 
will, in contract negotiations, really consider the impact of 
should they take a higher wage percentage or should they make 
sure their pension is solid. So this is very important. And it 
doesn’t really talk about, oh this is defined benefit pension plan 
as I mentioned earlier and that’s a very, very important thing. 
 
As so you know, and there’s other things to talk about, making 
sure amendments that all employers to remit contributions to 
MEPP within 15 days of the pay period so that’s more equitable 
and that type of thing. We appreciate that several updates to 

language ensure that it’s gender neutral and uses modern 
language and so that’s a good thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 78, An Act to amend The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act is one that as I said, everybody is 
interested in their pension. It became a topic of significant 
interest this past year particularly with the Sears closure and the 
windup of Sears Canada. So everybody is thinking about these 
kind of things and is thinking too about the impacts on our 
cities, our towns, our villages. We know this has been an 
ongoing debate — to make sure the liability is appropriately 
funded by the employer and the employee. And that’s a critical 
piece. So this is one that we will need to make sure we consult 
with the firefighters, the civic employees, the people who work 
at colleges, the libraries, those kind of places to make sure 
they’re on board with this and they feel this is the right kind of 
thing that needs to be done. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 
amendment to . . . not amendment, adjournment to Bill No. 78 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not sure if the member who 
had trouble between standing and sitting today is lecturing my 
adjournment amendment. So I will take that as a point well 
taken from my point of view, not that I’m in that place to take 
that point. But, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment to Bill 
No. 78, An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 78. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure again to rise on my feet to talk about Bill No. 79, An 
Act to amend The Public Employees Pension Plan Act. Again, 
as I will say, that’s a very important piece of legislation. All 
these pension pieces are very, very important, for as I have said 
prior . . . But if people are just tuning in now, or focusing only 
on this one, that they are there. They will be solid. They will be 
long lasting and will not be surprises for people who retire after 
many, many years of working at a particular job and thinking 
that their pension will be there. And so we take this very 
seriously. 
 
And I know the people, I know the people who administer of 
these things and look ahead to make sure that they’re solid, are 
very, very, very careful. And we think this is important. And I 
did allude to some of the things that are happening in Canada, 
that have been happening over the past year where we’d see 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

large corporations fail and employees are the back of the line 
when it comes to their benefits and getting their fair share. 
 
And so this is an interesting one that we have before us, Mr. 
Speaker, the public employees pension plan. And I’ll review the 
minister’s comments again. She had quite lengthy notes. 
Always when we’re talking about pensions, it gets to be a 
technical, dry topic, and I am very, very thankful that we have 
people who do look after these things and really make sure that 
the money is there and that it’s solid. 
 
But as she outlines right off the bat, this one . . . The other one 
. . . You know, this is the third one that I’ve talked about. We 
had the liquor board one which had about 180 people in, two 
active people right away, and the last one was 25,000 members. 
This one we have 65,000 members. So you know, between the 
two, 65 and . . . that’s about 90,000 members, you know, in a 
workforce in Saskatchewan of some 600,000. You can see this 
is a significant number of people who are in these two plans. 
And in this case there’s 146 employers. 
 
Of course, this is the public employees pension plan and known 
as PEPP. What’s interesting about this one is it’s a defined 
contribution pension plan that’s administered by the Public 
Employees Pension Board. 
 
So the last one I talked about was defined benefit plan where 
you knew what you were going to be getting out at the end of 
the day. That was the aim of the plan that those benefits, you 
would know they were defined, and that was the goal of the 
plan. 
 
Here is a more . . . has emerged in a more modern thinking, I 
think. I could be wrong. But it’s a contribution where you have 
defined contributions, whether it’s 7 per cent of your salary or 5 
per cent, and then that’s invested and then you get what you get. 
So the plan was established in 1977. It provides a means of 
saving for retirement and means of receiving retirement income 
for its membership — the employees of executive government, 
government agencies, Crown corporations, and other 
employers. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, you know as I said, this is something that 
changed. It happened around 1977. I know when I started — I 
actually started teaching in 1982 — the changeover date was 
1980 for teachers. But this will be interesting to see again what 
the feeling is, whether there’s been good consultation on this 
because, again as I said, people want to know that things are 
solid. 
 
The minister is proposing in this bill six amendments, and she 
says they’ll improve the rights of the PEPP members and their 
spouses and improve the services provided to PEPP. The first 
proposed amendment would provide immediate vesting or 
locking in of required member and employer contributions, and 
that entitles the member of the contributions made by the 
employer on the member’s behalf. And so this will be very 
interesting. So currently members must wait one year to 
become vested. Locking in means a member’s account balances 
must be used to provide a retirement income. Locking in 
happens currently at one year membership, and this will mean 
that it happens immediately and so I assume that means that it 
can’t be taken out. 

Now it’s interesting, and I think this is one that my colleague 
from Prince Albert talked about, because many of us have had, 
when we were younger, a job that maybe lasted a month, six 
months, and you haven’t really thought about the contributions 
to your pension plan and where they might be. Where were you 
working when you were 21 or 22? And now you’re 60 or 63 
and you’re thinking back, where did I work? Did I get my 
money back from these different places? And so it’s very 
important that people keep track of these because these could be 
significant amounts of money.  
 
We did some work and I would even thank the former minister 
of Education for the work they did. We had some 1,500 
teachers, or teachers who had worked less than 20 days, 20 
days, and they couldn’t get their pension out. Only their estate 
could get their pension out which meant they had to die and 
somebody had to know if they were a teacher for 20 days. Now 
if you can think about what the scenario would be: you’re 20, 
you worked for a week or two in a school, realized you hated 
that job and you wanted to be anywhere else and mutually you 
moved on, but you did make a contribution. 
 
So what happened was there was something like 1,400 people 
like this, that were in this spot, and one of them came to me. 
And it took about four or five years, but we were able to get her 
money to her. She was retired, and it was about $800 that we 
were talking about. It’s not a huge amount of money but it was 
still something, and she felt like, you know, she remembered 
that she had done this. 
 
Many others would not or may have passed away between . . . 
Because you’re talking about a lifetime between being 
twentysomething and 65. So it’s kind of interesting when we 
think back about where did we work when we were 
twentysomething and did we make contributions to a pension 
plan and what happened to those contributions? 
 
And so this is the kind of thing when I talked about locking in. 
This is an interesting amendment. And how many people would 
this impact? And of course, especially for younger people, you 
know, the fact that they may not be there at 65 to collect their 
pension. They may not have a spouse. What happens to that 
money? Of course, that will be interesting to see. 
 
Two other related amendments would also provide the spouses 
of PEPP members with additional rights. One would clarify that 
spouses of the deceased member in PEPP keep any amount left 
to her or him in PEPP. And with respect to that amount, they 
would have the same rights as any other non-working member 
of PEPP. So that’s interesting. Another one would propose . . . 
proposed amendment would remove a 15-day waiting period 
for unlocking voluntary contributions with termination. So there 
you go with that. 
 
And then she talks about issues administrating PEPP with 
respect to out-of-province members and the monies which 
would be subject to laws in other provinces. So I think these are 
all very interesting and also just a technical thing: changing or 
recognizing the new union, Unifor, and the name change from 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union or CEP as 
we would call them. They do actually appoint one member to 
the board. 
 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

[20:00] 
 
So this is an interesting piece of legislation that we have before 
us. This suite, I’m sure it’ll come together. The minister will 
bring them together, and we’ll have them in committee. But it’s 
one that we do want to make sure that we understand the 
consequences and that everyone is treated fairly. 
 
I do have some questions about locking in so quickly. And what 
is the process of getting that money out, and are people going to 
be aware of that? That’s an interesting one because I know as 
pensions want to have draw on bigger and bigger pools of 
money, so they’re looking at those early contributions because 
those are the ones that grow over time, and if they can keep 
them, then that would be very helpful to the plan. But it’s also 
important that we balance the interests of the person who’s only 
worked a short time and whether they should be locked in as 
quickly as the minister is suggesting. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debates on Bill No. 79, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017. Lots there, but I would like to adjourn 
debate on that this evening. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise on Bill No. 80, An Act to Amend the Municipal 
Financing Corporation Act, and really essentially what this 
does is increase the allotment that the Municipal Financing 
Corporation of Saskatchewan can give out. Right now currently 
it’s $350 million. This recognizes the nature of capital markets 
and the growth in the expenditures for larger projects, and so 
they’re increasing it to 500 million. 
 
And I’ll just take a moment to reflect on the minister’s 
comments and talks about the first change, repeals the financing 
corporation’s 30-year borrowing limit which goes back to the 
’70s. That’s interesting that we haven’t changed it since the 
1970s. And she talks about, you know, capital markets have 
evolved since then to permit borrowing longer and more 
cost-effective terms. Now it is interesting . . . So repealing the 
30-year limit and put it more in line with other Crown 
corporations which have a 40-year time frame. So that’s 
straightforward. 
 
And of course the second change is to increase the debt limit 

from 350 million to 500 million. And to give us a bit of a time 
frame for this, the debt limit was set at 250 million in the 1970s 
and then raised just seven years ago to 350 million to assist 
local governments to address their infrastructure needs. And she 
argues that it’s prudent to increase the limit once again to 
ensure the demand continues to be met and no one is turned 
away. And so she argues that it’s self-sustaining debt, like the 
debt of SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, and does not affect 
the GRF [General Revenue Fund] operating debt. Local 
governments are fully responsible for repaying any amounts of 
the loan to them, and she talks about infrastructure financing 
and that type of thing. 
 
But it is interesting and one could recognize the fact that we do 
need to have more resources, more tools in the tool kit for doing 
this, and it hasn’t been increased since the 1970s, which she 
makes the argument. But in their time frame, this government 
has essentially doubled their lending limit from 250 million to 
500 million. And we’ve seen a government who particularly in 
that last budget where the Finance minister was the minister at 
the time, I believe, in charge of municipal relations, and broke 
the long-standing contracts with the municipalities around the 
SaskPower contracts that they had when the province took over 
the different power utility companies, local companies in each 
of the municipalities, and promised them a certain return over 
the number of years. So yes, these municipalities are going to 
have to do more and more, and allowing them to borrow more 
and more, I hope, is something that they’ve been asking for, is 
not something they’re being forced to do. 
 
So this is one that we’ll be interested in hearing more from 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
about. Is this the kind of thing that they see as the answer to 
funding infrastructure shortfalls in their community? We do see 
and we’ve seen and when we take a look at the bypass that grew 
from some $400 million to, I believe, it is $2 billion. And it gets 
them aggravated when we talk about the numbers, but those are 
the numbers. Those are the facts. They don’t like to hear those 
facts. But things that they have created, in many ways, an 
inflationary cost to a lot of these projects, that if they were 
planned out and done in a more sustainable way, we might not 
be facing the kind of pressures we are, that would force a 
government to break a long-standing contract with their local 
municipalities. 
 
So this one is interesting. While it seems straightforward and 
technical in some ways, there’s a lot there that we will need to 
be checking, and I’m anxious to see what our critic will be 
saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have lots of bills before us tonight, and I know 
many people will want to get up and speak about some of these 
issues. So I will be looking forward to some of the answers, 
some . . . She did not mention whether she consulted on this. 
This is one that we think there should’ve been great 
consultation. And did the municipalities ask for this? 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment on 
Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment 
Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 81, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 
2017. Initially there’s a bunch of areas where I guess 
government is making some amendments into this Act. And 
there’s quite a bit of information in the actual that’s been 
provided, and we will be . . . And I know my colleagues have 
had a dialogue on this and talked quite a bit I think about, you 
know, some of the issues that many people . . . 
 
But before I get into talking about the bills, I want a little bit of 
a . . . You know, it’s concerning overall when we look at 
Saskatchewan, and it’s nothing to be proud of — our track 
record with impaired driving, the chances that people take in 
this province, and those families that have been impacted with 
the loss of life. And you know, you look at some of the 
numbers. You know, you’re hoping the awareness in 2015, then 
you have the awareness of 2016. Still the numbers are more 
impaired driving and more people taking the chances. And 
when we say that . . . And you know, I say that. 
 
And I know from our side of the House, you know, being a part 
of the traffic safety hearings that went around the province . . . 
And I’ve kind of talked about this a few times. And we went 
around hearing the issues and concerns that many people, you 
know, brought forward about the concerns and about tougher 
penalties. And I have to say it’s taken a while for the 
government to finally hear what the people are saying, that this 
needs to change. 
 
Saskatchewan has the worst, worst record in Canada, and that is 
nothing to be proud of. And for those that, you know, take the 
chances, that go out there and, you know . . . And I think about 
the families and anyone who’s been impacted by a loved one 
being hit by an impaired driver. You know, our hearts go out to 
them. And it’s happened too many times in this province, and 
there’s too many people willing to take that chance. And I’m 
going to get into a little bit about some of the changes that are 
going to be brought forward. And you know, I say to the 
government, on this side we’re saying, you need to be tougher. 
You need to be harder on impaired driving and holding those 
people accountable. 
 
And I think sometimes the idea that, you know, you can maybe 
take a few drinks and you can drive, and you take a chance. 
And I think people . . . And we have to educate people about 
that, that you are taking a chance because you just don’t know 
at what point you’re going to be over, in the warning range, you 

know, where you’re going to get pulled over and checked. I 
think a lot of people in this province and I think really the 
young people are educating themselves. And I watch that. 
 
And we look at the numbers of loss of life. It’s in the rural area. 
It’s in a lot of the First Nations communities. So we see those 
numbers. They’re high. And we know that it has to be 
addressed and we have to do something. And this is a start. 
 
You know, we implemented new, I guess, penalties for those 
that were in the .04 to under .08, in the warning range, where 
they were given . . . you know, they’re pulled over, and they’ve 
been having a few drinks, and they blew over. There were some 
consequences, but we said that it needed to be harsher. And I’ll 
get into a little bit about that. And I mean people do it. They 
jump in their vehicles, and they go have a few drinks, I guess, 
and they decide to drive. 
 
I’m hoping with education . . . And I know SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] has done that, you know. They’re 
trying to educate the public. They’re trying to make sure people 
are aware. And I think some of the changes in here will hold 
people accountable and I think that’s important that people . . . 
It doesn’t matter who you are. It does not matter who you are, 
you should be held accountable. If you’re going to get in a 
vehicle while you’re impaired or while you’ve been drinking, 
you have to understand that you should face those consequences 
and should face the consequences. And no one should get away 
with that. 
 
But having said that, there are those individuals that, for 
whatever reason, will maybe take the chance or whatever, get 
pulled over. And I see some of the amendments in here. When 
we think about children. If you’re in a vehicle and you’re 
operating a motor vehicle and you’ve had a few drinks or I 
guess you’re impaired, they’re making the penalties stiffer. And 
I think those penalties should be stiffer. You know, you have 
children in a vehicle with you and you’re operating a motor 
vehicle while you’ve had drinks or you’re impaired, and I think 
people need to be held accountable. So now when we see that, 
if you’re under, you know, 16 and you have children in your 
vehicle that are under the age of 16, you’re going to have stiffer 
penalties. 
 
And they’re looking at some of the changes in here. That not 
only are they saying you’re going to have stiffer penalties but, 
each time, should you reoffend, and I know . . . should you 
reoffend and you decide . . . You’ve been found and you’re 
found guilty of it and you get the consequences. But should you 
do it again? And I think they’re going to make it harsher every 
time to try to send the message. And again on this side of the 
House, I think it’s important that that message be and the 
penalties be strict and the penalties to save peoples’ lives in our 
province and damage and injury and so on needs to happen, and 
our children and the public needs to be protected. So these 
amendments are going to give some more protection. 
 
Other provinces have done already, you know, many different 
things to try to curb this and it’s shown in some of the areas. 
And you know, me and my colleague, when we’re on there, 
member from Riversdale, you know, we shared that and we 
had, you know, hearings and we had people give testimonies 
about that, where you had some provinces that did some harsher 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

penalties and did the warning range. It helped and it made a 
difference and it saved lives. And that’s what this is about. 
 
So anytime, Mr. Speaker, you have an opportunity to take 
penalties and make them harsher for someone choosing to do 
this, I think it’s going in the right direction. I think it’s 
education, and we talk about. But unfortunately, sometimes 
even the education doesn’t get through to people. People still 
take the chances. But when they are going to take that chance, 
then I think here is, when they have children, there’s an 
opportunity. 
 
It also talks in here the length of, you know, seizing someone’s 
vehicle and in that case, repeat offenders. Like I said, the 
penalties will be harsher and each time it goes up. 
 
[20:15] 
 
It’s also another change that they’re proposing in here. Right 
now, currently, they can look at your record in the past five 
years. They can look to see, you know, did you have any 
impaireds, any warning ranges, and anything like that. Well this 
now gives law enforcement the opportunity to go back 10 years 
to have a look to see if there is a pattern, and maybe they’ll find 
a pattern in those 10 years and the penalties will be harsher. 
And again this is something that I know later on when we get 
into committee we’re going to have lots of questions, but for 
now at least these are some changes we can talk about right 
now. And I think, you know, it’s good as you’re enforcing 
stiffer penalties for those that make that decision. 
 
There is also in here . . . part of it is, my understanding, it’s not 
just the .08 in the Criminal Code that you’d be charged with. 
There is other areas. And I think in here, my understanding is, 
should you be under the influence of narcotics or other 
substances, you as well . . . There is giving provisions for the 
Criminal Code and you refuse to be tested, or my 
understanding, you don’t want to be, you know, you don’t want 
to take the test that an officer is asking you to comply with and 
you refuse to, you can be charged. But I know we’re going to 
have to go through in committee and work through that, and 
that’s fine. We can do that. 
 
Also another area in here, we talk about safety. We know that 
we have emergency vehicles. There has been, you know, 
whether it’s those first responders, tow trucks, different ones 
that go out there, our Highways workers. And I think about 
them when they’re on the side of the road. We’re changing it 
now. People might fly by them because they’re pulled up on the 
side of the road. Now you will be required, and that’s my 
understanding, and I know in committee we’ll ask this, but my 
understanding of the way the Act is coming out is you will now 
be required to slow to 60 kilometres when you’re passing even 
a Highways vehicle with their lights on on the side of the road 
or emergency vehicle or tow trucks, different ones that have 
certain lighting that indicate that they’re an emergency vehicle 
or first responder. You are required, and there is the change in 
there that you will, even though they’re on the side of the road, 
you have to slow down to 60 kilometres. 
 
So there are some changes in here. Again there is lots of 
changes and I know we’re going to talk about that. But that’s 
just some of the areas where . . . just quickly to go over some of 

the challenges and some of the changes that are being proposed. 
And I know we’ll have more of that. 
 
But having said that, there’s some other areas I just want to talk 
about in light of, Mr. Speaker, the government, you know, 
selling off STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] and 
that was . . . People are still mad. You go to rural 
Saskatchewan, the North — many people. 
 
You know, it’s interesting. They’re changing some of the, I 
guess the certification, operating authority certification. STC, 
those that transport passengers in the province, on our highways 
throughout the province, they used to have to have a certain 
certification to make sure . . . And there was a list you had to 
follow. You had to go through and follow and make sure that 
for safety . . . And that’s what we want. This is about the public 
safety. 
 
But you know what’s interesting? We were looking at some 
numbers. And this is a good time to talk about STC and here 
STC was one of those that provided a great service but their 
safety record was, you know, bar — from my understanding — 
none. There was no other. Nobody else had the safety record the 
way their . . . Their drivers were very professional and they did 
what they needed to do to make sure the public was safe. 
 
But you know what’s interesting? You have a government who 
talks about, Mr. Speaker, about oh, well it wasn’t used as much 
as this and that. Do you realize that 90 per cent, 90 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people had access to STC? I know they talk 
about the communities, oh, no. But if you look at our 
population, 90 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population had 
access to STC, had access — 90 per cent of our population. 
 
So when they say oh, there were small towns here and this is 
why we’re not covering, that is actually their way of doing it. 
But when you look at the numbers, it’s shocking that 90 per 
cent of Saskatchewan residents had access to STC. It might 
even be 91 but I’m going to say 90 just to try to, you know, to 
be fair; 90 per cent had access to STC. And here’s the 
government who’s doing away with it. And it was a safety 
thing, and I talked about the safety thing. 
 
So now the government has decided that they’re going to 
repeal. They’re going to repeal the certification so that it makes 
anybody that’s taking our passengers, whether it’s our kids, 
whether it’s our seniors, those on medical that are going to get 
on passenger vehicles . . . Because there is no more STC 
because the Sask Party government shut it down and sold it off. 
But now we’re going to ask residents to get into a vehicle that 
now the checklist doesn’t need to be . . . There’s no requirement 
for those businesses or those individuals operating passenger 
vehicles throughout the province, there’s no requirements for 
them to meet certain things, whether it’s safety. There’s certain 
criteria that they had to meet and SGI, you know, whether at 
SGI or Highway Traffic Board would enforce that or see that, 
you know, certain companies that, you know, provided that 
would do that. And unfortunately they’re moving away from 
that and they’re eliminating that. 
 
And I don’t know how it’s going to work, but I know we’re 
going to have tons of questions and that needs to be because the 
public wants to know and the public has a right to know. The 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

public will hold the government to account. 
 
And I’ve heard that many times just because of STC, that they 
did away with STC . . . And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s about 
safety. And they talked about the dollars. And you know, they 
talked about, oh, we’ve got 100 million that in five years we’d 
have . . . That wasn’t so. I believe, you know, we were looking 
at 10 and then we were moving to 11 million. So I mean they 
want to play with the numbers. Oh, it was 100 million over five 
years. Now all of a sudden it was amazing how it moved up. 
 
Well there was different ways they could have protected that so 
that we did have smaller vehicles, which they did have. They 
bought 22-passenger Mercedes vans or buses that were logoed, 
sitting there, never used it. But that’s amazing. 
 
So I know I’ve gone a little bit away from the initial bill, but I 
think when you talk about the certification of a passenger and 
the buses that STC had to go through and that other, you know, 
those that provide public transportation, there’s certain criteria 
they have to follow to make sure the public is safe. And here 
the government’s saying, no, we don’t need that anymore. It’s 
off. We don’t need it, so we’re not going to have it. 
 
So again I talked about this. And I say we will have many 
questions. I know my colleague, the critic for SGI, will also 
have many questions and will, you know, get a chance to 
question the minister and his staff and his officials. And we can 
get some details into exactly what’s going on. 
 
So having said that, this just was an opportunity, and I’m glad I 
had an opportunity to join in on the bill and just to go over a 
little bit of some of the information that’s been provided and 
that we could share. And I know we’re going to have more to 
say, a lot more to say, and we’re going to have a lot more 
questions when it goes to committee. And I think when you’re 
talking about public safety, we have to hold the government to 
account. 
 
And the people back, you know, in the constituencies that we 
represent on this side of the House are going to hold that 
government. And I know even some of those members on that 
side of the House have constituents that are not happy with the 
handling of STC and how they’ve tried to spin it — you know, 
oh, it’s not a public service. Yes, it was. We provided a public 
service to Saskatchewan, and you should have asked them 
before you sold it off. You shouldn’t have done that. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn on 
Bill 81 at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 81. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Pleased to be able to enter into the adjourned debates here 
tonight in the legislature, and in particular tonight I’ll be 
addressing the changes to The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
The changes seem quite simple on first blush but as I started 
looking closer into this, Mr. Speaker, while preparing for the 
debate, I’ve become increasingly and increasingly concerned 
about the changes that are being proposed here. The minister 
gave some very brief comments with some words that seemed 
quite reassuring if you look at them at first blush. It seemed, 
you know . . . He uses words like “efficiencies” and “enhancing 
safety” and “increasing opportunities” and things like that. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what I see here essentially is a privatization bill. 
 
This bill is proposing to change the way natural gas is being 
transported in this province. It’s always been the purview of 
TransGas or SaskEnergy and all of a sudden we have some 
changes in here that will I think affect very much the bottom 
line of that Crown and of course then will impact on the 
dividends that they receive from, that the people of the province 
receive from this Crown. 
 
Now when I look at SaskEnergy’s dividends over the last 10 
years, we have received over $400 million in dividends from 
SaskEnergy since 2006, and 2016 was one of the best years 
ever for SaskEnergy, or the best years ever for dividends to the 
people of Saskatchewan. They provided $64.7 million in 
dividends in the year-end 2016. Now that’s a lot of cash coming 
into the GRF, Mr. Speaker, $64.7 million in one year and, as I 
indicated, $400 million over 10 years from that one Crown, 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Now what the minister indicated in his opening comments, he 
says these updates, the amendments that are in the bill, will 
allow the corporation to better serve the private sector business 
opportunities. So when a minister says we’re going to change a 
Crown corporation to better serve private sector business 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker, that sounds like privatization to me. 
It sounds like the privatization of significant aspects of what 
this Crown corporation is currently doing and of course 
providing these sort of dividends to the people of 
Saskatchewan, like I said, in the tune of over $400 million in 10 
years. 
 
So you have to really question what’s going on here. When we 
see the minister . . . And I think once we get into committee 
we’re going to have the opportunity to really unpack this coded 
language in the minister’s comments to understand exactly what 
the net impact of these changes will be on SaskEnergy’s bottom 
line, which of course is the bottom line of us as citizens of the 
province. This is our Crown. So I find the language he’s using 
quite glib and perhaps understated to the point where you might 
not really realize that this could be an out-and-out privatization 
of key services of SaskEnergy. 
 
So you have to ask yourself, okay, well if they’re privatizing 
parts, significant parts of the SaskEnergy service, what exactly 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

are those changes? He goes on to say, “The major focus of the 
proposed amendments is on sections 23 and 60, the exclusive 
rights for distribution and transportation of natural gas.” Mr. 
Speaker, make no mistake: SaskEnergy currently holds the 
exclusive rights for the transportation and distribution of natural 
gas. That’s how it works. When we talk about transmission, we 
know it’s SaskEnergy providing that, and of course distribution 
is through TransGas. There was an attempt to privatize that 
back in the ’80s I believe when the Conservative government 
was in power. They tried to actually privatize out and out 
TransGas, and if you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that was quite the 
sensational time because the entire NDP [New Democratic 
Party] caucus basically walked out and let the bells ring for 
several days, if I have my facts right. And I may be colouring it 
a little bit, but something along those lines. But basically the 
furor that came out of the public when the concept of actually 
getting rid of this Crown was contemplated caused the 
government to back down. And in fact there was soon a change 
in government at that time. 
 
So here we see maybe perhaps an attempt to go through the 
back door what the previous Conservative government couldn’t 
do in the front door, and that’s to significantly privatize certain 
aspects of the work of this Crown, of SaskEnergy, and perhaps 
significantly cut into their profits and of course the subsequent 
dividends that we receive through the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
So okay, let’s take a look at these sections then. Section 23 of 
the current Act, The SaskEnergy Act, talks about exclusivity. 
This is a key function of this Crown. Section 23, the headline 
says, “Exclusive right to distribute gas.” And there’s a big 
description of what the distribution of gas is, what’s a metering 
point, an oilfield facility system, and a supply system. 
 
[20:30] 
 
And section 23(2) says, “The corporation has the exclusive 
right to distribute gas in and through any area in 
Saskatchewan.” So it’s pretty clear that that is something that is 
carved out for this Crown corporation, is an exclusive right to 
distribute gas. So what’s happening with this bill, Mr. Speaker? 
How is that being amended? 
 
If you look at clause 5 of Bill No. 82, you will see that whole 
section’s being repealed and now instead of having that 
exclusivity determined in the Act, we see it being moved to the 
regulation authority. 
 
So section 23(1) is now going to read, in this section and in 
section 24: 
 

(a) ‘distribution of gas’ means distribution of gas as 
defined in the regulations; 
 
(b) ‘exclusive right to distribute’ means the exclusive 
right to distribute as set out in the regulations; 
 
(c) ‘metering point’ [now] means a metering point as 
defined in the regulations; 
 
(d) ‘oilfield facility system’ means an oilfield facility 
system as defined in the regulations; [and] 

(e) ‘supply system’ now means a supply system as 
defined in the regulations. 

 
So they are taking the clear legislative definition that currently 
exists in this bill and moving it into the regulatory authority 
which, as you know, Mr. Speaker, and you’ve heard me talk 
about this before, that means Executive Council can change the 
rules now without ever coming to this House, without any 
public scrutiny whatsoever. 
 
And I think that’s something that is . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, we see it, and my colleague indicated, it’s a theme. It is 
a theme. We see this on a regular basis. And this is moving to 
the regulations the essence of the exclusive right of SaskEnergy 
to distribute gas. 
 
I think this raises all kinds of alarm bells and is certainly being 
done quietly in this bill. And I think, as we move along and 
have an opportunity to consult with different people, members 
of the public, to get a clear understanding of the impact of 
changing the exclusive rights of distribution, which is a core 
tenet of this Crown corporation, what is that impact going to be 
on the profitability of this Crown? 
 
And certainly we know what happens if the bottom line, which 
is kind of all the Sask Party looks at . . . When we look at STC 
for example, if they don’t like the bottom line, then they just 
privatize the corporation through any means possible. So I think 
this is the beginning of a fairly slippery slope. I think this is the 
beginning of some very significant changes to the core essence 
of what SaskEnergy is about. 
 
Now the minister indicated that we see these amendments in 
section 23, but we also see changes to section 60, which is 
another section relating to exclusivity. So I’m just going to 
remind the people looking at this of what section 60 talks about. 
Again the marginal note for section 60 is called the “Exclusive 
right to transport gas.” This was placed in the legislation. This 
is part III of the Act. It talks about transportation of gas. And 
this is, section 60 is about the exclusive right to transport gas. 
 
There’s a bunch of definitions in section 60 again. But section 
60(2) says: 
 

(2) TransGas has the exclusive right to transport gas in and 
through any area in Saskatchewan. 
 
(3) TransGas’ exclusive right to transport gas . . . operates 
notwithstanding any other Act or any consent, permit, 
right, special franchise or privilege in the nature of a 
franchise granted before or after the coming into force of 
this section. 

 
And it goes on to talk about: 
 

(4) TransGas’ exclusive right to transport gas [this is 
subsection (4)] . . . does not apply to the transportation 
carbon dioxide or of gas derived from power generations. 

 
There is some exceptions. There is another exception, 
subsection (5), on: 
 

(5) . . . transportation of gas from a gas gathering and 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

processing system to an oilfield production facility . . . 
where the gas gathering and processing system and oilfield 
production facility are owned by the same person. 

 
So those are exceptions to TransGas’s ability. When you have 
an oil company processing in one place and producing in 
another spot, then it makes sense that they can actually transport 
their own gas to their own systems. 
 
So that is the essence of this part of this section, part of the Act, 
part III. And I think it’s also the essence of the nature of the 
Crown and one of the reasons why our Crowns are successful, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s take a look at what’s happening now to section 60(1). 
This is section 10 of the new bill. And so in section 60(1) right 
now we have those definitions that I was talking about. We 
have very clear definitions of what a gas gathering and 
processing system is, a TransGas transmission pipeline, 
transportation of gas — those are the three definitions. 
 
Now what the new section in section 10 is doing in this 
amending Act is taking out that definition, much as we saw in 
section 23. And they’re saying now the definitions of these very 
important terms, for example: 
 

‘enhanced oil recovery operation’ means an enhanced oil 
recovery operation as defined in the regulations. 

 
The exclusive right to transport, again a key tenet of what this 
bill is about, here’s the new definition: 
 

‘exclusive right to transport’ means the exclusive right to 
transport as set out in the regulations. 

 
So once again we have Executive Council being able to change, 
through an executive order, what exclusivity means without 
ever coming before this legislature, Mr. Speaker. It’s never 
going to come on the floor of this House and be debated. That 
exclusivity definition is now entirely within the control of the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, which is basically cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that’s concerning. 
 
I think that’s something that the public is going to want to have 
a thought or two about and have an opportunity to comment 
because right now if this goes through, this is the public’s last 
chance to comment on what an exclusive right to distribute gas 
means in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, for me, that is very 
concerning. 
 
So certainly we’re going to be able to take this out for 
consultation with the public. I’m not sure that anybody in the 
public actually asked for this bill. I don’t think anybody in the 
public was consulted about this bill. And I don’t think that 
anybody in the public is even aware that these significant 
changes are being proposed. Now there may be, and certainly 
we’re going to want to consult with those folks who are more 
up to speed on these kinds of changes to The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
There are some other changes that the minister refers to. Some 
of them are considered what he says, housekeeping matters, and 
I would agree with that. Funny that they’re preventing 
SaskEnergy’s insurance premiums from rapidly increasing at 

the same time that they’re slapping on PST to every other 
insurance premium in the province. But those inconsistencies 
are, I guess, merely observations and leaves you to wonder 
where the priorities are for sure. 
 
Sections 54 and 64 again are going to allow the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to make regulations respecting the 
exclusive business rights definition. So I just want to take a 
quick look at that, Mr. Speaker. The exclusive business rights 
definition, section 54 currently reads . . . And I’ll just pull that 
up. 
 
Oh, this is under the offences and penalties clause. So what 
they’re doing there is they are amending it; 54(1)(d) is amended 
just by adding “fail to comply with . . . provisions of this Act” 
and the regulations because so much of this Act is now being 
booted over to the regulatory sphere that those kinds of changes 
are actually required. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more to say at this point in 
time. I think there’s a number of alarm bells that go off for me 
when you see the minister saying: 
 

These amendments will allow SaskEnergy to provide 
efficiencies and enhance safety to the corporation and its 
customers by allowing flexibility to determine the end 
point of the gas distribution system . . . [and] by allowing 
for third party trucking to qualified companies . . . and 
move the exclusive business rights definition from the Act 
into . . . [the regulations], allowing the corporation to make 
necessary updates . . . 

 
So this is coded language, Mr. Speaker, and I think we have to 
be really careful and work hard to unpack exactly what this 
means. And I believe, as we go forward in the adjourned 
debates and as we have an opportunity to go out into the 
countryside and talk to the folks and talk to people who 
understand this clearly and can explain the implications, then 
we’ll be better set, Mr. Speaker, to go into committee and raise 
some of these questions and determine what the exact impact 
will be on the bottom line of SaskEnergy, which of course 
affects the bottom line of the dividends that this proud and 
strong Crown corporation provides to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of alarm bells that go off 
here. There’s a lot of concern. There are, I think, some very 
significant changes being made to the exclusivity of 
SaskEnergy and TransGas. And as a result, the changes that are 
being proposed will allow the executive arm of government, the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council and cabinet, to make those 
changes without ever, ever consulting with the people of 
Saskatchewan, I think without ever exposing it to debate on this 
floor. I think those are things that are going to be quite alarming 
and would hope that the government would reconsider this. 
 
But at any rate, Mr. Speaker, I know others of my colleagues 
are going to want to have an opportunity to speak to this as 
well. So at this point in time I’d like to move that we adjourn 
the debate on Bill No. 82, An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 82. Is it the pleasure of the 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
once again to wade into debate tonight, this time on Bill No. 83, 
An Act to amend The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2010. 
 
This bill, for all intents and purposes, is our resource 
management legislation. It was originally passed in 2010, so not 
very old, Mr. Speaker, only seven years old. And it’s around . . . 
The goal I guess of the bill would be to assure that our 
environmental resources are sustainably managed and that our 
environment is protected. 
 
Some of the changes in this from the original bill, the first 
change is expanding the definition of “person” from The 
Interpretations Act, 1995. It expands the definition to include 
unincorporated associations, partnerships, or other 
organizations, providing the legislative authority to issue 
permissions to these types of facilities to ensure regulatory 
fairness and compliance through expanding the definition of 
“person.” 
 
The next, another piece here, Mr. Speaker, is on the minister for 
all intents and purposes here giving himself more power. There 
will be an amendment, there’s an amendment that will allow the 
minister to appoint new members to the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Code advisory committee in a quicker fashion. 
The advisory committee members, the argument is that they’re 
changing frequently due to changes within organizations and 
associations that sit on the committee.  
 
Members currently are appointed by orders in council. The 
ministry is arguing, the minister’s arguing that he can’t appoint 
new or replace members in a timely fashion to keep up with the 
committee as it meets every second month. And the argument is 
that by not appointing members in time for the meetings, the 
members are not entitled to vote or remuneration or 
reimbursement of expenses. So they’re suggesting to replace 
section 4 of this Act. Instead of an order in council, it will be at 
the minister’s discretion. 
 
I understand here that the minister can perhaps move more 
quickly than an order in council, which can take some time. 
This is a committee that has met six times since 2015. And I 
understand that it’s probably simpler for the minister to do this, 
but again this is a government who it’s become very apparent 
that accountability and transparency is a bit of an issue. So 
putting more hands, putting more power in the hands of the 

minister, I think having more checks and balances is not a bad 
thing. I understand the rationale but as again, this committee 
has only met, has met six times since 2015 — so in the last two 
years — I’m not sure that this is a necessary move.  
 
And I understand why they’re wanting to do this, but there’s 
always concern when you’re taking power — whether it’s 
taking power out of legislation and putting it into regulations 
where you have less oversight, or taking power from a larger 
group from pursuing an order in council to the minister’s hands 
directly, Mr. Speaker — all those kinds of things are a concern. 
So that’s something that’s taking place in this bill. 
 
[20:45] 
 
There’s one of the other amendments. Right now the bill refers 
to — this has been apparently at the request of the Water 
Security Agency — right now the bill . . . I’ll just take you back 
to section 5. It’s actually for all intents and purposes just adding 
the words “human health.” So the environment is mentioned, 
but they’re adding a reference to human health for clarity to 
ensure harm to human health is captured, as water supplied by a 
waterworks is directly tied to human health issues. 
 
And the ministry argues, or . . . This is consistent with the 
wording that was in The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act in 2002. There’s a new provision being added, 
an amendment including enforcement provisions to deal with 
people returning beverage containers where the deposit hasn’t 
been paid here in Saskatchewan, so people who have gotten 
beverage containers from out of province and try to return them 
here. Apparently there was under The Litter Control Act, which 
was repealed when The Environment Management and 
Protection Act, 2010 came into place, there had been a 
provision to deal with that. But it was noted that at the time a 
few enforcement sections previously contained in The Litter 
Control Act were not transferred. 
 
The government had assessed that this particular Act should 
provide adequate authority to charge any individuals and 
organizations purposefully redeeming out-of-province beverage 
containers at Sarcan depots. And they’ve discovered now, after 
operating under this particular model since 2015 and having 
experienced some enforcement challenges in this area, there’s a 
need to add a new enforcement section in The Environment 
Management and Protection Act. So they will be adding 
something very similar to what was in The Litter Control Act. 
And it will say, adding, “No person shall claim or attempt to 
claim a refund if the refundable deposit and environmental 
handling charge mentioned in section 40 have not been paid.” 
 
So they’re also adding a provision adding new authority to 
provide the minister, under approval from the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council authority, to operate a product stewardship 
program where needed, Mr. Speaker. This is a fairly . . . There’s 
a number of things taking place in this bill. The argument here 
is that, in these situations, the . . . Sorry, just lost my place here. 
So as I said, the amendment is adding new authority to provide 
the Minister, under approval from an order in council, authority 
to operate a product stewardship program. 
 
I’m just going to go back to section 7. I always have too many 
papers here on my desk, Mr. Speaker. So section 7, I’m just 



3026 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

looking at the old bill and the new bill here. So section 7 here is 
being added. Interim product stewardship program is outlining 
the prescribed product which will be a product prescribed for 
the purposes of clause 46, product stewardship program. And: 
 

Subject to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the 
minister may operate an interim product stewardship 
program on behalf of any person who manufactures, 
imports or sells a prescribed product if: 
 
no person holds an approval to operate a product 
stewardship program for that prescribed product; and 
 
the minister is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do 
so. 

 
So that’s one of the amendments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just looking at my pages, page 4 here. They’re also making 
a change here, amending, rewording a section from a shall not 
prohibition from a shall permission in order to make issuing 
charges more clear. So the argument here, it will now read: “No 
person shall discard or abandon or cause to be discarded or 
abandoned or allow to be discarded or abandoned any waste 
other than . . .” And then there’s a list of items. So the Minister 
argues that that clarifies things a little bit more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another amendment here. These double-sided pages . . . sorry, 
Mr. Speaker. Another amendment here: There will be 
increasing inspection powers to ensure environment officers 
have appropriate powers to conduct inspections as well as 
audits. Another provision is being added to include new 
provisions to provide environment officers authority to request 
information from a person in order to determine compliance 
with an Act and associated regulations. 
 
One of the amendments that caught my eye here, Mr. Speaker, 
is providing the “. . . ability for persons to request to keep 
information confidential beyond the five year time period 
currently provided. The ability for the minister to prescribe 
other criteria that may need to be kept confidential will . . . be 
included.” 
 
So looking back to the original . . . So with respect to 
environmental management and protection with public 
information, the existing bill states that after five years that 
information can become public. But they’re adding within the 
bill an appeal process for when the minister denies a request to 
keep information confidential. The appeal process will now be 
part of the bill rather than at the minister’s discretion. 
 
And the amendments for the persons to request to keep 
information around tests: “. . . information, data, test results, 
reports, returns and records and responses to a direction of the 
minister submitted to the minister pursuant to this Act, the 
regulations, the code or an accepted environmental protection 
plan are deemed to be public information.” So there’s an 
opportunity now after five years for these results to be kept 
confidential again. So I’m just curious who asked for this and 
where this is coming from. I think those will be questions that 
happen in committee. 
 
So there are a number of things taking place in this bill, again 

just flagging . . . putting a little bit more power into the hands of 
the minister. But also I think one thing that’s always important 
to remember when looking at legislation is who requested 
changes, why are the requests being made, what are unintended 
consequences. So we can go back to the original bill in 2010 
where The Litter Control Act was repealed and then there were 
issues around out-of-province deposits. So it’s good to go back 
and recognize that you’ve made a mistake and fix that, but it’s 
important to be diligent in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I do know I have colleagues, the critic, and many others who 
will be wading into the discussion on this particular bill, so with 
that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 83. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 72 — The 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 summary. 
According to my understanding of it, looking at the initial bill 
here, it’s requesting some changes. And I guess right now and 
sometimes when you’re dealing with a situation, I guess 
whether maybe it’s through the courts, when . . . And I don’t 
know if it would be with enforcement, if it would be with the 
courts, but usually when you go through a process, you 
normally have to, I guess, prove if you’re innocent, guilty, and 
that is sometimes a challenge people to go through. 
 
And what we see right now sometimes, unfortunately there are 
situations where to protect people’s privacy and for whatever 
reasons, people have, you know, certain . . . I guess you’re in a 
. . . And where I’m getting this from and probably the best to 
understand is if a person’s in a relationship, I guess, and for 
whatever reason you’re no longer in a relationship or if . . . And 
I don’t know if it’s like a dating, a husband and wife, if it’s just 
. . . It can be any type of picture that would be inappropriate. 
And I guess we’ll be asking some questions on this bill to find 
out. And I know my colleagues and myself will have. 
 
And I don’t know . . . We were trying to look at some of the 
changes that they’re proposing, and when you get the initial 
information, you’re wondering exactly, like, for whatever 
reason. And I don’t know if the Justice, the ministry went 
through and had consulted with individuals or it was complaints 
brought forward to government or to the Justice ministry with 
issues and if this is the situation has, you know, come forward 
and affected different individuals for whatever reason as I said. 
 
But in this one here, it refers to revenge, you know, revenge 
porn in this bill and that’s kind of the wording of it. And so I’m 



November 21, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3027 

assuming somebody just goes out there and I guess they’re not 
in a relationship or they have pictures or whatever and they 
release that to, you know, I guess social media publicly 
somehow. They make, you know, copies of pictures or 
whatever and they release that without the person’s knowledge 
and without the permission. 
 
So when I see the obligation isn’t going to be on the person 
who, from my understanding . . . And I will get to the person 
launching the complaint saying, you know, somebody has taken 
pictures that were my personal pictures and I didn’t want, didn’t 
give permission to anyone to share them with anybody. Nobody 
had permission to do that. It’s not going to be to that person 
who would be putting in a complaint to say yes, I have to prove 
that I didn’t. It’s going to be for the person that posts those 
pictures. And the way technology is today and posts those 
online or Facebook or wherever it is, they will be held and they 
will have to prove that they had, from my understanding, 
permission of the individuals or individual to share those 
photos. 
 
So when we’re looking at this bill . . . And I know there’s going 
to be a lot of questions and I guess from our colleagues, and the 
Minister of Justice, you know, will have the opportunity to 
answer some questions and see where it’s coming from. And I 
don’t know if there is a large number, that . . . [inaudible] . . . or 
if it’s something that just in line with the technology and the 
way things are changing, you know, if the Justice department 
decided they needed to move on this. 
 
So with that I know we’ll have more questions and my 
colleagues will have more questions on this bill. So I’m 
prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 72. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 72. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 73 — The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it took me a 
while to figure out what was going on in this bill, and I think for 
anyone who has looked at The Income Tax Act and had their 
eyes glaze over, just one look at The Insurance Act and I think 
you’ll have the same effect. This is a highly dense, complicated 
bill. Or not so much a complicated bill, but it’s a complicated 
area. 
 
And The Saskatchewan Insurance Act was first introduced, well 
it was under the revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, so it’s been 
around forever and it has been amended in many years. It was 
amended in ’79-80, ’80-81; it was amended ’97-98; it was 

amended 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004; amended in 2012; and it was 
amended in 2015. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government saw it fit to introduce a new 
insurance Act in 2015. It was introduced . . . I just had the bills 
here a while ago. I’ll see if I can find it. The Insurance Act is 
supposed to replace The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, and it 
was introduced . . . I’m just going to find the page to make sure 
we understand what’s going on here. It’s Bill 177, I believe, and 
I had it here before. It was introduced in 2015 . . . and it’s not 
jumping out for me. I’m sorry. I just had this and I closed my 
computer. 
 
[21:00] 
 
At any rate, The Insurance Act was introduced. Brand new 
insurance Act, another thick 200-page-long Act. The index 
alone is 10 pages long. The definition section is about 10 pages 
long, so that gives you a sense of the type of bill that was 
introduced in 2015. So you’d think that if the government was 
going to introduce something that complex, that they would 
have made sure it was well done. Well, Mr. Speaker, by the 
time that bill was introduced and debated and brought to 
committee, they introduced a 17-page amendment to that bill 
full of things that needed to be fixed a few short months later.  
 
Now when you look at the status of the insurance bill that was 
introduced in 2015 and got all the way through third reading, it 
hasn’t been proclaimed yet. So it’s still not in effect two years 
later, almost three years later. And so we have this weird 
situation. In the meantime, the medical assistance in dying 
provisions were proclaimed by the Supreme Court of Canada. 
And so those provisions now have to be brought in to insurance. 
And I’ll explain that in a second. 
 
But the weird part about this bill, and I think the name of it is 
actually somewhat misleading although . . . well, the full name 
of it is not misleading. The full name of this bill is An Act to 
amend The Insurance Act and to make related amendments to 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, just to be sure that we know 
that we’re talking about two bills and not one. I think it’s been 
shortened down to The Insurance Amendment Act for 
simplicity’s sake on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, but really it 
is amending those two bills. 
 
And why is that? Because one isn’t enforced yet. So we still 
have the old Saskatchewan insurance Act that we have to 
amend, plus we have to amend parts of The Insurance Act that 
is not yet proclaimed in order to make sure that those clauses 
will be there when the bill is actually proclaimed. 
 
So if you look at the minister’s comments in terms of what 
they’re trying to do here, we have him talking about “Ongoing 
consultations with industry stakeholders have identified some 
minor technical wording issues and concerns with this Act.” So 
not only did the 15- or 17-page amendment brought forward in 
committee in May of 2015 identify that, identified 17 pages of 
concerns, we still are dealing with fixing the 2015 bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it’s quite alarming when you think about it. And this is a 
pattern I have noted with this government over and over again, 
is they are in such a hurry to get the bill introduced that there 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2017 

are often mistakes or oversights or failure to consult that leads 
to necessary amendments — sometimes as soon as one year 
later, sometimes two years later, sometimes three years later. 
But it seems like they’re always going back to the drawing 
board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we had the Minister of Justice introduce this on November 
7th and talking about industry stakeholders and ongoing 
consultations. You have to ask yourself why there are still 
ongoing consultations when this bill was introduced in 2014 I 
guess and received third reading in 2015 after significant 
amendments at the time. 
 
Now as the minister rightly pointed out, the Carter decision 
from the Supreme Court of Canada led to changes to the 
Criminal Code for medical assistance in dying. And so now 
what happens with insurance is that we need to make sure that 
there are provisions regarding suicide which would impact 
some insurance policies. And so if a person is choosing medical 
assistance in dying — which is really suicide; it’s medically 
assisted suicide, but it still is suicide — that kind of suicide is 
now being protected because it’s no longer a criminal offence 
under the Criminal Code. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, I had a brother who committed suicide 
almost 20 years ago now. And he had a life insurance policy, 
but he got it and waited two years I think. And that may have 
kept him alive for a couple of years actually because he didn’t 
take his life until after his life insurance policy would have 
kicked into effect. And so I kind of wonder about the 
criminalization of his decision, whereas someone who chooses 
to have somebody help them commit suicide is now not 
criminalized and therefore allowed to be covered under 
insurance policies. So it’s an interesting ethical debate, and 
certainly one that I think will continue to be challenged through 
the legal system. And we know that people who wish to take 
their own life but are provided medical assistance in doing so 
are now recognized as that not being a criminal activity, and 
therefore insurance policies will still apply. 
 
So the changes that had to be made, and rightfully so, would 
incorporate that definition and ensure that then the insurance 
policy that would cover the medical condition they had or any 
kind of terminal illness or whatever their illness was would 
continue to be recognized as the cause for the purposes of an 
insurance policy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that is something that needs to be done. 
The irony of what’s going on here is that these changes not only 
are being made to The Insurance Act, they’re also being made 
to The Saskatchewan Insurance Act which should have been 
repealed in 2015 but for the problems that exist and the ongoing 
consultations that this government is still going forward with. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think for the ongoing consultations we’re 
going to want to make sure that we have an opportunity to 
consult as well and to seek out opinions and concerns from 
insurance providers for sure, and people who will be affected by 
this significant Act itself. But also, why are there still gaps? 
Why are there still errors? Why are there still amendments and 
why is this government still consulting on a bill that was tabled 
here almost three years ago, or two and a half years ago? 
 
Just to give the Assembly a bit of the flavour of the change of 

the Act, medical assistance in dying is being . . . oh yes, here it 
is. Section 17 of this Act tells us that we have to amend The 
Insurance Act, which is still a bill. It’s not proclaimed. We have 
to amend section 8-118 to do that, and then we’re also 
amending The Saskatchewan Insurance Act itself, which would 
be section 122. 
 
And basically the definition of medical assistance in dying — 
these are identical clauses — medical assistance in dying, it 
says that this section “. . . does not apply to an insured who 
receives medical assistance in dying” and the “. . . insurance 
money will be paid if a person whose life is insured receives 
medical assistance in dying, the undertaking is lawful and 
enforceable.” And it says, “. . . if an insured receives medical 
assistance in dying, that insured is deemed to have died as a 
result of the illness, disease or disability for which he or she 
was determined to be entitled to receive that assistance . . .” 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, people who choose to seek medical 
assistance in dying are now covered and not those who just 
choose to take their own life with their own hands or in their 
own way. I think that may be a little gap that seems a bit unfair. 
So that may be something that will end up in the Supreme Court 
in years to come. But as far as the, I think the proposal . . . and 
it’s obviously important that insurance policies reflect the law 
of Canada and that medical assistance in dying should not be a 
negative factor when considering insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know others of my colleagues will want to have 
an opportunity to speak to this bill, but at this point in time I 
would like to . . . I don’t have any further comments so I’d like 
to move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, An Act to amend 
The Insurance Act and to make related amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 73. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:09.] 
 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 84 — The Income Tax (Business Income) Amendment Act, 2017  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3012 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3013 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3015 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3016 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3020 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3022 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3025 
 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3026 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3027 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


