






















































Hansard: October 26, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2595 
 October 26, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues. It is an honour to be able to introduce a very, very 
special friend of the province of Saskatchewan today who has 
joined us in your gallery. He’s also in the company of some 
Saskatchewan leaders that will be no stranger to members of 
this House. But it’s a pleasure for me to introduce Mr. Huseyin 
Arslan who’s the executive chairman of AGT Food and 
Ingredients. He is joined today, Mr. Speaker, by Murad 
Al-Katib, the president and chief executive officer of AGT, also 
again well known to members of this House, as well as Murad’s 
brother, Omer. 
 
I had the chance to enjoy Omer’s company last night at the 
dinner where we hosted the heads of missions. He is an 
honorary consul for Turkey, as well as very much involved in 
AGT. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell members of the House who 
may not know this is that he was a pretty accomplished bass 
player in the rock band May Run, which some of us are old 
enough to remember. It was good to see a picture of the band he 
had with him on his phone. I had a hard time picking him out 
though, Mr. Speaker. Things have changed since then. 
 
Later today there will be a very special ceremony at 
Government House. We will honour Huseyin with an award 
called the Saskatchewan Distinguished Service Award. This is a 
recognition, an award that recognizes non-residents of 
Saskatchewan who have made a powerful and outstanding 
contribution to our province. And his recognition, Huseyin’s 
recognition, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest is long overdue. He 
has made a major impact in Saskatchewan. He is based in 
Turkey and has been involved in the global pulse and food 
business for the last three decades. 
 
It was back in the late 1990s when Huseyin met a young Murad 
Al-Katib, who was at that point working for the Saskatchewan 
Trade Export Partnership. The two men struck up a friendship 
which developed into a business partnership. And so he is one 
of the founding shareholders of SaskCan Pulse Trading; that 
was the forerunner to AGT Food and Ingredients. And members 
of the Assembly of course are familiar with AGT’s story. It’s 
grown into a $2 billion company. It has 2,000 employees 
worldwide, 250 employees right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, 40 processing facilities on five continents. 

Under Murad’s leadership, AGT has been at the centre of a 
massive expansion in the pulse industry in our province. The 
company is a major buyer, as we all know, of Saskatchewan 
lentils and peas and beans and chickpeas, shipping to 120 
countries, including Turkey where our exports, by the way, our 
exports to Turkey are up 2,600 per cent since 2007, during this 
decade of growth. By any measure, this is a world-class 
company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Murad was named World Entrepreneur of the Year just a few 
months ago, the latest in a number of very well-deserved 
accolades that we have marked in this Assembly together. But 
he’ll be the first to tell you that AGT would not have risen to 
the heights that it has without Huseyin Arslan. He has gone 
about his work, Huseyin has, without fanfare. He is humble. He 
is hard working, scrupulously honest in his endeavours. And 
today we are grateful to have the opportunity to honour him on 
behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan for his 
great contribution to us.  
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming Huseyin and our guests to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming Murad Al-Katib, Huseyin 
Arslan, and Omer Al-Katib, who I actually had the opportunity 
to meet at Government House yesterday, to their Legislative 
Assembly and congratulate them for all that they’ve done. 
 
Huseyin, congratulations on receiving the Saskatchewan 
Distinguished Service Award later today. That’s an honour 
that’s very well deserved. 
 
And to all of you also, congratulations on being shortlisted for 
the federal innovation superclusters initiative. That’s very well 
deserved as well, and I look forward to hearing about you 
eventually being awarded the final prize. 
 
You’ve done a lot both individually but also as an organization 
in supporting and promoting business and development in 
Saskatchewan, so thank you for all that you do. And I’d like to 
ask all members to join me in welcoming all of you to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of this Assembly, it’s 
my pleasure to welcome to this province, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, is the Hon. Michael Veitch, member of the 
Legislative Council from New South Wales, Australia. Thank 
you, sir. 
 
Mr. Veitch is a member of the Australian Labour Party. He’s 
shadow minister for Primary Industries, shadow minister for 
Lands, and shadow minister for western New South Wales. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members of this honourable 
Assembly join me in welcoming Mr. Veitch to Saskatchewan’s 
legislature. 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the minister in welcoming Mr. Veitch to our Legislative 
Assembly. He’s on a tour of our building and meeting with 
different people. And it’s always a pleasure to have people from 
abroad come to Saskatchewan, and we gain a lot of knowledge 
and experience from our conversations. And I look forward . . . 
We’ll be having lunch, I understand, and look forward to 
having that chance to talk further. So I’d ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Michael Veitch to our Assembly. Thank 
you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 

Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce Kimball Siebert seated in the Speaker’s gallery and 
his children Julia and Nicholas, who come from the village of 
Borden. Kimball and his wife, Jodeine, have six children and 
are repopulating the small village of Borden. So welcome to 
your Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce a guest to you in your gallery. It’s Don 
Fyrk. He’s the reeve of Buckland. And Don is in his second 
term as the reeve of Buckland, but he’s also a retired SaskTel 
employee. So he’s done a lot of work for our province; he 
works hard for the residents and he does a lot of volunteering.  

And Don is also married to Wendy who is also a retired 
SaskTel worker. I had the opportunity to work with Wendy 
when I worked at SaskTel. She’s very passionate about rescuing 
animals, and she does a wonderful job with that in the Buckland 
area as well. And so I’d like to ask everybody to welcome Mr. 
Fyrk to his Assembly. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it is my pleasure to introduce a friend, a 
neighbour, and possibly a colleague, I understand. So now I 
know why you’re here, Don. Don Fyrk, reeve of Buckland, 
welcome. You assisted me and helped me during the flooding 
of Highway No. 2 a few years ago, so I do admire your work. 
So I hope you stay up there, Don. So welcome to your 
Assembly. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to present the petition around 
the permanent closure of Main Street access to Highway No. 1 
in the town of Balgonie, Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 

Respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 

take the necessary steps and actions to leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles in and out of Balgonie, 
Saskatchewan at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and 
Main Street in Balgonie, Saskatchewan. 

We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and the westbound lanes of Highway 
No. 1 and Balgonie, Saskatchewan at the Main Street 
intersection. This gate would allow emergency services 
access to the eastbound lanes of Highway No. 1 at the 
Main Street in Balgonie, Saskatchewan intersection, but 
would not allow the public access to cross the east- and 
westbound lanes. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, and 
many, many other pages as it attached itself to this petition, are 
primarily from Balgonie, and I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the House today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. I would like to 
read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Melfort, 
Star City, Kinistino. I do so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics. And the people signing this petition 
want to bring to your attention the following: Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties. But you know, in 
Saskatchewan, the people here deserve to live in a fair province 
where all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
But we know that over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan 
Party has received $12.61 million in corporate donations. Of 
that, $2.87 million came from companies outside 
Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
government, the Sask Party, to overhaul Saskatchewan’s 
campaign finance laws to end out-of-province donations, to 
put a ban on donations from corporations and unions, and 
to put a donation limit on individual donations. 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Eastend. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition to reopen the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. The individuals that signed this 
petition here want to draw the attention of the fact that the 
closure of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre left 15 
people out of work, and financial impacts of their families and 
the local businesses. 
 
But also the closure hurt the elders within the community that 
help the inmates during their odd jobs. And the closure of the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre hurt the families of the 
inmates . . . while learning new skills, while working with 
skilled employers to obtain employment upon release. 
 
And also the closure took the inmates far away from their 
families, which makes visitation difficult or non-existent at all. 
And the closure also took away from the inmates to get 
treatment and obtain training tickets while there. And this is so 
important within our northern communities to have this facility. 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 
immediately reopen the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre to better our community for future generations to 
come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this particular petition 
are from the community of Buffalo Narrows. And I do so 
submit. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who signed this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: to the fact that the Sask Party has cut 
at least $674 in government funding for every student, every 
student across Saskatchewan; to the fact that the Sask Party 
hiked education property taxes by $67 million while still cutting 
$54 million out of our classrooms and that, even though the 
Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids are actually 
getting less; and that the Sask Party cuts mean that students will 
lose much needed supports in their classrooms, including 
funding for buses for kindergartners and programs to help 
children with special needs and autism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
education system pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

Those who signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, reside in Regina. I 
do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Wildfires in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
here today to acknowledge all those affected by the recent 
wildfires in Saskatchewan. The fires recently, tragically claimed 
the life of James Hargrave, a 34-year-old volunteer firefighter. 
 
James, who ranches on the Saskatchewan-Alberta border, 
selflessly risked to help his neighbours in their time of need. 
Seventy-two-year-old Eddie Riehl was also injured in this fire, 
is now suffering third-degree burns in Calgary. He is being 
treated. Our thoughts and prayers are with James and Eddie and 
their families at this difficult time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two of my own constituents were also injured in 
these fires. Ron and Evan Wedrick are the husband and son of 
my constituency assistant, Twila. They were trapped in by the 
blaze when the fire shifted, and both are being treated in 
Calgary for third-degree burns. Mr. Speaker, I spoke with Twila 
yesterday and mentioned I was making this statement. She 
asked that I thank everyone for their generosity and their 
kindness in her family’s time of need. Even now, she is thinking 
of others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been said that the true measure of people’s 
strength is how they are raised to face adversity. I am extremely 
proud and grateful of these heroic actions from the firefighters, 
emergency crews, SaskPower crews, and the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police], and the volunteers from 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Lives Lived and Lost 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we lost a true Canadian icon last 
week. Gord Downie inspired many through his music, his 
poetry, and his advocacy for social justice and true 
reconciliation with indigenous peoples. 
 
His work and quiet activism encouraged people to reflect, 
engage in the politics of hope, and to appreciate the pretty 
things: constellations slowly revealing themselves, sunlight 
colouring a room as it passed through a bottle of olive oil, and 
the preciousness of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t need more reminders of just how 
precious life is. Last week, James Hargrave, a volunteer 
firefighter, lost his life while he bravely fought to save his 
community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while there are many others who have lost 
their lives since we last met who would merit the honour of 
mention here, in our own party this summer, we lost three 
dedicated members — men who helped to build our party, who 
helped to build our movement, and who dedicated so much of 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

themselves to building a stronger and fairer Saskatchewan. 
 
Fred Kress, John Black, and Stephen Moore were taken from 
us, from their families, too soon and too young. These men are 
missed, but they have each left a legacy of change effected and 
people inspired. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Remembering Gord Downie 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past week, 
Canada lost the great music icon, Gord Downie. Surrounded by 
his loved ones, Gord passed away after his battle with terminal 
brain cancer at the age of 53. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gord had a very passionate and inspiring love for 
this country, its people, and its potential. What he will be best 
remembered for is leading one of the greatest Canadian groups 
of all time, The Tragically Hip. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet Gord on a number of occasions, 
including having The Hip play at a club I co-owned called The 
Venue on their first tour across Canada. 
 
Not knowing who the band really was at the time, how 
influential they would become, we paid them the door, which I 
can tell you, Mr. Speaker, was not very much. 
 
Though we knew this day would come, many Canadians are 
feeling a great sense of pain, a sense of loss, and a sense of 
hope, that one day we will live in a society that Gord dreamt for 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I’d like to extend our 
deepest condolences to Gord’s wife and family through this 
difficult time. It was Gord’s wish that we could all stand 
together as one, continue to build relationships of reconciliation 
in our country, and continue to love this nation. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Survivors During Violence Prevention Week 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s Violence Prevention 
Week, and Saskatchewan continues to hold the dubious 
distinction as the province with the highest rates of domestic 
violence in Canada. In fact Saskatchewan’s rate is double the 
national average. And as all members here know, these rates are 
nothing short of tragic. 
 
As a province we need to step up and do all that we can to 
prevent violence and to support survivors. I want to recognize 
the work of the Regina Community Partnership Against 
Violence, a partnership that includes the provincial association 
of transition homes and services, the Office of Gendered 
Violence-Prevention Strategies and the Lifelong Learning 
Centre at the University of Regina, as well as SOFIA [Support 
of Families in Affliction] House, Regina Transition House, and 
the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] of Regina. 

Together they work to create inclusive, safe communities here 
in Regina and across the province. 
 
I would also like to recognize STOPS to Violence 
[Saskatchewan Towards Offering Partnership Solutions to 
Violence] Sask, the Sexual Assault Services of Saskatchewan, 
and the other organizations across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the rates of violence in Saskatchewan 
are a heartbreaking reality. Steps have been pushed for and that 
this Assembly has taken are encouraging, but we know that 
people are still facing desperate situations and we must, we 
must continue this work. I ask that all members join me today in 
recognizing Violence Prevention Week and support the call to 
step up and do all that we can to prevent violence and to support 
survivors. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Usher of the Black Rod  
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
speak to the Assembly about the Usher of the Black Rod. This 
tradition dates back to 14th century England when the Usher of 
the Black Rod guarded the doors to the chapel where the 
knights assembled. 
 
In the fall of 2013, Saskatchewan incorporated the Usher of the 
Black Rod tradition into our parliamentary practice. Adding the 
rich tradition of the usher, our government has made it a 
priority to invite a military veteran to serve in this role. Jeffrey 
Dickson, a military veteran of over 24 years, has been the usher 
since the fall of 2015 and recently stepped down from the 
position. On behalf of all the members of this Assembly, I’d 
like to thank him for his service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our new usher is Lieutenant Colonel Gwen 
Bourque. Lieutenant Colonel Bourque is an accomplished 
veteran who joined the military in 1992. She is now the 
commanding officer of 38 Service Battalion. A mother of two 
daughters, she was deployed on a seven-month tour of 
Afghanistan in 2006, and in 2014 she was awarded the 
Lieutenant Governor’s Military Service Pin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of this Assembly, I want 
to thank Lieutenant Colonel Bourque for her service and 
sacrifice during her military career and welcome her to the 
Assembly as the new Usher of the Black Rod. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Grand Opening of New Gallery in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend 
marked the official grand opening of the Remai Modern gallery 
in Saskatoon. The building stands four stories high with 11 
galleries displaying up to 8,000 works of art. It will captivate 
and inspire the minds of all who walk through its doors. The 
gallery offers a unique experience for all, as it has so much to 
offer to Saskatchewan’s diverse cultures and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the role the government played in 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

developing this project, contributing over $17 million in 
funding. I would also like to thank the Government of Canada, 
the city of Saskatoon, and all the corporate and private donors 
who were involved in the opening of this gallery, especially the 
Frank and Ellen Remai Foundation. Ellen Remai contributed 
over $100 million in donations to the museum. Mr. Speaker, the 
museum plays host to the world’s largest collection of Picasso 
linocut prints worth $20 million. 
 
This truly was a collaborative effort for many to finally make 
this dream a reality. I look forward to the impact this gallery 
will make on the art community across this province. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
hard-working staff, donors, and contributors on the grand 
opening of the Remai Modern gallery. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Home to World’s Largest Potash Mine 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to stand in the House today and announce that the 
world’s largest potash mine is now open, and it’s located right 
here in Saskatchewan. On October 12th the PotashCorp 
completed a $3 billion expansion on its Rocanville mine located 
just a short distance northwest of Rocanville. This expansion 
more than doubles the capacity of the mine from 3 million to 
six and a half million tonnes and doubles the workforce to more 
than 750 employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to truly understand the size of this operation, I’d 
like to share a few facts with the Assembly. The underground 
footprint to the mining operation is approximately the size of 
Saskatoon. The depth of the Scissors Creek shaft is twice the 
size of the CN Tower. 130 kilometres of conveyor belts have 
been installed underground, which is enough to stretch almost 
from Regina to Moose Jaw and back. Over the span of one 
week, over 360 000 tonnes of ore were hoisted, which is over 
50 000 tonnes a day. It is also estimated there are at least 69 
years of potash reserves available at this mine. 
 
This government is committed to maintaining a competitive 
business climate, and that is why the Mining Journal’s world 
bank report ranked Saskatchewan as number one in the world 
for places to invest resource capital. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating PotashCorp, its 
employees and builders, on the expansion of PCS [Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] Rocanville mine. Thank 
you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the first day back. It’s the 
one-year anniversary of the Sask Party introducing Bill 40. It’s 
been one year since Saskatchewan people first started fighting 
this scheme to sell off our Crowns, and it’s been five and a half 
months since the Premier told reporters he needed Bill 40 to 
scrap STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. But it’s 

only been two days since he claimed to have heard 
Saskatchewan people and agreed to reverse the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that bill, along with their budget, were at the 
centre of the Sask Party’s cluster of fiascos that left 
Saskatchewan people paying the price and not knowing what 
their government would do next. Have they really heard 
Saskatchewan people? If yes, when will they announce they’re 
bringing back STC and when will they reverse the rest of their 
heartless cuts and unfair tax hikes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to begin with a congratulation to my hon. friend on her position 
as Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, she, I think, is the 
seventh Leader of the Opposition that I’ve had the honour of 
facing since 2007. And I’m hopeful that the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] have saved their best for last, Mr. Speaker, at 
least in terms of my time here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also want to congratulate the new 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, having won the by-election, as 
well as the member for Saskatoon Meewasin on his leadership 
campaign, and the decision of the member for Regina 
Rosemont to not not run as well in the leadership campaign. I 
think there’s going to be a lot of interesting dynamics going on 
politically in the Legislative Assembly on both sides of the 
House. 
 
And to the Leader of the Opposition, I thank her for her 
question, Mr. Speaker. It’s true that Bill 40 was the intent of the 
government to define what privatization was, because the NDP 
had left that part out of the Crown protection Act. Mr. Speaker, 
we chose the World Bank definition, which indicated that 
privatization meant the 51 per cent sale of a Crown or a 
partnership representing 51 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province were pretty clear 
with MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and with me 
directly over this year that they didn’t agree with that definition, 
that the definition that the people of Saskatchewan held to in 
terms of privatization was the sale of any portion of a Crown 
corporation or a partnership involving any portion of a Crown 
corporation. And so, Mr. Speaker, what we did yesterday was 
simply recognize the fact that it is the people of the province 
that own the Crown corporation, and it’s their definition that 
should matter more than a World Bank definition or the 
government’s from Bill 40. And so we’ve made the decision to 
repeal that portion of the bill, Mr. Speaker, in a reflection of 
exactly what we heard from Saskatchewan people. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I wish I could say that I was 
shocked that the Premier dodged the question about saving 
STC, but I’m not. And it’s the people of Saskatchewan that 
owned STC as well. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, with the Sask Party, their stories 
always seem to change. Either they’re listening to 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

Saskatchewan people or they’re not. Either the Premier was 
saying what he really thinks when he told reporters they needed 
Bill 40 to scrap STC or not. And, Mr. Speaker, with their 
growing scandals, the contradictions are even worse. 
 
In November of 2016, the Premier assured everyone that he had 
the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] under control. “I was 
there through this whole process. I know what was intended and 
what wasn’t.” But by June of 2017, his office was saying he 
was “not involved in any of the negotiations regarding the 
GTH.” Mr. Speaker, which is it? Was he there for the whole 
process or was he not involved at all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First, 
let me just say with respect to STC, the government’s decision 
stands. There won’t be any change to the decision, Mr. Speaker. 
I would point out again for members of the House and those 
perhaps viewing question period this morning that the per 
passenger subsidy from taxpayers for STC was almost $100 per 
individual, per passenger. The forecast subsidy for STC, Mr. 
Speaker, was going to be upwards of 85 to $100 million over 
the next five years in order to keep it operating because people 
simply were not taking the bus. 
 
I’m happy to report to members though that, in the wake of the 
wind-down of STC, we have seen companies apply for 
operating permits that will serve Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle — 
that’s DiCal Transport — Balcarres, Melville, Yorkton; starting 
in November, Kamsack and Canora. Also Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Estevan, Yorkton, Meadow Lake, and Swift 
Current to be served by Rider Express, Forward. Alsaskbus 
Services will serve Saskatoon and Alsask to Calgary. The list 
goes on, Mr. Speaker. The private sector and others are 
providing these routes. 
 
And in the meantime, we’re going to be able to take the money 
that would have gone — the $100 million that would have cost 
taxpayers — to subsidize STC and keep it operating, and do 
things rather instead: investing in highways, Mr. Speaker, in 
health care, in education. These should be the priorities of the 
government going forward, and they are our priorities going 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisition 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That non-answer to a 
serious question about the GTH reminds me of the 110 times 
that the member from Meadow Lake popped up in QP [question 
period] and repeated the Premier’s lines; sometimes he added a 
few of his own. But then he very briefly joined the race to 
replace the Premier for real. Then he threw the Premier, the 
former minister who was plagued by scandal, the cabinet, his 
whole caucus under the bus: “I defended the position of the 
government and what I’m saying . . . today is what that position 
is going to change to, if I’m premier.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the newest minister responsible for the GTH: 

can he tell the people of Saskatchewan his own personal 
feelings about this scandal, or will he just “defend” the position 
of the government too? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Environment, GTH, SaskPower, and SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is obviously an issue that we take very seriously 
on this side of the House. That’s why with respect to the 
questions that have been raised around the Global 
Transportation Hub, the government did take the step of 
providing access to the Provincial Auditor of any and all 
information or individuals that her office wished to speak to. 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, as well with respect to the review 
that’s been done by the RCMP, the government has co-operated 
fully in that, Mr. Speaker. And I believe from media reports that 
review is complete, and it’s in the hands of prosecutions in the 
Justice department in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Global Transportation Hub, we 
certainly do take the findings of the Provincial Auditor 
seriously. That’s why the Global Transportation Hub has 
implemented all of those recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I would offer to the member and to all 
members the opportunity that I took two weeks ago to actually 
go out to the Global Transportation Hub, take a tour, see what’s 
actually happening out there, see the nearly $500 million in 
private investment, see the over 800 jobs that have been created, 
the 1,800 construction jobs that have been created. This is still 
early days of this operation of a generational project, and we’re 
going to do all we can to ensure that it is a success going 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I actually have been 
out at the GTH a couple times this summer, and I think the 
member opposite forgot to mention the tumbleweeds that were 
blowing across the highway on the open, wide open empty 
spaces that still exist in the GTH. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try and be a little more direct 
here. During perhaps what was the most revealing and 
astonishing press conference that many of us have ever seen, 
the member from Meadow Lake who — now again after day 
after day defending the government — turned these daily eye 
rolls and scoffing and “it’s been fully canvassed” into “If this 
happened when I was premier and a minister were responsible, 
they would have been fired.” Period. End of story. He even 
indicated that the senior Sask Party operative who was behind 
the whole thing should be fired too. 
 
So to either the new Minister Responsible for the GTH or the 
new Minister Responsible for the Economy: should that 
minister have been fired, and should that senior staff person 
also be held accountable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
GTH. 
 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member’s 
comment about tumbleweeds blowing across, Mr. Speaker. 
That certainly wasn’t the opinion of Tiffany Melvin, the 
president of the North American Strategy for Competitiveness, 
who was in Regina a year ago. She has worked with inland 
ports for nearly 20 years and emphatically stated her 
amazement of how thoughtful, progressive, and aligned the 
Global Transportation Hub is, and the progress that has been 
made in a very short amount of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, certainly we’re engaged in a vigorous 
leadership contest, and people that are running for the 
leadership are going to state their positions, Mr. Speaker. The 
same is true on the other side. I’m glad to see there’s actually 
candidates that have declared a year . . . It took a year after Cam 
Broten left through the ejector seat from this House, but finally 
after a year they finally have some candidates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work all . . . do all that we can to 
ensure that we are not only being accountable for the decisions 
of the past, and we have worked through that process and are 
working through that process, but also to work hard to ensure 
working with the boards, the management, and the staff, that the 
Global Transportation Hub is a success into the future, a 
generational project for this province, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would encourage the members opposite to join us in that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister calls this early days. 
The GTH has been in place for almost seven years now, and yet 
we see an operation across the way on Tower Road where we 
see a new transportation hub being developed by private 
individuals on the CN [Canadian National] railway that’s 
growing faster and more exponentially than anything that’s 
happening at the GTH. So you’ve got to wonder what’s going 
on. The Sask Party is not answering our questions. 
 
But earlier this summer we got another peek behind the curtain. 
An email exchange between one of the Premier’s senior staff 
and the Premier was accidentally sent to a journalist. In that 
email — the Premier is using his partisan email account on a 
server housed at Sask Party offices, the same account that he 
promised to stop using — the two are trying to control and tamp 
out questions into the Sask Party GTH scandal. Mr. Speaker, is 
the minister aware of any other communication about the GTH 
where he or anyone else in the government or Executive 
Council used a non-government email account for government 
business, and when did he stop using his personal email 
accounts for government business? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s just important to note that of the 800 acres 
. . . sorry, pardon me, 1,800 acres comprised at the Global 
Transportation Hub, over 700 acres in seven years have already 
been sold — $485 million in private sector investment that has 
created 860 full-time jobs, 1,800 construction jobs. And again, 
Tiffany Melvin, president of the North American Strategy for 
Competitiveness, has stated emphatically her amazement at 

how thoughtful, progressive, and aligned the Global 
Transportation Hub is and the progress made in a short period 
of time. 
 
Now we’re all eager to see ongoing success as quickly as 
possible. I think that that is in the best interests of the Global 
Transportation Hub, the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. This is a generational project that is going to 
create and continue to create jobs. It has already contributed, I 
believe, $15 million in personal income taxes by people that are 
employed at the Global Transportation Hub. $17 million in 
diesel fuel tax has been created, revenue, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We want to work hard to ensure 
that this is a success going forward, and that’s what we’re all 
committed to doing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been using 
private emails to avoid transparency right from the start. 
According to a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
story, in 2008 the now Finance minister who, with no sense of 
irony, used her private email account to admit she knew she 
was breaking government rules and said, and I quote, “Blah . . . 
Blah . . . Blah. Lots of fun. I really don’t care what they think!!” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when did this minister last use her personal email 
account to conduct government business, government business? 
And when will she commit to only using her government email 
account for government business from now on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite is referencing an email with a constituent 
of mine who I knew before we ever formed government quite 
frankly. I know him and his wife. I know about his family. He 
knows about mine. We had been corresponding on issues prior 
to us ever forming government. We continue to correspond on 
my non-government email. There was a short period of time 
that we did employ this gentleman, and that’s because when we 
did form government, I was minister of Social Services. 
 
Shortly after, the Children’s Advocate released a report called A 
Breach of Trust. A Breach of Trust revealed how badly the NDP 
had neglected the child welfare in this province. It was in a 
crisis. It cited 21 children in one foster home. It compared 
another foster home to a puppy mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was devastated. It was a crisis, and I was 
frustrated, absolutely frustrated at that time of the shape and the 
neglect that the NDP had for child welfare. There was children 
at risk, so I continued to . . . I didn’t even give a second thought 
to email servers. My non-government email is subjected to the 
same legislation as the government email. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, these are serious questions about 
transparency, accountability, and following the rules. And 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

members opposite are laughing while we ask these questions. 
 
So is the Premier willing to lead by example? Last May, he said 
he would stop using his personal email account on a partisan 
server housed at the Sask Party office for government business. 
But we learned this summer that he was still using it. So will 
the Premier drop the terrible, ridiculous excuses, commit to 
keeping his promise to “send all of my government-related 
emails on the government account,” and will he give the 
Privacy Commissioner access to his partisan email account for 
full review? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the short answer, Mr. Speaker, the 
short answer is yes, absolutely, Mr. Speaker. In fact I think I 
indicated in the scrum when this issue was first raised in the 
spring that there might be an occasion where I would still use, 
inadvertently use a non-government email. Mr. Speaker, 
there’ve been occasions when the government server has been 
down and I have to continue to conduct government business. 
 
There are two important reasons why we would want to use a 
government email account, and there’s also these same reasons 
why we’d want to ensure that any non-government emails were 
in compliance. And that would be, number one, that they could 
be FOI’d [freedom of information]. Mr. Speaker, if the email 
came either from a non-government account or a government 
account, it should be FOI-able. Mr. Speaker, they know that 
I’ve been using this account because in fact they got it from an 
FOI. They read that into the record. And so, Mr. Speaker, it has 
met the mark in that respect. 
 
Secondly, it would be important for us to use government 
emails or ensure that non-government emails are available for 
Provincial Archives. We have a duty as members of the 
Executive Council, when we leave politics, to make sure the 
documents that we have rest with the people of the province, 
because they don’t belong to us as individuals. 
 
That member, she prefaced her question with wanting all of us 
to act in terms of what was accountable and transparent. She is 
the leader of a party who is, who claims the membership of 
eight former NDP cabinet ministers who have yet, from 2006, 
to turn over their personal . . . sorry, their government 
documents from their basement to the Provincial Archives. 
Those documents are not the purview and the possession of the 
NDP. 
 
Well now they’re laughing at that. Now that deputy leader is 
laughing at that. You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because these 
rules and the importance of accountability, they never apply to 
the NDP. There are eight former NDP ministers, one of them a 
Justice minister who presided over the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal, by the way, who has not, who has not turned over his 
files, the government’s files, as a minister, to Provincial 
Archives. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the new leader of the NDP is interested in 
that transparency and that accountability, will she immediately 
direct these eight former NDP ministers to comply with the 
Provincial Archives? 
 

[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Employment and Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, while they seem to be very proud 
of their rhetoric, their record is costing Saskatchewan people 
jobs. Numbers released just this week, last week, show across 
the rest of the country there are fewer people relying on 
employment insurance than there were last year at the same 
time. Our neighbours to the west actually saw a staggering 25 
per cent drop. But Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces 
where more people are turning to EI [employment insurance] to 
pay the bills. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with so many people in Saskatchewan looking 
for work, why didn’t the Sask Party take the opportunity 
yesterday with the Speech from the Throne to introduce a 
comprehensive job creation plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, our 
provincial economy has been hit quite hard by the drop in 
resource revenue over the past few years. It has affected a lot of 
people in this province who have lost their job, and we 
sympathize with anyone or we feel empathy with them, anyone 
who’s lost a job. It’s very important for them. 
 
What we’ve done as the government is we tried to create an 
atmosphere in this province, a climate in this province where 
businesses can flourish. We’ve reduced regulations. We’ve 
lowered the tax rate. There’s 64,000 more people working in 
this province today than there ever was under the NDP. That 
shows what growth and what prosperity can do for a province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is the Sask Party’s 
heartless cuts and unfair tax hikes have resulted in more people 
looking for work. In fact there are about twice as many people 
unemployed today as there were when the Sask Party came into 
office, and there are more cuts coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s attack on health care and 
education has meant women are being hit the hardest. There are 
28 per cent more women relying on EI than at this time last 
year. That’s the highest increase in the entire country. How can 
the Sask Party possibly justify these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, in September, we had an 
unemployment rate of 6.2 per cent in this province. That’s the 
national average. There’s 1,600 full-time employment positions 
created, 3,000 part-time jobs created in the past year — that’s 
an increase over the past year — 64,400 more people are 
working now in this province than there ever was at the best 
times the NDP ever had. 
 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing our best to create a climate in this 
province where everyone can flourish — men, women, 
everyone. So, Mr. Speaker, I think our record stands for itself. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps I can welcome 
the new Minister for the Status of Women and Education with a 
couple of facts. Women represent more than 70 per cent of 
people working in educational services in Saskatchewan. The 
Sask Party’s cuts to education forced boards to cut more than 
200 positions across the province. These were 200 good-paying 
jobs and 200 real people who are no longer supporting our kids 
in the classroom. 
 
At 70 per cent, it’s not hard to see how so many Saskatchewan 
women have been forced to rely on EI. Does the minister 
actually think that eliminating these supports from our kids’ 
classrooms will help them learn? And does she think that 
cutting these good-paying jobs will help strengthen our 
communities and our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education and the 
Status of Women. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like first to acknowledge how nice it was to see the 
member for Lakeview at the grand opening, reopening, in her 
constituency of École Connaught School last Friday. And we 
know that she wasn’t always supportive of this $21 million 
investment by our government, that’s to say the least, Mr. 
Speaker. But she tweeted last week: thank you for this beautiful 
space to teach, learn, and build community. 
 
And I agree it is that, Mr. Speaker, a high-tech space, full of 
light, which blends old and new architectural components, 
complete with 17 new classrooms, an integrated amphitheatre, 
rooftop learning terrace. The member opposite will have heard 
the poem written by students which included the line, my 
school is not ordinary, it’s extraordinary. Innovative design and 
technology across the school helps us grow. I was honoured to 
open it and pleased to see her there. 
 
And to be sure, Mr. Speaker, there have been some challenges 
this past year; the member opposite has referenced them. But 
the 20 schools that have opened since we last convened here, 
including 18 joint-use schools which opened on time and on 
budget, those we can surely agree are significant achievements 
for everyone in this economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, how about we actually resource the 
classrooms in those new schools and all schools across the 
province? Those lines simply will not cut it with those who are 
living the reality of these cuts with their own children. Parents 
across this province are being forced to pay extra for child care, 
miss work, move their children to other schools, other child 
care centres, or in one case, parents actually bought a van for 

their child care provider because it was cheaper than the other 
alternatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are doing all of this while paying more in 
education property taxes. That is, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
took in an additional $67 million in educational property tax but 
at the same time cut $54 million out of our children’s 
classrooms. Why does the minister think that it’s okay to make 
Saskatchewan parents literally pay more while their kids get 
less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important to note that Saskatoon director of education Barry 
MacDougall said earlier this fall, “The number of supports in 
schools in terms of teachers and EAs hasn’t changed this year. 
In fact, it’s gone up a little bit.” Gone up, and that’s in the 
province’s biggest urban division, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again we acknowledge the amazing work that teachers and 
staff do in this province every day. And I recently highlighted, 
as part of Education Week, favourite teachers of mine, Mr. 
Speaker, who challenged perspectives, went beyond the call, 
made their subjects live. We’ve all had them and we thank 
them. 
 
And we have accommodated a changing landscape, Mr. 
Speaker. Since ’07, investments have been substantial. In our 
schools today there are 10 per cent more teachers, 30 per cent 
more psychologists, 38 per cent more language pathologists, 
and over 50 per cent more occupational therapists. We 
commend their amazing work, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on House Services to report that the committee 
considered committee membership changes on September 6th, 
2017 and pursuant to rule 136(6), filed with the Clerk the 
seventh report of the Standing Committee on House Services. 
 
I move: 
 

That the seventh report on Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member has moved the motion: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
inform the Assembly that I received a letter from the Lieutenant 
Governor dated October 11th, 2017 outlining the membership 
of the Board of Internal Economy. I will now list in the names 
of the membership: Hon. Corey Tochor, Hon. Dustin Duncan, 
Hon. Paul Merriman, Hon. Greg Brkich, Jeremy Harrison, 
David Forbes, and Warren McCall. 
 
I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask for 
leave to make a motion regarding sitting dates. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize Deputy House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Sitting Days 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move: 
 

That, notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
when this Assembly does adjourn on Thursday, November 
9th, 2017, it shall stand adjourned until Tuesday, 
November 14th, 2017, at 1:30 p.m., and that in accordance 
with rule 3(2), the 25th and final day of the fall period of 
the revised parliamentary calendar shall be Thursday, 
December 7, 2017. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take the motion as read. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to move 
a motion on committee membership. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Committee Membership 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the name of Vicki Mowat be substituted for the name 
of Nicole Rancourt on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview had 
moved the following motion: 
 

That the name Vicki Mowat be substituted for the name 
Nicole Rancourt on the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — I wish for leave to make a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — The motion is: 
 

That the name Jeremy Harrison be substituted for the name 
Paul Merriman on the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 

 
The Speaker: — Moved by the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow: 
 

That the name Jeremy Harrison be substituted for the name 
Paul Merriman on the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — What a great honour it is to be able to respond to 
the Throne Speech. I can hardly believe that it was only a year 
and a half ago that I had the opportunity to stand here and give 
my first speech in this House. So much has transpired over that 
time frame that it seems much longer. 
 
I would like to take some time to thank those who have helped 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

me and continue to help me as I take this journey of having the 
privilege of being the MLA for Estevan. First of all to my 
partner, Bart, who has fallen into our new routine. He was here 
yesterday and he enjoyed the day. He affectionately likes to 
refer to himself as my arm candy. 
 
To my parents, Stan and Jolene Wicks, who have been there for 
me unconditionally. They’re the foundation on which my work 
ethic has been built and I truly thank them for that. 
 
To my children, Miranda, Mercedes, and Wyatt Morstad, who 
have grown into amazing young individuals. Thank you for 
supporting me and helping me reach my goals. I could not have 
done it without you. 
 
[11:00] 
 
I would like to take a little time and talk about my oldest 
daughter, Miranda. She is 26 and she is a grade 1 teacher in 
Saskatoon. Miranda has been dating a young man by the name 
of Jonathan Forbes. For those of you who may have not noticed 
the last name, I did say Forbes. He is the nephew of the MLA 
from Saskatoon Centre. Well Jonathan and Miranda have 
recently become engaged to be married, so I guess in some 
roundabout way I’ll be a relative to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. We’ll be one big happy family. 
 
To my committee that continues to work hard in my 
constituency and always preparing for the next election. I would 
like to make special mention of my president, Dustin Hockey. 
He’s fairly new to the position and has brought a renewal to my 
committee that is welcome. 
 
And to my constituents, who have the confidence in me to make 
me their MLA and to make me their voice here in this 
legislature. I will continue to listen to them and bring their 
voice forward. 
 
And I would also like to thank all of my new colleagues that I 
sit in this House with. When I first arrived, I must admit it was 
a little bit more than intimidating, but this wonderful group of 
MLAs that I have the privilege of working with on a day-to-day 
basis has truly made this a welcoming place to work. And last, 
but certainly not least, I would like to thank my Lord and 
Saviour. All I have is because of him. 
 
The title of the Throne Speech is “Growing Stronger,” and what 
an appropriate name that is. Our population is growing faster 
than it has since the earliest days of this province. In just the 
last 10 years, we have grown by more than 160,000 people. The 
two decades before this, the province has saw nothing but a 
steady decline in population. Saskatchewan is not only growing 
stronger, but it is growing larger, and we are a much better 
province for it. 
 
One of the opportunities I have had in my short time here was 
to sit with the Human Services Committee on the organ 
donation consultations. I’m very excited to see that there is 
work beginning to happen in this area. Having donor doctors — 
I guess donor physicians — who will provide education and 
support to help champion organ donation across the province 
will help ensure that we get on the path to a successful program. 
And while listening to the people and the organizations who 

came forward with the presentations on organ donation, I heard 
loud and clear that presumed consent would be a huge asset. So 
once again I’m glad to see that we will continue to explore this 
option. 
 
Both of my daughters are schoolteachers, so to see the progress 
that is happening in the field of education is wonderful. 
Contrary to what you may hear from our opposition or on the 
most current Facebook post, progress is being made. This year 
alone our government opened up 21 new schools. This included 
18 joint-use facilities built using the P3 [public-private 
partnership] model, and by using this model it reduced the 
construction costs by approximately $100 million. 
 
Over the past decade, this government has invested in an 
unprecedented $17 billion into kindergarten to grade 12 
education. And while the enrolment numbers have only 
increased slightly over the past 10 years, with this investment 
we have added 875 more teachers and created nearly 6,000 
more child care spaces. 
 
And let’s not forget the graduate retention plan, which is the 
most aggressive student attraction and retention program in all 
of Canada. Since 2008 nearly 70,000 post-secondary graduates 
have chosen to begin their careers right here in Saskatchewan 
and have benefited from this program. These are students who, 
if it were not for this program, would most likely have chosen 
to take their education and start their careers in other provinces. 
As we have heard our Premier say on several occasions, gone 
are the days when we would buy our kids luggage for 
graduation. I know that’s what I got for graduation. I chose to 
stay in this province and I’m truly happy I did. This program is 
definitely one of the reasons Saskatchewan is growing stronger. 
It has served the purpose it was meant to. 
 
I think without a doubt we can all agree that our communities, 
whether they be a city, town, village, or rural municipality, they 
are the backbone of this province, truly what makes it tick. And 
that is why it is so important that we try to protect these 
communities the best we can, which brings me to my next topic 
of discussion. 
 
As we are all aware, our federal government has announced its 
intention to legalize the non-medical use of marijuana by July 
of 2018. This is not only eight short months away. It’s 
something that we have to think seriously about. Now this is 
going to happen whether we agree with it or we disagree with it. 
I believe this decision was made without sufficient consultation 
with our provinces, and now we will have to take the next steps. 
 
So currently our government is in the process of doing 
consultation through an online tool. I’m not sure if any of you 
did, but I took the time to go on and fill out the survey. This 
was not your typical survey. It was very detailed and gave you 
lots of opportunity to express your point of view in sentence 
form as well as by ranking it by number if you chose. 
 
We have received nearly 35,000 responses. I’m not going to go 
into all of the details, but I think it’s important to note the four 
guiding principles that led this survey. And they were: 
preventing the growth of the underground market, restricting 
access to minors, ensuring road and workplace safety, as well as 
the protection of public health. 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

Once everything is tabulated, we will need to introduce 
legislation that will govern the sale and distribution of 
marijuana while at the same time protecting public health and 
safety as well as ensuring that we enhance the education. This 
will not be a small task, and we don’t have much time to do it 
— as I mentioned, only eight months away. 
 
I also had the opportunity to take part in a committee that was 
appointed to consult on measures that might strengthen public 
safety. This was formed because of the concern of increasing 
crime, primarily in our rural areas. It truly was an honour to sit 
on this committee. We had the opportunity to travel the 
province and listen to stakeholders from every walk of life. We 
also received numerous written submissions. For myself — I’m 
not sure about the rest of my colleagues that were travelling the 
province with me — this was truly an eye-opening experience. 
From these consultations, we heard loud and clear that visibility 
is a huge problem. I’m sure you are all aware that Saskatchewan 
has a large number of roads that need to be covered, which in 
part contributes to this visibility problem. We also heard that 
while there might be many different types of enforcement 
officers out there, they do not all have the powers they need for 
the proper enforcement. 
 
So with some existing resources and expanding some powers, 
our government has created a new protection and response team 
consisting of 258 armed officers who have the authority to 
arrest and detain those suspected of committing crimes. This 
will definitely help with the issue of visibility, as well as giving 
them the tools they actually need to do their job, keeping in 
mind that there is always more work to be done. But this is 
definitely a step in the right direction. 
 
One of the comments I heard from more than one group when 
we were on our tour of the province was, we are not going to 
arrest our way out of crime. There were so many discussions on 
root causes of crime, whether that be addiction, mental illness, 
housing, or any host of social issues that cause these problems. 
It was also refreshing to hear the different organizations that are 
out in our province every day, each of them having their own 
little niche, helping work with people who have some of the 
issues I have referred to above and hearing about some of their 
successes in all of these different fields. Having said that, there 
is still a lot more work to be done. 
 
Saskatchewan is definitely growing stronger. When we look at 
our infrastructure numbers, this becomes quite clear. When our 
government took over in 2007, there was a huge deficit in this 
province. Over the last decade, our government has invested 
more than $26 billion to renew and expand our infrastructure. 
Included in this number was 7.4 billion for our province’s 
highway system, which equates to repairs and improvements of 
12 000 kilometres as well as the completion of other significant 
projects. 
 
Earlier in my speech, I talked about our communities being the 
backbone of our province. Well if you talk to the people of this 
province, a good portion of them also feel that our Crown 
corporations are the backbone as well. These corporations 
support economic growth and quality of life for our province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, just speaking specifically to the constituency 
of Estevan, I can attest that my community has a very large 
contingent of SaskPower employees who, of the two power 

generating stations, are located there. And these employees are 
a good backbone to my community, as well as working hard for 
the province. 
 
During the last session, our government passed Bill 40. This bill 
would have allowed for the sale of up to 49 per cent of our 
Crown corporations. While we the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan would still have retained majority ownership of 
these corporations, it did not seem to be sitting well with the 
majority of our population. Over the past few months we have 
been listening to the Saskatchewan people. What they are 
telling us is they like their Crown corporations. In fact I might 
even go as far as to say they love them, and that even the sale of 
a small stake is not something that they are on board with. 
Therefore this fall our government will repeal the provision of 
Bill 40 that allows for the sale of a partial-equity position of a 
Crown corporation. This is what our government does: we 
listen and we act accordingly. 
 
And what would a speech of mine be if I did not talk about the 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions? I am very proud of 
SaskPower’s Boundary dam 3 project, not only because it’s 
located in my constituency and is about 5 kilometres from the 
front door of my house. To date this project has cut carbon 
dioxide emissions by 1.6 million tonnes in our province. That 
may not seem like a whole lot to some people but if we translate 
that into real terms, what that means is we have taken the 
equivalent of 400,000 cars off the road. 
 
This plant was the first commercial post-combustion carbon 
capture system and it is something that we should be very proud 
of in our province. We are a world leader in the advancement of 
carbon capture and storage technology. And this is not just 
something that we are saying about ourselves. You don’t have 
to take my word for it. This has been identified by the United 
Nations and the International Energy Agency as a crucial 
technology if global emissions are to be lowered. And this 
technology was developed right here in our province. 
 
I had the opportunity to attend a carbon capture symposium 
earlier this month, right here in Regina. There was 
representation from 14 different countries there. They were 
listening and talking about this groundbreaking technology. 
They are all very aware that this technology is needed to help 
significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions around the 
world. 
 
SaskPower is also helping with reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions by expanding renewable power to as much as 50 per 
cent of its total generating capacity by 2030. This will be done 
in several different forms including solar and wind, as well as 
many other options. 
 
This upcoming session will be the end of a very important 
chapter in this province’s history. Our Premier and the MLA 
from Swift Current will be stepping down from politics in the 
near future. Our Premier will without question go down as the 
best Premier this province has ever seen. He has poured his 
heart and soul into making this province better than when he 
arrived, and I believe we can unequivocally agree that it is in 
fact what he has succeeded in doing. 
 
As some of you may be aware, the Premier is a huge fan of 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

Waylon Jennings. And Waylon could not have said it better 
from his song “Working Without a Net,” and I quote: 
 

Up on the high wire, I hear the crowd begin to call 
Some want to see you fly; some want to see you fall 
Now and then I stumble, but I ain’t fallen yet 
Your love helps me forget I’m working without a net. 

 
Really quite appropriate words. When the Premier started his 
career he was truly working without a net. He had to find his 
own sure footing and the path he wanted to follow. On his 
journey there were people who would have loved to see him 
fall. But he took the time to build a net around him that would 
help ensure his success. You might say there was even a divine 
providence that has helped bless our province and this Premier. 
So right now I would like to thank our Premier for the humility 
and courage he has shown in making Saskatchewan a better 
place to live, work, and play. 
 
Which brings us to our future, and oh what a future it is going 
to be. While it is very sad time because we are losing once 
again without question the best Premier this province has ever 
seen, change is upon us, and we need to look towards the future. 
This is a very exciting time for not only our party but for this 
province. This is an opportunity for growth and renewal. This 
province has been growing stronger, and we want to see it 
continue. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And what will that future look like? We will soon have a new 
premier leading this province. We want to ensure that we 
continue down the path of prosperity and growth. Whoever 
becomes our new leader, it will be so important for us to rally 
behind that new leader and continue down a successful path as 
is the name of the Throne Speech, “Growing Stronger.” And we 
can only do this by working cohesively as a team. 
 
There are many more things I would love to talk about, but I 
think I will leave that for some of my colleagues. In closing I 
would like to say that I completely support this Throne Speech, 
and Lord, let they kingdom come and thy will be done. Amen. 
 
Now, to the business at hand. I would like to make a motion 
which will be seconded by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 
To Her Honour, the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 
Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has pleased to 
address us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Thank you. 

The Speaker: — The member from Estevan has made the 
motion. I’ll take the motion as read. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour for 
me to rise in the legislature today to second the motion made by 
my colleague from Estevan who spoke so eloquently on behalf 
of her constituents and our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member for Kelvington-Wadena, I have the 
great privilege of serving typical extraordinary Saskatchewan 
people. They are hard working, innovative, diverse, and caring 
people who freely share their time and energy with others 
through their volunteerism, through their commitment to their 
communities, and their commitment to the province of 
Saskatchewan. We are all well served by our municipal leaders, 
numerous partner community-based organizations, and the 
outstanding commitment of dozens of local groups to do the 
community building through church groups, auxiliaries, service 
clubs, and all those who work the fall suppers, the bingos, and 
all the fundraising activities that are so important to rural life. 
Furthermore, in rural Saskatchewan we celebrate the little 
things and big things equally. Whether it’s hockey, football, 
harvest, hunting, the change of seasons, or a business or 
personal anniversary, we know our neighbours and we celebrate 
with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll take a moment to thank my wife, Giselle, who 
is here in your gallery, for walking this path with me. She has 
fully embraced this opportunity for us to serve the people of 
Kelvington-Wadena and the province. 
 
I’d also like to thank our families back home for their support 
and for their frank and honest feedback on many issues. Our 
families have broad, diverse backgrounds in agriculture, health 
care, education, small and large business, law enforcement, 
finance, and more, and as such, are typical Saskatchewan 
extended families. Through them, I get the diversity of opinion 
that helps form my view of the issues of the day. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank my constituency 
assistant, Chris, for the amazing work she does. While this has 
been my first full year as a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly, with the work we do in this place, it is the work that 
happens on behalf of our individual constituents that is most 
important. Chris has quickly exemplified the facilitator role that 
a CA [constituency assistant] undertakes, and it is greatly 
appreciated by myself and our constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all made better people by the interactions 
we have with our colleagues and staff in this place. Colleagues 
are often seen gathered around a desk or a dinner table, testing 
out ideas and examining issues and consequences. Committee 
work is well established as a place to challenge in a more 
formal way the movement of legislation and regulation, but 
much of the heavy lifting is amongst colleagues working 
through the kinks. I truly appreciate the wisdom and frankness 
that is offered freely amongst our team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, governance is a journey. It is a 
road with many forks, many curves, and many hills and valleys. 
We are tasked with making legislative and regulatory decisions 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

each and every day that have consequences for families and 
businesses in the province. None of us in this Chamber takes 
that responsibility lightly. None of us has the proverbial crystal 
ball that provides that perfect view of the future. We make 
decisions of the day based on the best advice from stakeholders, 
communities, our public sector, business, and internal and 
external expertise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Regina 
Coronation Park, in his reply to the Speech from the Throne in 
2012 quoted from Anthony Robbins as follows:  
 

Don’t be afraid of new ideas. Be afraid of old ideas. They 
keep you where you are and they stop you from growing 
and moving forward. Concentrate on where you want to 
go, not on what you fear. 

 
This quote speaks volumes about the task before us. 
 
As government, as public service, and as citizens of the 
province, we have been challenged in the past to be more each 
generation. Our challenges today are not measured by 
generations, but are more often measured by years and 
sometimes by months. As a province, we must be on our game 
to compete. 
 
I will speak about our resources shortly, but I would be remiss 
if I didn’t challenge our thinking in terms of rapidly evolving 
competition for innovation, technology, and value-added 
opportunities. We must reinvent our internal processes to ensure 
we can be responsive to the marketplace in competing for the 
highest quality outcomes as our public and private sectors 
evolve. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, we have provided an overview 
of the general direction of the government. We have identified 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people to continue to succeed. 
We have listened carefully to our constituents and have made 
the adjustments they have asked of us. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we have stood firm on our 
commitment to challenge the federal government on several 
fronts. Through and with our municipal partners, we will need 
to face the challenges of ill-timed and, frankly, inconsiderate 
marijuana legislation that is politically expedient at the federal 
level but shifts an incredible regulatory burden onto the 
provinces. 
 
Our challenge is the safety of our roads and workplaces, 
schoolyards and families. We don’t know the long-term impact 
on health care, social services, law enforcement, the judicial 
system, and equally the financial impact on the province. We 
will, to a certain extent, be challenged to deal not only with the 
regulation of use and sale, but also grow operation regulations, 
and into the future with regulation of edible products and the 
likely evolution of inconceivable violations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to focus our work on building a better 
Saskatchewan. Our farmers have all but completed a harvest 
that by most measures exceeded expectations in most areas of 
the province, despite the vagaries of the weather. Our economy 
continues to face challenges in potash and oil and gas, but is 
continuing to show very positive signs in many economic 

indicators. We continue to be very positive that our budget 
plans are on track to achieve the balance to ensure we can 
provide the services the people of Saskatchewan expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we fully accept that our spring budget challenged 
the province in ways unlike recent history. However we 
committed to using the tools available as a government to bring 
us back to balance in three years. Finding the balance between 
debt, increased revenue through taxes, and managing expenses 
is always subject to a variety of opinions. We made 
wide-ranging decisions based on the best advice of the day, and 
we continue to be committed to building out our infrastructure 
and services to meet the needs of our citizens. 
 
As a province, we are extraordinarily fortunate to have the 
natural resources as our foundation in mining, oil and gas, and 
forestry. As a province, we have incredibly innovative 
agricultural producers that not only feed the world but do so in 
a way that is actually a positive story in the carbon footprint 
discussion. We have incredible provincial and regional parks. 
We have earned the respect of the nation and internationally 
through our leadership on trade and other policy initiatives. We 
have a society that works hard to care for those less fortunate. 
We have a well-educated and enthusiastic next generation 
pushing us to be all that we can be. 
 
As we work collaboratively with our municipal partners, we 
must be ever cognizant of the need for all of us to be learning 
organizations, constantly looking to improve our relationships 
with our customers, the citizens of Saskatchewan. The 
dynamics of the workplace have changed as we move from the 
silent generation, through the baby boom generation, to 
generation X, generation Y, and millennials, and so on. 
Workplaces must adjust to the dramatic shifts, as our young 
people have far different expectations of job security or job 
flexibility than previous generations. 
 
We must never lose sight of the fact that as governments we are 
the conduit between the taxpayer and the consumer, and that 
they are one and the same person. Our responsibility is 
providing value to the taxpayer and providing exceptional 
service to the recipient of health care or social services or of 
other ministries and Crowns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we sincerely appreciate the incredible 
work that CBOs [community-based organization] do across the 
province, and we must foster their efforts through further 
encouraging collaborative working relationships between our 
ministries and agencies and their relationships across the 
province. 
 
Providing continuity of service delivery will be a big part of the 
work undertaken in bringing together the 12 health regions into 
a single provincial body. This should be looked at throughout 
health care as an opportunity to build capacity and align 
resources, with the patient front and centre in every decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was young, a trip to town was an 
adventure. As a teen, going to neighbouring communities was 
the Saturday night outing. As a young adult, I worked in 
northern Manitoba which was accessed only by rail or air. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without question, the issues on everyone’s minds 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

in the ’60s and ’70s are exactly the same as those today. Will I 
have access to a school for my children within a reasonable 
distance? Will I have access to some level of health care within 
a reasonable time frame? What are the conditions of the roads? 
How do we pay for rural and urban infrastructure? Mr. Speaker, 
it is unlikely the questions will ever change. The issue is how 
we respond to those questions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the NDP were in government, they 
chose to close 176 schools. When in government, the NDP 
chose to close 52 hospitals. They chose to cut nearly $500 
million from municipal revenue sharing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the NDP made a conscious decision to close 1,200 long-term 
care beds and didn’t raise the seniors’ income plan by a single 
penny in 16 years. How ironic that today they boast about being 
the defenders of rural Saskatchewan, seniors, educators, and 
health workers, when you consider their devastation of the very 
infrastructure that supported those most vulnerable. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in an effort to be balanced and 
considerate to my friends opposite, I thought I would look at 
recent experience as indicators. Where best to look but in 
Hansard, the official record of the legislature? And this is what 
I found: in the spring and fall sessions of question period, out of 
739 questions asked, they asked four of the Minister of 
Agriculture. They asked three of the Minister of Parks and 
recreation. They asked four of the Minister of Highways, and 
they asked four of the Rural and Remote Health Minister. I can 
only surmise that these issues aren’t that important to members 
opposite. These are things that matter to my constituents. 
 
Let’s take a minute to compare our record. This year alone, we 
have unprecedented investment in education with the opening 
of 21 new schools this fall. Since we became government, we 
have constructed and renovated 65 schools as part of a $17 
billion investment in education. We have 875 more teachers and 
173 more student support teachers in the system today than 10 
years ago. 
 
While we continue to invest in schools and teachers and 
support, we will focus also on outcomes, and the announcement 
of curriculum enhancement, particularly introducing computer 
coding, which will move us firmly into the realm of the 
forward-thinking leaders that our educators are day in and day 
out. In addition we will be looking at math scores across the 
province, as this is a foundation for the scientific world we live 
in as we engage future technologies. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have added an average of 600 
child care spaces a year. Mr. Speaker, we have 750 more 
doctors and 3,400 more nurses practising in the province today 
than 10 years ago. We have doubled investment in new hospital 
projects, including the new Saskatchewan Hospital in North 
Battleford and the children’s hospital in Saskatoon. All of us in 
the province benefit from these investments. In my own 
constituency, I was pleased last year to share the stage in 
opening the new Kelvington integrated health care facility. Mr. 
Speaker, we opened 15 long-term care facilities and tripled the 
seniors’ income benefit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past few months I’ve had the 

honour to participate in funding announcements in support of 
people with disabilities in my constituency. When we formed 
government, we committed to removing the wait-list for people 
with disabilities to have a home, a place they can call their own 
and be proud of in their role in the community. Mr. Speaker, we 
have invested $4 billion in support of these folks who are now 
significant contributors to our communities and to our economy 
as they participate through community initiatives. 
 
The Speech from the Throne refers to the $100 million that has 
been invested in provincial parks since we formed government. 
In my constituency, we have seen ongoing support for regional 
parks, and Greenwater Lake Provincial Park has benefited from 
water treatment upgrades, new service centres, and significant 
expansion of camping facilities. 
 
I’m also very pleased to share the announcement of the creation 
of a new park in the Porcupine Hills area. This has been under 
discussion for many years and has had substantial stakeholder 
engagement. We very much look forward to this new park 
creation in the east central part of our province. 
 
We have also outlined continued unprecedented investment in 
highways. Of particular importance to all of us is the effective 
use of passing lanes, which make a significant contribution to 
the safety and efficient movement of goods on our major 
arteries. 
 
As a province, we have much work to do in areas of crime 
reduction and prevention. The work done by our special 
committee on crime that gathered feedback from around the 
province is being recognized in early steps to more 
responsiveness capability by our law enforcement providers. 
We can build on this by encouraging our municipal leaders to 
play a role through shared initiatives with neighbouring 
municipalities, towns, and villages to enhance community 
safety and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very essence of our province is changing as we 
welcome new citizens from around the world. We have much to 
learn from the thousands of years of history and culture that is 
being shared with us by our new citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague said, both sides of the House are 
currently engaged in leadership races. Twenty years ago our 
party was formed through the vision of eight very brave and 
very determined individuals. From that grounding we had the 
good fortune to identify a leader of extraordinary will and 
appeal. We will have much opportunity over the coming 
months for appropriate accolades, but for the moment let’s 
agree that we will be forever grateful for an opportunity to see a 
revitalized and strong Saskatchewan through the eyes of the 
member from Swift Current. 
 
Under that founding group and the new leadership, they saw 
that the path Saskatchewan had been on for years was a path of 
mediocrity forever. Successive NDP governments had 
succeeded in driving the people of the province to a dependency 
mentality. The NDP thought that government should be the 
solution to everything, and they failed miserably. People left the 
province in droves. They closed schools and hospitals, and they 
left an infrastructure deficit that will be generational to repair. 
 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

What comes to mind in looking across the aisle in terms of 
policy is an image of buzzards circling philosophical roadkill — 
bereft of new ideas, afraid of challenging the status quo, and 
terrified that their federal brothers’ bandwagon has no room for 
engines of economic reality in Canada. 
 
The new national NDP leader, who is opening the NDP 
convention this weekend, has specifically said no to Energy 
East and Kinder Morgan. All four of the federal NDP leadership 
candidates clearly staked out positions against pipelines who 
would move our products to the global market. Mr. Speaker, on 
that side of the House the old horse and buggy economy is alive 
and well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I close my comments today I am mindful that 
our government’s vision of a bright future for Saskatchewan is 
confirmed, not only by our founding principles but by the 
commitment each of us has on this side of the House to a 
positive view of the current state of the province and a 
commitment to keep Saskatchewan strong. We have much to 
do, and I’m excited to be part of moving forward with our 
government and our leadership team. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As always it’s an honour to be able to rise in the House and 
have an opportunity for comments. And certainly today in reply 
to the Speech from the Throne, I’m very grateful to be able to 
do so. And in fact I really appreciated the quote yesterday from 
Ron Petrie that the Lieutenant Governor used in the Speech 
from the Throne where he said, “Let it be known that I am 
grateful.” 
 
I too have so much to be thankful for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
so lucky to have been born into many privileges that I’m still 
learning about and still trying to understand. I’ve had access to 
all levels of education. I’ve had no shortage of food, universal 
health care, but also health insurance. As a diabetic, that’s very 
important to me. I have a pension. I have a house. I have 
healthy children, and for that I am grateful. 
 
I’d like to take a minute now just to thank some of the people 
who enrich my life. To my new constituency assistant, Jaime 
Nicklas, who I know is watching right now. Thank you so much 
for your patience and particularly for the empathy that you 
show the people who come to our office. And I think when I 
think of Mary-Ann McLeod and her son, Jonathan, who had 
been to several places trying to get help with their housing 
arrangements. They were living in a garage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, infested with cockroaches and they couldn’t get any 
help, but my CA, Jaime, went above and beyond to ensure that 
they were looked after and that they actually now have a home 
that they are happy to call home. 
 
I’d also like to thank Robert Clipperton, my constituency 
president, who actually doubled our NDP memberships in the 
last year. So thanks, Robert, for your determination. To our 
intrepid caucus staff, thanks for all that you do to ensure that the 
loyal opposition does what it can to hold this government to 
account. 
 

To my friends, thanks for standing by me. And to my kids, 
thanks for your willingness to take on your adult world with 
enthusiasm and passion. To my siblings and my siblings-in-law, 
thanks for looking after my aging parents with so much love. I 
wish I could be closer to home to help, but you guys are there 
and you take my worries away. 
 
To my mom, your kindness and love even in the throes of 
dementia, it still comes through. And to my dad who is 91 years 
old . . . He still rides his exercise bike, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
He’s still passionate about politics. I want to say thanks for your 
inspiration. 
 
And finally to my new seven-week-old grandson, thank you. 
This always happens, Mr. Speaker. Anyways I’ll get a hold of 
myself. My new seven-week-old grandson, Théodore 
Cinq-Mars, merci pour m’inspirer de travailler fort pour votre 
génération. 
 
[Translation: Thank you for inspiring me to work hard for your 
generation.] 
 
His generation will inherit an uncertain world from us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this gratitude leads me to politics and why 
we’re all here, what brings us, all of us, to this position. And I 
know that we all come here with a dream to bring what we are 
able to offer to make this province a better place. 
 
And at this point in time I do want to commend our Premier, the 
member from Swift Current, for his amazing dedication to this 
province and his commitment to this province and the work he 
has done in his years here in this House. I want to thank him for 
that work and congratulate him for an amazing job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course where we differ is how to get there. And 
for me, I want to fight for Saskatchewan where everyone has 
the opportunities I’m so grateful for: where everyone has food 
on the table, where everyone has a roof over their head, where 
all seniors are able to afford both their rent and their 
prescriptions, and where no young person is so full of 
hopelessness that they choose to take their own life. 
 
I listened very carefully to the Throne Speech yesterday, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I heard a lot of talk about the past, a lot of 
patting themselves on the back for spending when oil was $140 
a barrel. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the true measure of any government is not 
how they manage in the good times. The Sask Party came into 
government in 2007 with the cupboards full. Then they had 
several years of record revenues. But it is their performance in 
the last couple of years that they’ve revealed how they have 
failed Saskatchewan people. This has not gone unnoticed, Mr. 
Speaker. Standard & Poor’s, for example, had given them two 
consecutive downgrades to their credit rating. 
 
In the Throne Speech, what we got was a lot of the same, 
repetitive, old news from the time when the revenues were at 
heady rates, and then a lot of talk about growth, the moral 
imperative of growth, but, Mr. Speaker, not all forms of growth. 
They’re not talking about all forms of growth, just a very select 
type of growth that doesn’t reflect the reality that so many 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

people in Saskatchewan are facing, a select type of growth that 
cheapens the real meaning of moral imperative, which actually 
implies universal growth where everyone is getting ahead, not 
just a certain strata of our society that gets wealthier and 
wealthier while others fall farther and farther behind. 
 
And I think it’s important to talk about some of the growth in 
this province that this government doesn’t want to talk about. 
And here is but a few examples. Growth in the number of 
people waiting for surgeries — in the last two years five times 
as many people are waiting longer than three months for their 
surgery, and there are seven times more people waiting longer 
than six months for their surgery. 
 
How about the growth in public debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 
Sask Party has doubled the province’s debt in just five years. 
Growth in the number of people looking for work — more than 
32,000 people are unemployed in Saskatchewan, and my city of 
Saskatoon has its highest unemployment rate in two decades. 
 
Growth in the number of people relying on the food bank — 
31,395 people accessed food banks in the province in 2016, up 
17.5 per cent from the year before. And 45 per cent of those 
people accessing the food banks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
children, above the national average of 36 per cent and the 
highest in the country. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The growth of the number of kids, particularly indigenous kids, 
in care, the number of children in care continues to climb up by 
454 children in just three years, was almost 5,000 children in 
2016. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we know the terrible statistic 
that indigenous children remain overrepresented in the child 
welfare system among those sustaining critical injuries and 
those who have died. 
 
There’s a growth in the number of people on assistance, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. In June of 2017 about 35,750 people accessed 
one of the three main benefits offered by the province. And that 
number has continued to climb nearly every month for at least 
the past four years. 
 
The growth in cases of HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 
virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome] — 
Saskatchewan’s HIV rate is the highest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s up 800 per cent in one health region alone. And we’re the 
only jurisdiction that saw a growth in the number of cases in 
recent years, up 6 per cent between 2015 and 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan child poverty rates are above the 
national average. This shouldn’t be. Saskatchewan’s child 
poverty rate of 24.6 per cent is six percentage points higher than 
the rest of the country. Sixty-nine per cent of indigenous 
children on-reserve are living in poverty. I want to repeat that 
statistic, Mr. Speaker. Sixty-nine per cent of the children living 
on First Nation reserves are living in poverty. How can that 
happen in a country or a province as prosperous as ours? 
 
Highest family violence rates in the country. We have double 
the national average. And of course, Mr. Speaker, you have 
heard us talk on this side of the House about the growth and the 
debt of the GTH, growth in the cost of the over-built Regina 

bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this the kind of growth that we want in our 
province? Of course not. But the province . . . This government 
doesn’t want to face the reality that so many people in this 
province are facing every day. 
 
I guess you could say that this government has grown too. They 
have grown out-of-touch. So out-of-touch that they are void. 
They’re empty of ideas, and to suggest that they represent the 
moral imperative in this province is almost laughable. But it is 
definitely hurtful and insulting to the people who suffer as a 
result of their mismanagement, their scandals, and their waste. 
 
In the Throne Speech, we heard a lot of one-sided talk. They 
talk about introducing ride shares, but they’ve eliminated the 
ultimate ride share, the STC. They talk about raising the small 
business tax threshold, but don’t even talk about hiking the PST 
[provincial sales tax] and forcing those small businesses to 
collect it for free. And their flip-flopping on the corporate tax 
rate will cause confusion and uncertainty for all businesses. 
They talk about an old election promise to provide tax deferrals 
for seniors who actually own their own home, but they don’t 
talk about their increasing costs for seniors in care. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch briefly on one part of the 
Throne Speech that suggests that this Premier, whose time we 
know in this Chamber is short, is wanting to pre-empt the 
system of law in this province to leave his mark on the issue of 
religion in schools. Rather than respecting the due process of 
law, he is jumping the queue and hauling out the threat of the 
notwithstanding clause. He is doing this, notwithstanding, the 
fact that there is a legal proceeding under way, and that will 
take many years. And if it goes to the Supreme Court of 
Canada, which it likely will, it will take several more years. 
 
In the meantime, this Assembly, because of what he’s doing, 
will have to review and review the notwithstanding clause, 
which only has a shelf life of five years, Mr. Speaker. It’s like 
him leaving the ball diamond in the middle of the first inning, 
taking the bat and the ball and the home plate along with him. 
Our legal system and our education system deserve better than 
that. And his urgency shows an inherent lack of respect for the 
legal system that is simply breathtaking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move on now to climate chaos. You 
only have to watch the news to recognize that climate chaos is 
having a serious impact on the world and that many world 
leaders are finally beginning to show the leadership that is 
needed to slow the growth of carbon dioxide emissions in our 
atmosphere, but not this government. Instead of working for 
Saskatchewan people by determining a made-in-Saskatchewan 
system, it rather stomps its feet and pouts when the federal 
government imposes a carbon pricing system on us. 
 
In 2009 this government actually did that; they actually passed 
a law with a made-in-Saskatchewan solution focusing on 
innovation and challenging the highest emitters in this province 
to find real ways to reduce their emissions. But did they enact 
that law, Mr. Speaker? You were in power and the former 
minister is saying, chirping from her seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but they didn’t enact that law. The majority of this House 
passed that law and now she’s worried about what happened on 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

this side. They did not enact that law, Mr. Speaker, and you 
have to wonder why. And you have to wonder why she was 
soon removed from that position after that bill. 
 
So now we have a void in leadership and it’s evolved to the 
point where the Premier’s only solution is to tell his former 
Environment minister to walk out of meetings. Wow. How 
mature is that, Mr. Speaker? And now what do we see in the 
Speech from the Throne? Rather than a proactive approach, we 
get a Premier who threatens with a lawsuit that experts say 
won’t succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to move on to illegal drainage. It’s a 
serious issue in this province. I was out at Wadena last month 
and I saw blatant trenching and drained wetlands. This is after 
the Water Security Agency and the two most recent ministers in 
Environment, now sitting in the backbench, told us that they 
were going to shut down unauthorized drains going back 100 
years. They were going to write letters and then they were 
going to enforce the law. What have they done? Nothing. They 
are listening to the cheerleaders and ignoring the facts, and they 
allow unauthorized drainage to rampantly continue without 
even trying enforcement. You just have to drive down the 
highway, Mr. Speaker, and you can see it. You have to ask 
yourself, what on earth is going on over there? 
 
The steady sell-off of our Crowns continues unabated. On the 
chopping block this year was the sale of our Grain Car 
Corporation — which was making money by the way — and of 
course the so-called wind-down of the STC. How can you say 
that you didn’t privatize our public transportation system when 
there are now private businesses offering public bus services in 
the province? You say you won’t privatize and then you turn 
around and over and over again you privatize. How are people 
in this province able to have any confidence in what this 
government says? 
 
The epitome of that is, of course, Bill 40. You had every single 
member over there vote in favour of that bill last spring. And 
that Premier and his Minister of Justice defended it over and 
over again, despite loud cries of opposition from this side of the 
House and across the province with protests and rallies and 
petitions all coming forward to condemn the attempt to open the 
door to privatization. And then the Premier decides yesterday, 
yesterday to repeal it. And you have to ask yourself, what on 
earth is going on over there? 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the budget, when you had every single 
member opposite vote in favour of that ill-conceived budget and 
you see retraction after retraction after retraction of budget 
measures, you have to ask yourself, what on earth is going on 
over there? 
 
The GTH, when you have a cabinet minister defend the GTH’s 
unconscionable overpayment for land that the Ministry of 
Highways was going to expropriate, and then in a brief bid for 
the coveted spot that the Premier currently occupies, calls for 
abandoning the whole project, you have to ask yourself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what on earth is going on over there? 
 
And when you have a Throne Speech that overlooks half of our 
province in the North, that shows no regard for the desperate 
situation that so many young people are finding themselves in, 

with tragic, tragic results, you have to ask yourself, what on 
earth is going on over there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is bereft of a moral 
imperative. It is a tired and old government with tired and old 
leadership. And we deserve better and we demand better. So I 
reject the motion to approve the Throne Speech. I would like to 
move now the following amendment. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 
 

And that this Assembly does not support the Sask 
Party’s unambitious agenda that ignores the realities 
faced by Saskatchewan families and focuses on 
backtracking, bravado, and revisionist history, instead of 
creating jobs, strengthening the North and rural 
Saskatchewan, making life more affordable, or investing 
in our kids’ classrooms, health care, and supports for 
seniors and our most vulnerable. 

 
And I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved a motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 
 

That this Assembly does not support the Sask Party’s 
unambiguous agenda that ignores the realities faced by 
Saskatchewan families and focuses on backtracking, 
bravado, and revisionist history, instead of creating jobs, 
strengthening the North and rural Saskatchewan, making 
life more affordable, or investing in kids’ classrooms, 
health care, and support for seniors and our most 
vulnerable. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 
to second the amendment put forward by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana, and to take the opportunity to address the 
House on behalf of the residents of Saskatoon Fairview in reply 
to the Throne Speech. 
 
First I want to thank the constituents of Fairview. I certainly 
have other people to thank, but the people of Fairview sent me 
to this building because they were looking for change. The Sask 
Party wasn’t working for them, and they wanted to send a 
message — a message that Saskatchewan deserves a 
government that doesn’t forget who they work for; that doesn’t 
slash funding from schools; that doesn’t cut health care 
workers; that doesn’t try to sell off our Crowns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Fairview picked me and my 
caucus as the change they were looking for, and I thank them 
for their trust. Everyone that opened their door to talk to me, 
invited me into their home, and spoke to me about sometimes 
very personal issues, confiding in me and believing in our 
democratic system — I hope to represent you well in the 
legislature no matter your political stripe and that you will reach 
out if there’s a way I can be representing you better. 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

Certainly I would like to take a minute to thank some of the 
people who are closest to me. Some of them got to witness my 
swearing-in on October 5th and, in standard family tradition, 
my mother started crying about two minutes in. My parents are 
very proud and have been support pillars throughout my life. 
Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a working family. My parents taught 
me about hard work. They taught me how to work hard and to 
not complain about it. I attribute any of the successes in my life 
growing up with this mantra guiding me. 
 
I want to thank my partner, Grayson, for his enduring support 
and confidence in me no matter what. Anyone can be 
supportive on a good day, but it’s how people behave on bad 
days that makes the real difference. I know that most people 
thank their spouses on occasions like this, but anyone who 
knows Grayson knows that we are a very strong team, and he 
has been there providing selfless support every step of the way. 
 
I also want to thank my close friends who have been supportive 
in my journey thus far. Without these individuals I may not 
have had the courage to try or the resolve to keep trying. I’m 
thankful for the support I have received from these people and 
that they’ve never stopped believing in my ability to do this job. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank the many hundreds of 
people who helped get me here, perhaps thousands. Thank you 
for believing in me and I pledge to work hard on your behalf. 
 
I would like to thank the Legislative Assembly Service staff and 
the caucus office staff for the support they have provided to me 
thus far. Figuring my way around this place and the directives 
we all follow has meant a lot of reading and a lot of asking 
questions. I have appreciated your patience and support as I’ve 
been finding my way around this past month or so and the high 
standard of professionalism I’ve observed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had some time to reflect on the Throne 
Speech. My response is shaped by my interactions with the 
constituents in Saskatoon Fairview and across the province. I 
want to share some of those stories in light of the proposed 
legislative agenda for this session. 
 
We know that Saskatchewan has grown and that our 
demographics have shifted over time. We have observed the 
greying of Canada, where a higher percentage of our population 
is 65 or older. But when you look at Saskatchewan in particular, 
some interesting trends emerge. Although our population of 65 
and older is still around average at 15.5 per cent, we also have a 
staggering number of young people at 19.6 per cent — the 
highest percentage of young people among all provinces in 
2016. 
 
There are more young people aged 14 and younger than there 
are seniors. In a CBC article, economist Eric Howe said that 
this younger population is largely because of the growing 
number of indigenous peoples in our province. The indigenous 
population is the fastest growing segment in the Canadian 
population and the median age of First Nations people in 
Saskatchewan is 20, the youngest in the country. 
 
With a growing population of indigenous peoples, we have a 
responsibility to put meaningful action toward reconciliation. 
Mr. Speaker, action on this issue certainly isn’t something we 

have seen from the Sask Party. The Speech from the Throne 
didn’t focus on it at all. 
 
We also have a growing population of newcomers, particularly 
those from South and Southeast Asia. According to Stats 
Canada’s 2016 census numbers, roughly two-thirds of Canada’s 
population growth is due to international migration. Twice as 
many people enter Canada as leave. 
 
[12:00] 
 
This year, Statistics Canada came out with a forecast that by 
2036, nearly one-quarter of Saskatchewan people could be 
newcomers. Saskatoon Fairview certainly reflects this diversity. 
It has to be one of the most diverse constituencies in this 
province. We have seniors living in long-term care, in their 
original homes, and in private apartments. We have working 
families and younger children, and we also have empty nesters. 
We have young students, and people who are making a 
minimum wage. 
 
We have people of all ethnicities and backgrounds, including 
indigenous and newcomers. I have had the pleasure of meeting 
so many individuals from the Philippines, Vietnam, Pakistan, 
India, Bangladesh. Many of these individuals belong to strong 
cultural associations in Saskatoon. 
 
Our demographic makeup in Saskatchewan is changing. This 
diversity makes us richer. If we are going to be future oriented, 
we should keep these changes in mind and look at ways of 
strengthening our workforce now, including ending the 
education gap for on-reserve children, looking at how we can 
acknowledge immigrant credentials, examining the changes that 
have been made to the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program, and investing in the future of this province. We owe it 
to our grandchildren and other people’s grandchildren to be 
looking ahead. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to respond to the Throne Speech 
by relating it to my experiences in Saskatoon Fairview. Many of 
the constituents that I have met over the past few years are 
struggling. In particular, at this moment they are frustrated with 
the budget put forward in the spring. I spoke with many people 
who could directly tie a family struggle that they were having to 
this year’s budget cuts. Normally I find that people have trouble 
connecting their personal experience to a broader policy 
change, but this spring was very different. The people of 
Fairview were clearly connecting their struggles to the Sask 
Party budget, to their tax hikes, and to their budget cuts. 
 
People are frustrated with the government’s PST hikes and 
adding PST to restaurant meals, kids’ clothes, and insurance. I 
spoke with mothers and fathers who could not believe the 
government was making up for the deficit shortfalls on the 
backs of their children or by taxing their Tim Hortons coffee. 
So many people asked me how this could happen after a decade 
of resource boom in this province. I spoke with grandmothers 
and grandfathers who were living alone on a fixed income, 
trying to figure out where these taxes were going to come from. 
I helped build this province, one man said to me, and this is the 
thanks I get. So many people argue that this government has 
mismanaged the public money. 
 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

People are frustrated with cuts to education. I heard from 
parents who were trying to figure out how they were going to 
get their kindergarten-aged kids to school because of cuts to the 
school bus routes. I heard from parents who were concerned 
about us putting schools on a P3 credit card and future debt we 
will have to deal with. I heard from teachers who were 
concerned with the lack of EA [educational assistant] assistance 
they were getting in the classrooms, and repeatedly that because 
of these budget cuts they were being asked to do more with less. 
After a decade of boom why wouldn’t we have the best schools 
in this province? We should be viewing education as an 
investment not an area where we can trim the fat. 
 
And people are frustrated with the lack of jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has repeatedly released reports heralding their 
ability to create new jobs in this province, yet they remain quite 
silent when the employment rates are sent out. In fact the EI 
rates have been terrible in this province lately, and this is 
consistent with what I’m hearing from my constituents. I spoke 
to one woman on the phone since being elected who had a full 
life full of work experience. She’d applied for nearly 500 
entry-level jobs. Her last bit of employment working casually 
for an organization had disappeared. She said to me, I have 
worked hard my entire life; I’ve never had to apply for social 
assistance, but I don’t know what else to do. And she broke 
down into tears. 
 
I spoke to a gentleman this summer who worked in the trades, a 
skilled labourer who hadn’t had work in nearly six months. 
When he was leaving school he was encouraged to enter trades 
and become educated. He was told this would provide stability 
for his family. Now he’s picking up odd jobs and struggling to 
keep possession of his modest living arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are defining moments in people’s lives. This 
government has a responsibility to work for the citizens of this 
province. 
 
People are frustrated with the state of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Tommy Douglas is a source of pride on 
doorsteps across this province, but what is happening in our 
health care system right now is not what he envisioned. I often 
speak to health care workers who are struggling to see the good 
in decisions that have been made over the past several years, 
patients who wait for hours and hours and hours in emergency 
rooms, and family members who only want what’s best for their 
loved ones. We need to do better. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my constituents were very concerned about 
this government’s plan to sell off up to 49 per cent of our 
Crown corporations without consulting them, and they were 
clear that they won’t trust the Sask Party with our Crown 
corporations. 
 
I have heard so many concerns about the closure of STC. I 
heard from a mother whose son would often ride the bus to 
come see her. Now she isn’t sure if or when her son is going to 
be able to come see her. I’ve heard from grandparents who use 
STC to visit their families. I’ve heard from patients who relied 
on STC to transport them to and from their medical 
appointments, business owners who relied on STC freight to 
transport parts in a timely manner. Mr. Speaker, STC was set up 
as a public transportation service. Dismantling it has had a 

tremendous impact. 
 
And the people of this province are equally concerned about the 
potential sale of SaskTel. Many of my constituents are 
employees of SaskTel. I have also heard from consumers who 
rely on SaskTel to keep our rates low, people who have lived in 
other provinces and seen what happens to utility bills under 
private ownership. 
 
SaskTel brought high-speed Internet into every nook and 
cranny of our province, and now they’re leading the charge by 
bringing fibre to some rural areas as a pilot project. SaskTel 
services this province, and people want to see it stick around. 
The people of this province do not agree that this government 
has a mandate to sell any part of this Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since being assigned my critic duties, I have heard 
from many folks outside my constituency as well. As this is a 
place of deliberation, I look forward to spreading their 
messages and ensuring they have a voice in the direction of this 
province. I believe the opposition has an important role to play 
in holding this government to account and ensuring 
transparency, and I am committed to working with my 
colleagues to do this important work. 
 
To close, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the constituents of 
Saskatoon Fairview for choosing me to represent them and to 
fight on their behalf. It is a humbling experience, and I will do 
my best. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to second this amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to speak to my 27th Speech from the Throne. It’s a 
privilege to continue to represent the riding of Cannington in 
the very southeast corner of the province, a province that has 
been well served by this government and a province that has 
been growing since this government was formed in 2007. Now I 
note that the members opposite don’t like to use that word 
“growing,” but I’ll address that after a bit. 
 
I wanted to thank the constituents of Cannington for again 
asking me to represent them in this legislature and speak on 
their behalf. It’s a privilege that I take very seriously and that I 
hope that I perform to their expectations. And having been 
elected seven times now, I think they continue to approve of my 
performance here. 
 
I would also like to thank the Premier, the member for Swift 
Current, for his service to the province. Premier for 10 years 
and elected in 1999, he’s had a very successful career as a 
Saskatchewan elected member and as Premier, and I know that 
the people of Cannington — regardless of their political stripe, 
although most of them are obviously Sask Party — continue to 
support the Premier in his efforts to make Saskatchewan a more 
prosperous and better place to live. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the 
new member for Saskatoon Eastview to becoming a member of 
this august body. I look forward to hearing her comments and 
see her performance here in the House. But having listened to 
her speech, I have to say I am somewhat disappointed in some 
of her commentary. She has obviously drank the philosophical 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

NDP Kool-Aid. 
 
Now when you look . . . She was talking about the increases in 
property taxes, but she forgot to mention that Tommy Douglas 
had said that property taxes on farm property, agricultural 
property, was too high and had to change. Forty-five years later 
Lorne Calvert said the same thing and the status quo was not 
on. But it took the election of the Saskatchewan Party 
government to make that change, to reduce the property taxes 
on farm land, on commercial property, and on residential 
property. The member opposite seems to ignore that. Yes, there 
was a property tax increase in the budget, the first one in 10 
years. So, Mr. Speaker, very selective choices of perspective on 
property taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new member also talked about immigration credentials. I 
was elected in ’91, served 16 years in opposition to the New 
Democratic Party. At that time they had the opportunity to 
make changes allowing for a greater acceptance of immigrant 
certification, and it didn’t happen. It didn’t happen for 16 years 
under the NDP. But what did we do? We expanded that 
certification through the New West Partnership across Western 
Canada to accept the credentials of all four of the Western 
provinces. 
 
And the member for Athabasca is chirping away in his seat. 
And I remember when he stood in this House as a Liberal, 
condemning the NDP. And now he can’t keep his lips together 
because he’s always heckling, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t say 
anything important, but he’s always heckling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the certifications on immigrant 
doctors. It used to be that they had to take training in Manitoba 
and maybe they would be accepted in Saskatchewan. Today 
they come to Saskatchewan. We’ve expanded from the six 
countries on the NDP list to many more jurisdictions. They now 
come to Saskatchewan, take SIPPA [Saskatchewan 
international physician practice assessment] training for three 
months, and can now work. If they pass, they can now work 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, we’ve increased the number of doctors in this 
province by almost 800. But more importantly, we doubled the 
number of seats for doctor . . . medical training in 
Saskatchewan from what the NDP had — 60 to 120. 
 
Nurses. Under the NDP, they had cut the training seats for 
nurses to 160 nurses a year because obviously under the NDP’s 
growth plan, we were going to shrink. We didn’t need all of 
these nurses, so why train them? Well, Mr. Speaker, this 
province under the Saskatchewan Party has grown. We now 
have seats for 450 nurses, I believe it is, across the province. 
That is growth. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And the member from Saskatoon Fairview needs to consider 
these facts as well as drinking the Kool-Aid. And the member 
who is sitting in front of you heckling, the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, has a lot to say. But when he was a minister, 
he accomplished nothing. He didn’t do a thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think the people of Fairview appreciate the fact that there 

are about 800 more doctors here and 3,000 more nurses, Mr. 
Speaker. Because under the NDP previously, you had to wait 18 
months to get surgery, 12 months to get an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging]. 
 
I’ll give you an example. The member won’t listen. He’s too 
busy talking. But back in the 1990s, I raised dogs. Try and get 
in for an MRI would take you 9 to 12 months. I got my dog in 
for an MRI at University Hospital in three days using the same 
MRI that people used because the MRI worked at night for the 
animals whereas the staff couldn’t work in the daytime. Now it 
just made no sense, Mr. Speaker, no sense. 
 
So this province has grown significantly over the last 10 years: 
160,000 more people — and I think it’s actually more than that 
— but officially 160,000 more people. And I remember sitting 
over where you’re sitting now, and the member, Doreen 
Hamilton from Regina, the east side of Regina somewhere, 
standing up and saying it’s statistically impossible to grow the 
population in Saskatchewan. And I agreed with her. It was 
statistically impossible to grow the population of Saskatchewan 
under the NDP. Basically from 1944 to 2007, with a couple of 
breaks in there for the Liberals and the Conservatives, it was 
NDP. The population didn’t change. We were under a million 
people in 1944, and we were still under a million people in 
2007. The real growth happened in the 1910, 1920s. Nothing 
really after that until now. And I know some people on both 
sides of the House may think that I was there, but I wasn’t. 
 
One of the NDP cabinet members, years ago, said, grow, grow, 
grow; that’s all you guys in the Sask Party talk about. Well 
that’s true. We continue to talk about growth and growing the 
economy, growing the number of people in Saskatchewan, 
growing the prosperity of Saskatchewan. I think that’s a very 
worthwhile goal. Before we formed government we said that 
our plan was to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 
years, and that was to be impossible. Well in 10 years we’ve 
grown it by 160,000, a very commendable record. 
 
You know, talking about doctors and the new doctors in 
Saskatchewan, the community where I was born, Redvers, now 
has three full-time doctors, more than they’ve had in many, 
many years. A local girl went and took her medical training and 
now has returned to work in Redvers. A young guy from Alida 
took his training, and now he works at Redvers as well, you 
know. And we have one immigrant doctor there from Southeast 
Asia. I’m not sure exactly which country he’s from. So we have 
seen the growth in Saskatchewan and the benefits that it brings 
to all of our communities. 
 
I didn’t check the clock when I started so I’m not sure where 
I’m at here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Keep going. Keep going. We’re 
enjoying it all. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh no. Don’t have to worry. I’ve got 
lots to say. It’s more that I’m more apt to get the hook to get out 
of here. 
 
You know, we’re looking at organ donor legislation to provide 
supports for people with severe medical conditions that can be 
helped out by the unfortunate demise of other members of 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

Saskatchewan. I had the privilege to chair the Human Services 
Committee when this recommendation was coming forward out 
of that committee and particularly with the cardio-circulatory 
death being recognized as an opportunity for harvesting of 
organs for organ transplants. 
 
We also recommended that a program be put in place and then 
reviewed four years later to see whether or not it was providing 
the service that our expectations had for that program because 
you don’t always get everything perfectly right the first time. 
You need to go back and reconsider and renew that program. So 
I’m looking forward to that kind of a review and develop the 
proper program for Saskatchewan because there certainly is a 
need to have a good organ donor program . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, yes. No, no. I’ve got 15 minutes yet. 
 
You know, the members opposite are talking about increased 
taxation and cuts to schools, tumbleweeds blowing through the 
GTH. But you took a look at the 176 schools that the members 
opposite closed when they were in power. I’m not sure about 
the tumbleweeds in the schoolyards, but there certainly are no 
children in those schoolyards, you know, and that was a severe 
blow to many, many communities when their schools closed. 
The school in my own community of Alida was closed. The 
school that I went to high school at Storthoaks was closed. You 
know, that was all part of the benefit of living under an NDP 
government, that your school would be closed. You know, so I 
think the fact that we have built 18 new joint-use schools across 
the province is a commendation and a recognition of the growth 
that has taken place in Saskatchewan under the Saskatchewan 
Party government. 
 
You know, I mentioned earlier about the property tax increases. 
Yes, once in 10 years there has been an increase. Every year 
prior under the NDP, there was property tax increases for 
education. Those property taxes have been significantly reduced 
for everybody across the system. 
 
You know, we’re looking now and it was mentioned — the 
member from Estevan mentioned this in her address — about 
the changes that the Liberal, federal Liberal government are 
bringing in on marijuana laws. You know, the feds made the 
decision, federal Liberals made the decision to implement 
non-criminal use of marijuana, and they did not provide any 
supports, any time for training, for law enforcement, for 
medical services to deal with any of the issues that might arise 
for this. 
 
Can you go to school and stand out on the sidewalk? Because 
you can’t smoke in school, but can you go to school and smoke 
out front of the school, your joint? Yes, you’re not supposed to 
have it unless you’re of legal age — 18 or 19, 21 perhaps 
depending on which province you’re in — but you can legally 
possess it at age 16. So are we going to have high school kids 
going and standing on the sidewalks and having a few tokes 
before they go back to chemistry class and do their chemistry 
experiments? I don’t know because the feds have never allowed 
time to work these things through. They just simply, you know, 
made the promise in 2015 and they’re implementing it next 
summer, and you’ve got to live with it. You figure it out after 
that point. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a recipe for disaster. I think there 

needs to be more time taken to develop the proper protocols to 
provide for this kind of a change in the environment of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, the one thing the feds did come forward with, 
though, was that they want a 10 per cent tax that’ll go to them. 
But everybody else is supposed to keep their taxes very low so 
that we can compete against the black market, so as long as they 
get their 10 per cent it seems they’re, you know, prepared to be 
happy about that. I’m not sure that that’s the proper attitude that 
the federal government should have towards any of the 
provinces. 
 
You know, over the last decade in this province, we’ve had 600 
people killed because of impairments, impaired driving, and 
4,000 people have been injured. You know, I was part of the 
last safe driving review that was done in this province in 
1993-94. That’s a long time, Mr. Speaker, and it might well be 
worthwhile with these changes to marijuana legislation to take 
another look at that and how we are going to deal with this as a 
province. 
 
I know when we did this study and we selected .04 as the 
cut-off, that decision was made because at .05 there was a 
dramatic increase in the number of accidents related to 
impairment. Up to .04, the line was . . . it increased, but it was a 
gradual increase. At .05 it spiked dramatically. 
 
What are the numbers for marijuana? Nobody knows. The 
research has not been done. And yet it’s going to be 
implemented next summer. So I really think we need to take a 
very serious look at what needs to happen in these particular 
cases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the members opposite . . . and being in opposition, 
you can do this. You can complain all you want because you 
don’t have to accept any responsibilities. You don’t have to 
expect or accept any responsibilities for the decisions that are 
made. 
 
You know, if I look over the last 10 years of the Saskatchewan 
Party government, one of the things that is probably most 
notable across rural Saskatchewan in particular but certainly 
right around the urban areas as well . . . The NDP are always 
complaining about the Regina bypass, but across Saskatchewan 
in general we have spent in upgrading our highway 
infrastructure and our road network record amounts of money. 
Eight billion, I’m told. 
 
Why did we have to do this? Because for 16 long years under 
the NDP, there was virtually no road construction and very little 
maintenance. I remember the 1992 budget where it was 
decreased, maintenance, to $110 million a year and construction 
was $50 million. We’re spending over a billion dollars a year 
now upgrading those roads that the NDP allowed to deteriorate 
and become virtually impassable. Trucks were getting stuck on 
the highway going past my place because it was impassable. 
 
Now we have spent a lot of money and done a lot of work in 
upgrading highways across this province, and we’re not done. 
And I want to remind the Minister of Highways that we’re not 
done yet and that I’ve got three highways in my constituency — 
we’re not done yet — that need a little work. He should listen. 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

Highway 361, Highway 318, and Highway 47, and a little short 
stretch of Highway No. 8 south of Redvers, about 3 or 4 
kilometres worth through a bunch of bog that needs to be ripped 
out and the base needs to be rebuilt in it. It’s never been done 
since that highway was built in about 1952. It was resurfaced 
but the base has never been redone, and it just destroys the 
surface because there’s no supports underneath of it. 
 
[12:30] 
 
You know, the members opposite were talking a lot about 
SaskTel. And we’ve spent a lot of money on upgrading 
SaskTel, but there’s a huge difficulty there that most people 
don’t recognize. And that is that when we buy bandwidth to 
increase the services of smartphones and iPads and Surface Pros 
and all of the other connectivity, digital connectivity, that we 
have and want, we have to compete on the national stage to buy 
that bandwidth. So we have to compete for a service in 
Saskatchewan, but we have to pay as if we were supplying that 
service in Ontario or Quebec or British Columbia or across the 
entire nation. 
 
It makes it extremely difficult for SaskTel to be able to afford to 
buy that kind of bandwidth. We get outbid most times. So what 
happens is that we have fewer and fewer capabilities in our 
system to supply the service that our citizens want. Well the 
people of Saskatchewan have spoken and said no, they want 
SaskTel to remain the same. That also means that they may well 
be asked to accept a lower service than what is available across 
the country, because we simply can’t buy the bandwidth. So, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s great to keep our Crowns, but we need to be 
able to compete across Canada as well. 
 
You know, one of the things that I have the privilege of being 
on is the Chairman of the energy sub-committee of the Midwest 
Canada committee of MLC [Midwestern Legislative 
Conference]. And there we deal with inter-jurisdictional issues 
dealing with energy, production, and transportation. What kind 
of shape is the electrical grid in? What kind of shape is the 
pipeline grid in? How is generation? How can we integrate 
renewable energy into a grid? And we look at what’s happening 
in other jurisdictions. 
 
You know, there is a push from groups in Saskatchewan to 
increase our use of wind and solar. That’s very good. But how 
do you include that into your electrical grid system? How do 
you lump that in with the generation that we currently have 
without causing problems? Because if you do it wrong, you can 
blow a lot of the system up. You’re not going to blow up the 
generators but you’re going to blow up the switching, the 
transformers. 
 
So what they’ve done in the U.S. [United States] is they have 
formed large blocks of states. And the one across from us is 
called MISO [Midcontinent Independent System Operator], and 
there they integrate over about 10 or 12 states the electrical 
generation — coal, nuclear, hydro, wind, and solar. And they 
sell electricity or they buy electricity in five-minute blocks. It’s 
remarkable how you can manage that, but that’s what they do. 
And they can . . . Somebody will contact them and say, my 
wind generator has come online; I can sell you X amount of 
power at a certain price. And somebody else says, yes, I’ll take 
that. And so it goes from, let’s say, from Illinois to Wyoming. 

And that transfer is made. I’m not sure the electrons go from 
Wyoming to Illinois, but there’s a shuffling along the line. 
 
You know, Minnesota has pushed very hard for renewables. I 
think they’re up around 20 to 25 per cent of their generation. 
And you’ve got to stop and think, in comparison to 
Saskatchewan, that’s about a 6- to 8-million-person population 
there. So they’ve got a greater capacity to absorb renewables. 
 
But what do they do when the wind isn’t blowing across South 
and North Dakota or in Minnesota? Their backup is Manitoba 
Hydro. They’re building a billion-dollar line out of Manitoba 
down into Minnesota to supply hydroelectricity to back up 
Minnesota’s wind production. And what do we have for access 
out of Saskatchewan or into Saskatchewan? We’ve got a small 
— I think it’s 100 kVA [kilovolt ampere] — connection into 
Alberta, 150 into North Dakota, about 100 or so into Manitoba. 
We’re looking at developing a bigger connection into Manitoba. 
 
But we are such a small electrical jurisdiction that we have 
peaked basically on our ability to generate more renewable 
energy because it will have a very negative impact on our 
generation if we allowed unrestricted access to our grid for 
wind. So we need to be a part of a greater conglomerate of 
generation and access to that. So we need better lines going in 
and out of this province so that we can utilize some of the 
capabilities that are available. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Page 2. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, page 2. No, I have other colleagues 
who wish to have something to say today. So again I would like 
to welcome the member for Fairview to the Legislative 
Assembly. I would ask that she look skeptically at the 
commentary and philosophies of both sides of the House — not 
just one side but both sides because none of us have all of the 
answers . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I know; it’s amazing, 
but it’s also true. So I would invite you to keep an open mind on 
what goes on in here and participate fully and enjoy your time 
here. 
 
I will not be supporting the amendment . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I know; it’s a disappointment. But there are a 
small number of people on that side that are disappointed, a 
large number on this side that will be happy that I am 
supporting the main motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this certainly isn’t the position 
you want in the speaking order, following my learned 
colleague. However, as Paul Harvey used to say, and now for 
the rest of the story. 
 
It’s indeed my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to once again be able to 
rise and lend my voice to this very well-thought-out Throne 
Speech, this speech that’s going to help us inform the direction 
of this second session of the twenty-eighth legislature of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time I’d just like to offer some thanks, as many of my 
colleagues have done, certainly firstly to my two constituent 
assistants, Lillian Robinson and Amanda Humenny. They do a 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

great job up in The Battlefords for me. We have what I consider 
a very busy office up there. They handle all of our constituent 
concerns with great compassion, great efficiency, and in every 
case, get back to the constituents with their concerns. 
 
Of course I’d like to also thank my family, Mr. Speaker. I mean 
they are . . . The most important thing in all of our lives are our 
families and the support that they give us. They look after 
things back home for me, for all of us, indeed, when we’re in 
this House, and we thank them for their support. 
 
And finally of course, great thanks to the constituents of The 
Battlefords. I believe back in my inaugural speech many years 
ago, I referenced an adage that I had heard many years before 
that in my previous profession, and that was that service is the 
rent that you pay for the space you occupy. And I committed at 
that time that as long as I occupy the space in this chair, I will 
continue to serve The Battlefords’ constituents and be their 
voice in this House. And I will continue to do that. 
 
So before I begin with my comments on the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to share a little bit of what’s 
been happening in my constituency up in The Battlefords. 
 
It’s been a very busy summer with sporting events, parades, 
cultural events, all those sorts of things. Western provincial 
finals in fastball we hosted up there. And of course right now 
The Battlefords are abuzz with preparations for the 2018 
Saskatchewan Winter Games which are going to be hosted in 
Battleford next February of 2018. 
 
And I had the privilege just a few weeks ago to speak on behalf 
of SaskEnergy. They’ve been a sponsor of the Saskatchewan 
games for many, many years and once again will be sponsoring 
the volunteers. We are going to need about 1,200 volunteers to 
pull off these Winter Games, and I know The Battlefords have 
always come forward, whenever they were called on, with 
volunteers for a function like that. 
 
Recently I just had the opportunity to attend the opening of our 
very first Habitat for Humanity home in The Battlefords. And 
everyone who was there certainly enjoyed, you know, the wide 
smiles that were on the two families that now finally have a 
home to call their own. And this was a duplex built for the first 
time with Habitat for Humanity in our city. 
 
Last week I had an opportunity to address the class of 2030, if 
you can imagine. The class of 2030 is this year’s kindergarten 
class actually, for a technicality. And this is a program begun by 
Living Sky School Division, and I think it’s a very worthwhile 
program. We had a great attendance at that function with 
parents, extended families, a great representation from the local 
business community, community leaders. And the gist of this 
whole program is that they’re going to follow this class right 
through their education process from kindergarten right through 
to grade 12, the purpose being to try to increase the graduation 
rates and the kids continue to stay in school and receive their 
secondary education. So I think this is a great initiative they’ve 
begun and certainly a credit to the Living Sky School Division. 
 
I was also able this summer to attend the announcement, on 
behalf of our Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, the 
announcement of $275,000 for our runway improvements at our 

local Cameron McIntosh airport. This is part of the community 
airport program that’s been in the province here for some time, 
and we’ve committed $6.3 million to over 37 locally owned 
airports around our province. And you know, our airport in 
North Battleford is very important not only for The Battlefords 
but certainly for all of the Northwest — with the oil exploration 
that’s going on, some mining activity, agriculture — to move 
products and people in and out of our city. So it was a great 
announcement. 
 
And just last month, Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health was on hand for the unveiling of our new CT 
[computerized tomography] scanner at Battlefords Union 
Hospital for which our government provided $600,000 in 
funding, which was matched by a very robust fundraising 
campaign run locally of another $600,000. And of course 
anyone who has absolute need for a CT scanner, and I guess 
I’m considered one of those people, this new CT scanner works 
at a lot greater speed than the previous one and with a lot less 
radiation emitted. So anyone using a CT scanner is very happy 
to have this in our city. And of course we’re all watching with 
anticipation as our new Sask Hospital in North Battleford 
progresses. But I’ll talk a little bit more about that later, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Over this past decade, our province has enjoyed growth 
experienced by very few other jurisdictions in our country. 
There are now, as mentioned previously, 160,000 more people 
living and calling Saskatchewan home than there were 10 years 
ago. We’ve had the second-best job creation record in the 
nation and the second-highest growth of average weekly 
earnings. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is indeed a 
testament to the hard work and ingenuity of our Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
I think that we’re all probably going to be in agreement when 
we say that our recent budget contains serious restraint 
measures that, though tough to accept, they are working to get 
us back to a balanced budget, something that many other 
jurisdictions have been either unwilling or unable to achieve. 
Our operating debt, Mr. Speaker, is now $1 billion lower than it 
was in 2007. Moody’s has now confirmed our credit rating at 
AAA as a result of our strong fiscal management and our plan 
to get to a balance in three years. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not striving to grow our economy for the 
growth sake alone. It provides us with the ability to do the 
things that we need to do in areas such as health care, in 
education, in care for our vulnerable. And in my constituency 
alone in the Battlefords since November of 2007, $10.6 million 
has been invested to develop 209 rental and homeowner units 
for low-income families. And we’ve also worked hard to help 
out our seniors, as evidenced by our seniors’ income plan, 
which we have tripled in 10 years. In the previous 16 years of 
the former government, it was never touched once. We’ve 
increased it from $90 a month to $270 a month. 
 
Since we’ve had the honour of forming this government, we 
have hired 750 more doctors and 3,400 more nurses of every 
designation. Mr. Speaker, we’re not closing long-term care 
homes like the former government did. In fact we’ve opened 13 



October 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

new long care homes in the last 10 years. 
 
As well, we’re building schools. We’re building low-income 
housing. And yes, we’re building hospitals, like our own Sask 
Hospital North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, I had the distinct 
pleasure of attending the celebration marking the 60 per cent 
completion of this new beautiful facility and bringing greetings 
on behalf of our government. And what a beautiful facility it is. 
In talking to patients, some of the patients there that day and 
certainly the staff, family members of the patients, they can’t 
wait to move into this beautiful building with such a great view 
of our North Saskatchewan River Valley. The spacious rooms 
now, modern bathroom, this facility has been long, long, long 
overlooked and a lot needed, and we’re finally getting it built. 
 
In other areas of health care, Mr. Speaker, we are also making 
great strides forward. Mr. Speaker, our government’s 
innovative two-for-one MRIs have resulted in 1,800 scans being 
completed at no added expense to our taxpayers. 
 
Autism spectrum disorder continues to be a serious concern to 
many citizens with family members who are affected. And that 
is why we have committed to provide individualized funding of 
$4,000 per child per year on top of the $8 million we already 
provide for ASD [autism spectrum disorder] services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more good news. Our population, our school 
population is no longer declining. In fact it is increasing. And 
that is why we have opened 21 new schools this year with 
11,000 students being able to attend school in a brand new, 
better learning environment. To go along with the 21 schools, 
we have hired 875 more teachers and created 6,000 more new 
child care spaces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since I was fortunate enough to be elected 
to this position, I have made a point of attending, along with my 
colleagues from Cut Knife-Turtleford and from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, annual school board meetings with both 
of the school divisions in my constituencies. And one of the 
things that we heard at these meetings was a request for new 
curriculum renewal. We have listened to those requests, so we 
have now in our Throne Speech said that we are now going to 
pause our curriculum . . . We have ended the pause to 
curriculum renewal and it’s now been lifted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed the most aggressive grad 
retention program in Canada. And since 2008, 70,000 students 
have taken advantage of this program and they’ve been 
receiving $345 million in tax credit. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
means that there’s now 70,000 post-secondary grads that have 
chosen to stay right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this is in sharp contrast to the thousands and thousands of young 
people who left our province under the members opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only post-secondary grads benefit 
from our programs, but grade 12 grads can access our 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship. And in fact since 2012, 
over 38,000 have received over $33 million to help defray the 
cost of a post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall our Premier created a committee to try to 
find some solutions to reduce crime in our province. I was 
proud to be asked to be a member of that committee along with 

my colleagues from Cut Knife-Turtleford, from Cypress Hills, 
Estevan, Canora-Pelly, Regina Coronation Park, and Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we spent a very busy winter travelling to 
10 different locations here in our province to hear the concerns 
and suggestions from individuals, groups, police forces, 
municipal governments, First Nations, and many more. We sent 
out over 300 invitations and notices to these meetings, met with 
some 58 presenters, and received numerous written 
submissions. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very pleased with the response 
we received from the Ministry of Justice and the announcement 
of 258 armed police officers and of our government’s 
commitment of $5.9 million towards these initiatives. We know 
that there’s more to do in crime reduction, and we are going to 
continue to work to help reduce this problem. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I talked earlier about growth and what 
improvements it has allowed us to undertake. So let’s just touch 
a little on our infrastructure expenses and improvements in 
which we have invested $26 billion since 2007. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a former job that I had I was president 
of a national association. And one of the jobs of that national 
association was to travel to the other provinces and speak at the 
annual general meetings of the provincial associations, and on 
many occasions I travelled to Alberta. You’d sit around at a 
round table as you always do at a lot of these things. And once 
the flatland jokes and the no-time-change jokes were dispensed 
of, one of the main topics that came around that table was, 
when are you going to get your highways fixed in 
Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m happy to say 
that of that $26 billion, $7.4 billion has been invested to 
improve, to build, or rebuild 12 000 kilometres in highways in 
this province. 
 
With our growing population comes increased demand for 
essential services like power. And SaskPower has experienced a 
25 per cent increase in demands since 2007. And not only 
SaskPower, but SaskTel as well has invested $2.6 billion since 
2008. SaskPower’s response has been investing $8 billion to 
meet that demand and to replace an aging infrastructure that 
was there. And SaskTel is continuing to invest with $300 
million to expand and enhance its network. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to see that my community in The Battlefords 
is on the list for faster Internet service, as are several other 
communities in this province. 
 
Some of the growth is due to our increased activity in exports in 
this province because we are a very export-focused province, as 
we’ve heard earlier: exports to such designations as China, with 
a 530 per cent increase to $3 billion worth of exports going to 
China. India, we’ve seen an increase of 272 per cent to $1.5 
billion; Pakistan, 293 per cent increase to $548 million. 
 
And of those imports, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture plays a 
huge part in our exports, accounting for half of our total at 
$14.4 billion. This involves over 300 companies that employ 
5,000 people here in the province. And our government will 
continue to support our ag sector by strongly opposing the 
carbon tax which would be crippling to our province and by 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2017 

continuing to expand access to world markets, investing in 
research, and supporting value-added food processing. 
 
We also need to be reminded of agriculture’s contribution to 
carbon sequestration to help reduce our net emissions in this 
province. In 2015 alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our farmers 
sequestered nearly 12 million tonnes of carbon into our soil. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have so much to be 
thankful for here in Saskatchewan. And one thing is our 
beautiful park system. And before I close here, as I know that 
several of my colleagues have more comments to add, I would 
just like to comment on the addition of one more provincial 
park to our park system. This is the second park, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have created in the last five years. And with attendance 
at our parks increasing at a very rapid rate every year to over 12 
million visits, I know that this park is going to be very busy as 
well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this is my last opportunity that I will 
have to address a Throne Speech under our Premier, I would 
just like to say that what a genuine honour it has been to serve 
with this Premier, and I certainly want to take this opportunity 
to thank him for his guidance, his wisdom, his hard work, his 
humility, his sense of humour, and indeed for his vision. The 
citizens of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think are in 
such a better place today than they were 10 years ago, and to 
him we all owe a great debt of gratitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that we could touch on in 
this Speech from the Throne. It was been called a very 
ambitious Speech from the Throne. It outlines in summary what 
we are working to attain in this session of our legislature. Our 
colleagues are dedicated to work towards the end, to achieve the 
ends outlined in this Throne Speech, and I certainly will be 
proud to be part of that team. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I’m 
very pleased with the initiatives proposed in this Throne 
Speech, and I look forward to our government moving forward 
with the implementation of the initiatives in it. So in conclusion 
I would just like to say I will not be in favour of the amendment 
to this motion, and I’ll be voting in favour of the Speech from 
the Throne. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
honour to stand up and join the Throne Speech debate. And as I 
often do when I stand up, each and every time I want to make 
sure I take the time to properly thank my family. All of us here, 
without our support systems back in our homes, we don’t get to 
do this job. So I want to make sure I thank my wife, Marjorie. 
Without her unending support, I wouldn’t be here doing this 
today. It’s her fault I’m here today. She’s the one that actually 
got me involved in politics a long time ago, even before we 
moved to Moose Jaw. 
 
It was actually back in Estevan when I first got really, really 
interested in politics. We always went and did our civil duty 
and made sure we got out and voted. It was one of the things 
you learned in cadets, that you had to make sure your vote 

counts. So you got out. You learned about what the issues were 
and make sure you voted for the right party, which was always 
the party on the right, so we’ve always gone that way with my 
family. And again without her support, I just want to make sure 
she knows how much she means. 
 
Then there’s my kids. They’re all special in their own ways: 
Geoffrey, Dylan, and Ryan. And Ryan’s actually really 
involved, my youngest son. He’s helped me out on . . . They’ve 
all helped me out on my campaigns, but Ryan actually sits on 
my board, so I want to thank him, and his wife for letting him 
spend that time with me. 
 
And then there’s our board back home that helps me out. We’ve 
got, we’ve got . . . Oh I’m going to forget names, so I’m not 
going to name my board. There’s a lot of people back home on 
my board that help me out. 
 
On top of that, we’ve all got our constituency assistants back in 
our hometown. So Trina . . . She won’t be back from lunch yet 
probably but she’s a good worker so she might be there early. 
She’s the one that holds down my office. And many of the folks 
know her from the time she worked in the minister’s office up 
on the third floor and I was able to steal her away to come back 
and to take care . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You remember 
that. Yes, you should . . . get her back in Moose Jaw and take 
care of my constituency office. 
 
She has done such a fantastic job of keeping me on task, 
making sure I’m getting back, making the phone calls to the 
constituents, even those phone calls you don’t want to make 
when you have to tell those folks that no, because of the 
regulations, the rules of the legislation, no, we can’t do this. 
 
But the ones that are the most fun are . . . She lines up — and 
we did this this summer — in my riding we have six, seven, 
eight, nine seniors’ towers in my riding in Moose Jaw. So we 
make a point of going out every summer and every year before 
Christmas and visiting all these folks. So we get out there and I 
spent . . . Each one you spend a couple of hours in. They love it 
because Maple Leaf Bakery opened up again on South Hill, just 
around the corner from my office, and make sure we take fresh 
baking from . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is now past the normal hour of 
adjournment of 1 o’clock, so this House stands adjourned until 
1:30 p.m. on Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2595 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2595 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2595 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2596 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2596 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2597 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Wildfires in Saskatchewan 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2597 
 Lives Lived and Lost 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 
 Remembering Gord Downie 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2598 
 Support for Survivors During Violence Prevention Week 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 
 Usher of the Black Rod  
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2598 
 Grand Opening of New Gallery in Saskatoon 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 
 Saskatchewan Home to World’s Largest Potash Mine 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Intent of Bill 40 and Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisition 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2601 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 
 Employment and Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2604 
MOTIONS 
 Sitting Days 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 
 Committee Membership 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2604 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2607 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2610 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2612 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2614 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2617 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2620 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




