






















































Hansard: May 16, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 89A  TUESDAY, MAY 16, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2535 
 May 16, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always an honour to have students visit to the Legislative 
Assembly from our respective constituency. And today we have 
a great group of 44 students from O.M. Irwin School in the 
great city of Swift Current that I want to welcome to the 
Assembly. Through you and to you, introducing two teachers: 
Mr. Mark Siemens is with the kids, as well as Mrs. Karen 
Schommer. 
 
Chaperones today: Clint Walker, Shelley Vipond, Abbie 
Houston. And I want to thank Abbie, if she’s here, because 
she’s been very supportive on social media of Colter and his 
efforts. So I should acknowledge that, as others have been. 
Brennen McMurtry, Kristina Burnett, Brandy Kemp, Carolyn 
Hildebrand, and Tara Gottselig — they’re all here chaperoning, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to have a chance for pictures with the students, as 
well as a little bit of a visit later on in the office, and I’m 
looking forward to the discussion that’ll happen there. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask all members of the House to welcome these 
students from O.M. Irwin School in Swift Current. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join the Premier in welcoming the school group from 
Swift Current. One of the teachers that has graciously helped 
the students on their way here and is part of the chaperone 
support as well is a teacher called Karen Schommer. 
 
Mrs. Schommer, as many of you may not know, taught in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse for a number of years. And sadly she left our 
community, and what Ile-a-la-Crosse’s loss was, was of course 
Swift Current’s gain. But I want to share with the Assembly the 
great work that she did while she lived in Ile-a-la-Crosse, her 
and her husband, Jerome, and the impact she had on our 
community and the children. And today now we see 
Ile-a-la-Crosse has done very well. The community is growing. 
The population is strong. They renovated the elementary school 
where she taught, and I won my first curling game as well since 
she left. 

So I want to tell all members of the Assembly that Karen and 
her husband have done a tremendous amount for our 
community. They really embraced the community. She 
participated in many sports, taught the children very well in our 
school, and I want to take this opportunity to thank her in front 
of all my colleagues and to again express to her our sincere 
gratitude for her years in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And like I said, what 
Ile-a-la-Crosse’s loss is, is certainly Swift Current’s gain. So I’d 
ask all members to welcome Mrs. Schommer to her Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a number of guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. With us are — and I’d 
ask each of them to just give us a wave as I introduce you — we 
have Harry Desnomie who is the Aboriginal health consultant 
with the Eagle Moon Health Office; Sheila Anderson, executive 
director of primary health care; Lori Robertson, a registered 
nurse with Connecting to Care; and a number of other officials 
also, Mr. Speaker. We have Nicole Bachynski, Stephanie 
Cavers, Dorothy Lloyd, Jocelyn Argue, and Anne Lindemann. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these guests are with us today to share the story of 
an individual that’s also joining us in your gallery, Mr. Ken 
Manitopyes. Mr. Speaker, Ken has had a challenging life. He’s 
a residential school survivor. He was raised in foster care and 
has a history of being in and out of jail. And until recently, 
Ken’s quality of life wasn’t good and neither was his health. 
Mr. Speaker, Ken was considered a frequent flyer patient in our 
health care system. He has COPD [chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease], hepatitis C, diabetes, and high blood 
pressure, and would be in and out of hospitals frequently. 
 
Three years ago, Ken’s life changed when he met some people 
who, in his words, wanted to show him that there’s more to life. 
Mr. Speaker, the Eagle Moon Health Office at RQHR 
[Regina-Qu’Appelle Health Region] works with departments in 
the health region to improve services for First Nation and Métis 
people, and Ken says without Eagle Moon and its staff he 
probably wouldn’t be here today. 
 
He was set up with RQHR’s Connecting to Care program, also 
known as the hot-spotting program. That program helps 
high-use patients get access to appropriate care and resources 
within the community, services like regular GP [general 
practitioner] appointments, educational programs, 
transportation, and housing. Mr. Speaker, since January of 
2015, over a hundred clients have been helped by that program, 
and Ken is one of those. 
 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, Ken told me today — the Minister of 
Rural and Remote Health and I had a chance to meet with him 
— he tells us that he no longer smokes, which we’re happy to 
hear. And because of that, his daughter and some of his family 
have also quit smoking. 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a program that’s been a huge help to 
Ken and to many other people, and we’re very grateful that Ken 
came here today to share his story. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
him and all those who have accompanied him, and I ask all 
members to please give them a warm welcome to their 
Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming these individuals from the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and the Eagle Moon health 
centre to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly Stephanie 
Cavers and Harry Desnomie and the rest of the folks, welcome 
to your Legislative Assembly, and thank you very much for the 
work that you do all the year through. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a special word of 
welcome to Mr. Ken Manitopyes. Keep on healing. Keep on 
showing that better way forward is our urging for you, and 
again our thanks to you for setting that good example. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me on behalf of 
the official opposition in welcoming these very important 
people to their Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 
the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce my first 
school class here, as a member, from the Northstar School, 
Hyas, Saskatchewan. There’s 13 kids from grades 7, 8, and 9. 
They’re seated in the west gallery. Give them a wave. And they 
are accompanied by the teacher, Mr. Hanley Fehr, and parent 
chaperones, Krysten Fehr, Shawn Penner, Leslie Penner, Hilton 
Toews, Mavis Toews, Sylven Penner, Andrea Penner, and 
Laurel Bartel. 

I met with them at 1 o’clock and had a nice little meeting with 
them. And just to let my colleagues know, I will be giving them 
ice cream on their way out; maybe a little lesson that all the 
colleagues could take. With that, I’d like you to all join in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a constituent and friend of mine who 
is seated in your gallery. I’d like to introduce Larry Trischuk, 
who travelled from Borden today to have meetings in Regina. 
So please welcome Larry Trischuk to his Legislative Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 

extended introduction. 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to introduce two very special guests seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Gary Robins and Ms. Lisa Brownstone. Mr. Speaker, these two 
individuals, I’m very happy to count them amongst my 
constituents, but more importantly as friends. The longer that 
they sat and talked today, the longer my introduction became, 
so I thought I should ask for an extension. 

There’s so much that I could say about these individuals. But 
first of all, I had the privilege of sharing a street with them for a 
number of years as neighbours, but more importantly to share a 
community with them and some passions. These two folks have 
had a front-row seat to many of the pivotal moments in this 
province. 

Lisa’s dad was a former civil servant who was involved in 
implementing medicare, bringing medicare to this province and 
later to the country. Gary told me that the last time that he sat in 
this Assembly he was able to take a picture of Allan Blakeney 
and Tommy Douglas. And the stories could go on and on. I 
think Lisa pointed to a picture in our office and noted that the 
former premier Allan Blakeney used to live with them and her 
family. And I can go on and on. 

But they not only have been witness to history in this province, 
they’ve been part of history in this province. And I’ll just hit a 
couple of notes. Lisa was one of the founders of Regina 
Transition House over 40 years ago, one of the two people who 
brought that service, that very important service, to this 
province, the first in our city, Mr. Speaker. 

Gary has been an instructor at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology], at SIFC [Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College]. He is one of the folks responsible for 
Playing For Change in this province. And they are fearless and 
passionate and compassionate advocates for people in this 
province. Lisa’s been very involved with FASD [fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder] in the province. And their latest passion — 
not the only passion — is being caregiver to their grandson 
Atreyu. 

And it’s just been a delight to know them and to hear their 
stories and to have them here in their Assembly. So I’d invite 
all members to join me in welcoming, thanking them first of all 
for their work and their contribution to this province, but 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 

Ms. Lambert: — I request leave for an extended invitation. 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce Dan 
Coggins, seated in your gallery. Dan holds a visual arts degree 
from the University of Saskatchewan and a master’s degree in 
advertising design from Syracuse University in New York 
State. He’s married to Dr. Carol Schick. She has recently retired 
from teaching at the University of Regina and was awarded a 
Canada Research Chair during her tenure there. 
 
Dan and I worked together at CTV [Canadian Television 
Network] in Saskatoon. Dan left broadcasting, moved to Regina 
and started pitchgreen.com, a communications company. I’m 
pleased to say that his company has won national awards in 
communications. Another impressive fact is that 
pitchgreen.com is committed to Trickle Up, an organization that 
helps people living in extreme poverty by providing start-up 
capital and mentorship to create and run their own small 
businesses. 
 
When I decided to self-publish my cookbook Recipes I Stole 
From My Mom, I chose Dan to do the design, layout, and 
proofing. He has recently converted my cookbook to digital 
format. I am pleased to say that our friendship has survived this 
project. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Dan to his 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it is my pleasure and honour to introduce someone 
that has been obviously no stranger to this Assembly, and that is 
my former mentor in my constituency, the MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for Wood River. But Yogi 
Huyghebaert is sitting in the back of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and I just wanted to introduce him. And he gave me a 
lot of advice in my role as now the MLA there, but one of the 
greatest things he left for me was his CA [constituency 
assistant], and Sandy Kuffner is now my CA and she’s doing a 
great job for me. And I appreciate everything he’s done for me 
in me getting into this position, Mr. Speaker. So I ask all 
members to welcome Yogi back to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to extend a welcome back 
to Yogi Huyghebaert here in the Assembly, and to thank him 
for his many years of service, not only as an MLA, but 
obviously in his service as a pilot with the air forces and serving 
our country in a very, very important way as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From down from that area, the Huyghebaert family is a 
well-known family in the area and certainly were good 
neighbours to our family as well in Lafleche. They lived just 
down the street from my mom and dad. But I know Yogi and 
his family are well respected in the Glentworth area and 
certainly his years of service are very much appreciated. So 
welcome back to Yogi. And on behalf of the official opposition, 
we want to welcome you back here. 
 

[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of the House, I would like to introduce my wife 
seated in your gallery — a great lady. We have three kids in 
different age groups — 7, 12, and 15. She’s very busy before 
kids go to school, then job, and after school, kids back and forth 
at the soccer field, Mr. Speaker. And she’s also president of 
Ahmadiyya women’s association Regina and a great volunteer. 
 
I ask all the members to join me in welcoming my wife, Attia, 
in her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
remiss earlier in not introducing a very good friend of mine 
from Swift Current as well, Ryan Plewis. He and his brother 
own and operate Standard Motors in Swift Current, a business 
that has been I think in the family for, I don’t know, maybe 80 
or 90 years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well there you go, 
87 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 107, Mr. Speaker. That is 
remarkable. 
 
And throughout those years they’ve not only employed a lot of 
people and invested a lot in Swift Current and contributed to 
our economy, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also given back. They 
support the arts. They support social causes. And Ryan and his 
brother have really led these initiatives to a greater degree, 
frankly, than has been even done in the past, and it was 
significant in the past. And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Ryan to his Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
present a petition opposed to the Sask Party plan to scrap and 
sell off the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. The people 
who have signed this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following. This Sask Party budget unilaterally eliminates the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, an important Crown 
corporation that provides a crucial service to people across the 
province who depend on it for travelling, accessing medical 
services, and shipping important packages. 
 
The Sask Party did not inform the Saskatchewan people prior to 
the 2016 election about their plan to scrap the STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], and this closure 
leaves 224 people out of work and communities across the 
province isolated from each other. Less than a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, the then minister of STC said it was a needed service 
and that it was safe from sale. 
 
And also the STC provides a vital service to seniors, workers, 
and families throughout the province. By scrapping STC out of 
the blue, without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel. STC helps drive the economy with its parcel service 
that serves farms and other businesses, and the Sask Party is 
breaking their promise to Saskatchewan people by getting rid of 
a Crown corporation. 
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Estevan, Regina, Tisdale, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from the Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Blaine Lake, Big River, Shell Lake, Saskatoon, Shellbrook, 
Meacham, Leask, North Battleford, La Loche, Medstead, 
Spiritwood, Muskeg Lake, Marcelin, Nipawin, Prince Albert, 
and Debden. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of this province believe 
in an economy that’s powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 

provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 
 

And the people signing this petition today come from Midale, 
North Battleford, Prince Albert, Aberdeen, Vanscoy, Edam, and 
Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of child care in our province. Those who’ve 
signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
to the fact that across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child 
care centres are taxed inconsistently, and that many of our 
licensed non-profit child care centres pay commercial property 
tax, and this is not something that is done in Alberta, Manitoba, 
Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick; to the fact 
that child care is essential to our economy, yet most centres 
struggle to balance their budget and this issue threatens both the 
number of child care spaces as well as the quality of care; to the 
fact that child care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s 
future outcomes and yields high rates of economic return; and 
to the fact that child care centres are institutions of early 
learning and childhood development and it’s appropriate that 
they receive the same tax treatment as schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and further exempt 
all licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by citizens across 
this province. The page that I submit today is signed by 
residents of Weyburn and Vibank. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical supports for victims of 
domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious 
distinction, Mr. Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic 
violence amongst all of the provinces. Employers should be 
obligated to reasonably accommodate victims of domestic 
violence in the workplace. Employees who are victims of 
domestic violence should be able to take a leave of absence 
from their employment without penalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories to this petition believe that 
Saskatchewan must do more to protect women and children 
who are victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the 
prayer. 
 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
supports, including employment supports, for victims of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Celebration of Buddha’s Birthday 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 14th I had 
the honour of celebrating Buddha’s 2,560th birthday at the Orr 
Centre in Regina. The evening was a wonderful way to come 
together in peace and harmony in celebration of the Buddha 
and, in doing so, reflect upon his teachings and share them with 
the wider world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Buddhism promotes peace, strength, and hope by 
guiding us to strive for a society that is welcoming to all. Here 
in Saskatchewan, our motto reflects the Buddha’s teachings. 
“From many peoples, strength” exemplifies how we work 
together to create an inclusive, strong, and welcoming society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in our province as our multicultural society 
expands, we continue to celebrate and acknowledge the 
growing diversity that makes our province unique and strong. 
We can set an example here in Saskatchewan of how we can 
better live together; how diversity is not divisive, not the weak 
link, but the very source of our creativity, morality, and 
strength. 
 
I would like to congratulate and thank all those involved and in 
attendance at this celebratory event including the Chinese and 
Nepalese Buddhist communities and some of Canada’s 
venerable monks. Mr. Speaker, I would especially like to thank 
Dr. Govender and Reverend Uttam Barua who influenced and 
prepared the beautiful celebration. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in celebrating Buddha’s 
birthday as the teachings he established still apply to each and 
every one of us, each and every day. Namaste. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Birth of a Family Documentary Receives Acclaim 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in the House today to 
recognize Tasha Hubbard and the success of her most recent 
documentary, Birth of a Family.  
 
Tasha Hubbard is an award-winning filmmaker from the 
Peepeekisis First Nation. She’s renowned for her 
social-issue-based documentaries that centre around the lives of 
indigenous people in our country. Her previous documentary, 
Two Worlds Colliding, won a Gemini and a Golden Sheaf 
Award in 2005. 

Tasha’s most recent documentary, Birth of a Family, explores 
the devastating effects of the Sixties Scoop on four Dene 
siblings who are involuntarily separated as children. This film 
not only documents their joyful reunion, a feat that was made 
possible by the hard work of Saskatoon journalist Betty Ann 
Adam, one of the four siblings, it tells the story of their great 
loss as they reflect on being taken away from their culture and 
community. The film also holds a special meaning for Hubbard 
herself as she too was taken away from her family during the 
Sixties Scoop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Birth of a Family has been screened at 
multiple festivals including the Aabiziingwashi Indigenous 
Cinema on Tour, and Hot Docs Canadian international film 
festival, receiving much acclaim. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me today in celebrating 
Tasha Hubbard’s contribution to Canadian film with the Birth 
of a Family, and recognizing the ongoing impact of the Sixties 
Scoop on indigenous people in Canada. And lastly, I’d like to 
ask this government to take responsibility, to do their part and 
finally apologize as promised to the indigenous people of 
Saskatchewan and the families that were separated during the 
Sixties Scoop. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

4-H Saskatchewan Hall of Fame Inductee 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
highlight a constituent of mine who has been inducted into the 
4-H Saskatchewan Hall of Fame. Mr. Peter Bygrove is the 
newest member to be inducted into the hall of fame. In 
recommendation letters written on his behalf to the hall of fame, 
Mr. Bygrove was described as, and I quote, “a man that is 
extremely sincere and dedicated, a man with a calm demeanour 
that you feel honoured to work beside.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, early on in his life, Peter Bygrove had a very clear 
interest in the cattle business and agriculture, which led him to 
join the 4-H Club. After years of dedication, he is now serving 
at the committee level. His fondest memories of the 4-H Club 
and his career revolve around the connections he has made with 
the youth of Saskatchewan, applauding the endless 
opportunities they are given through the 4-H and the 
agricultural community. 
 
He feels hopeful for the future as he and the rest of the province 
are seeing more and more young people become involved with 
agriculture, taking over oil patches, farming, and as 
accountants. This new interest in agriculture can be accredited 
to individuals like Peter Bygrove who have passed on their love 
and expertise of agriculture, making him very deserving of this 
recognition. He was born to be a farmer here in Saskatchewan, 
and we thank him for his mentorship for the future of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Peter Bygrove on being inducted into the 4-H Saskatchewan 
Hall of Fame. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

Winner of King Trapper Event Shares His Skills 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Gerald McKenzie was born and raised along 
the mighty Churchill River in Grandmother’s Bay. His father, 
John S. McKenzie, taught him the skills to live off the land. 
Those skills are still being passed down today by Gerald in 
classrooms across the North. 
 
Gerald started trapping when he was 15 years old. Growing up 
in a traditional lifestyle with his two sisters and six brothers, 
Gerald spent his time trapping, fishing, and gathering. In his 
younger days he didn’t have much success with trapping, but 
after learning from King Trapper veterans like Franklin Carriere 
and Tony Charles, he picked up techniques and strategies. 
 
Today Gerald competes in five trapping festivals per year. His 
favourite place to go to compete is in The Pas, Manitoba, which 
has 22 events including a flour packing, and a nine-mile 
snowshoe race. Gerald’s favourite event is the log sawing. This 
year Gerald won the Prince Albert Winter Festival King 
Trapper event and is now dedicating his time to pass down his 
skills to the younger girls and boys. Currently Gerald is 
working in schools across the North, where he teaches humane 
trapping courses and promotes King Trapper events. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Gerald McKenzie on his title of King Trapper, 
and in thanking him for teaching our youth to preserve and 
protect the lands and waters that are so precious in the North. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Redvers Man Receives Legion of Honour Award  
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here today 
to acknowledge a very special and deserving constituent of 
mine. Marcel Frecon is a decorated veteran who fought in 
World War II and has an extensive history as a dedicated 
community service volunteer. 
 
Mr. Frecon was born in Redvers, Saskatchewan on August 
14th, 1921 to Belgian immigrant farmers. For most of his life, 
Mr. Frecon worked on the family farm until he joined the army 
in 1942. Mr. Speaker, following his basic military training, Mr. 
Frecon began his journey in Europe and fought with the 
Canadian army in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and 
Germany. 
 
After the war, he returned to the family farm and married his 
sweetheart, Denise Rogg. They bought a small farm southwest 
of Redvers and raised a family of three girls: Cecile, Diane, and 
Geanette. 
 
Mr. Frecon has recently received the Legion of Honour award 
in addition to his numerous other military service awards. The 
Legion of Honour is the highest order of merit from the 
Government of France, given to a deserving individual for their 
military service and community and professional activities. This 
award was founded in 1802 by French military leader and 

political figure, Napoleon Bonaparte. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Mr. Frecon for his community and military 
service, his bravery, and his tremendous volunteer efforts. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Cosmopolitan Industries Annual Open House 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure of 
bringing greetings on behalf of the government to the 
Cosmopolitan Industries grand reopening and annual open 
house on May 5th in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community-based organizations in this province 
play valuable roles in supporting those with disabilities. For 45 
years, Cosmo has been providing skills training and 
opportunities that can build self-confidence, self-reliance, and 
generate income through social enterprise models. 
 
After a devastating flood last year, I was proud to help them cut 
the ribbon on their new recycling education centre with Dale, an 
original participant, and Vic Prediger, the very first operations 
manager. 
 
Everyone in this province deserves the opportunity for 
employment and education, and community-based 
organizations such as Cosmo are the key to having a more 
inclusive Saskatchewan. Their vocational day programs give 
opportunity to 400 people, giving them proper resources and 
services to lead meaningful and productive lives. 
 
This government is implementing the Saskatchewan disability 
strategy, and CBOs [community-based organization] like this 
are a key part of that. This government applauds Cosmo in their 
accomplishments in providing quality and inclusive, sustainable 
care for the people of Saskatchewan experiencing disabilities. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Cosmopolitan 
Industries for their 45 years of commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan and congratulate them on the grand reopening of 
their new recycling education centre. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Milburn Place Grand Opening 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May the 12th, the 
Premier attended the grand opening of Milburn Place, a new 
group home in Swift Current operated by Southwest Homes. He 
was joined by other dignitaries and community members who 
welcomed the three former Valley View Centre residents into 
the Swift Current community and into their new home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has made sure that the supports 
were in place to meet the unique needs of each and every person 
in this new facility. We wanted to make sure we provided them 
with the services that they need and that we could help them 
achieve their goals and dreams for a life in a community of their 
choice. 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

We are pleased to note that to date, 50 Valley View residents 
have made successful transitions into communities and with the 
majority of these folks finding homes in Saskatchewan. This 
person-centred approach will always be about dignity and 
inclusion, much like the concept of community living itself. 
 
Organizations like Southwest Homes have a key role in 
supporting people’s experiences with intellectual disabilities 
and in helping other government implement the Saskatchewan 
disability strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of the House to join me in 
congratulating Southwest Homes and the three new residents of 
Milburn Place on the opening of their new home. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Usage of Private Email Accounts 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the 
Premier if he was using his private email or his email on his 
private political server to make deals for the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub], and he acted as if nothing was wrong 
when he said, basically, yes of course he was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, setting that arrogance aside just for a moment, 
were all those emails turned over to the auditor? Was the 
auditor given full access to his private political server? And do 
other senior staff and cabinet ministers also use this private 
political server to negotiate international, national, or even 
provincial deals, like the Premier has been? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I answered these 
questions yesterday and in estimates the week before and then 
did meet with the media yesterday as well to answer questions. 
There would’ve been . . . Mr. Speaker, first of all I don’t 
negotiate deals via email, Mr. Speaker, and moreover it would 
be rare for a Premier or even a minister to be directly 
negotiating deals, whether it’s over an email or in some other 
way of communication. So I think it’s pretty clear that that 
would not have happened. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, all of the information required by the 
auditor for her look into the matter was provided. Mr. Speaker, 
we went well beyond what governments in the past, including 
when members opposite were government and they had their 
own officials investigate their own issues. We had an 
independent officer of the legislature do that investigation and, 
Mr. Speaker, all cabinet documents, all related documents were 
made available to the auditor. And she’s made her report and 
made recommendations which we take very seriously. 
 
She’s also indicated quite clearly, and did so in an interview on 
July 4th of last year, that there were no particular red flags, that 
an audit like this looks for conflict of interest. There were no 
red flags to indicate that kind of conflict of interest, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m not reading directly from her quote, but that’s 
very much an accurate paraphrase of what she had said to the 
media, Mr. Speaker, and I would . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well the member for Nutana is saying, why don’t we answer it? 
That’s exactly what I’m doing is answering the question 
directly. 
 
All of those emails are subject to FOI [freedom of information]. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that members on that side 
of the House use their own private accounts for emails. And the 
House Leader . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the Deputy 
Leader says it’s about the people on this side. If the question is 
about using your email, using your party’s server to send emails 
about government business, he ought to turn around and ask the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] House Leader about his conduct, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer from the Premier. No 
answers on the GTH deal, day after day. No answers about this 
political server, taking something that’s been gained through 
public resources — taxpayers’ dollars, something that’s in the 
provincial interest — and consolidating it into a private political 
server, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to the question, did the Minister of the GTH and SaskPower 
at the time use this political, this private political server? Were 
those emails and files turned over to the auditor and was the 
auditor given full access? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the short answer to the question 
as to whether the minister at the time used the server in 
question, the answer is no. Unequivocally, no. 
 
With regard to the other parts of the member’s question, the fact 
is that this is a secure account. This is a secure server. There 
have been no breaches. And as importantly, Mr. Speaker, we 
are complying with all of the applicable FOI legislation, with 
The Archives Act. That had been the intention all the way along 
and had been how we conducted business with regard to that 
matter. 
 
And members well know that we have a number of accounts as 
MLAs — whether they be our MLA account, whether they be 
our caucus account, whether they be our government account, a 
party account, or a personal account. And members on the 
opposite side well know, many of them personally well know 
that they used their own personal account, Mr. Speaker, to 
conduct government business or party accounts to conduct 
government business with this side of the House. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about 
booking some sort of legislative meetings, or some sort of 
discussions back and forth. We’re talking about international 
information and commercially sensitive information to the 
people and businesses of Saskatchewan. And the fact that the 
Premier doesn’t seem to get this is strange. 
 
And you know, the people of Saskatchewan deserve answers 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

from that Premier, not from his appointee, the minister he 
appoints to get up and roll his eyes and sort of shrug these 
matters off day after day and provide non-answers and nonsense 
to the people of Saskatchewan. My question is, how arrogant 
has this Premier become? How has he forgotten who he works 
for? How does he see no difference between his political party 
and our province, between his office and himself? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy and the 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The hypocrisy of the Leader of the 
Opposition is stunning, Mr. Speaker. What he is saying is that 
what they do is okay, Mr. Speaker, that they use their personal 
email accounts for government business is okay. And he said, 
well it’s nothing important though, Mr. Speaker, booking 
legislative meetings. That’s not what we’re talking about. 
 
When I say government business that they used their personal 
email accounts about, this is for things like hiring independent 
officers of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, about how interviews, 
about how interviews have gone for hiring, hiring people like 
the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, hiring positions like the 
Ombudsman, hiring positions like the Children’s Advocate. 
What he’s saying is that that’s not important. They used their 
personal accounts to hire these positions, Mr. Speaker, and deal 
with us on . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the volume level always rises 
over there, Mr. Speaker, when things are getting close to home. 
And the fact is, the fact is that they use their personal accounts 
for important government business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the server was secure. All of the applicable FOI 
rules have been complied with. The Archives Act had been 
complied with, and members opposite know they have done the 
exact same thing time after time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Look at the 
arrogance. Look at the arrogance, Mr. Speaker. Do they 
honestly not understand the problem of doing the work of the 
government using partisan resources on a private political and 
partisan server located at their party office? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Just like they have done on repeated 
occasions, Mr. Speaker, the exact same thing. Members 
opposite seem to have no compunction about using their 
personal address on matters that are of significance to the 
government, of significance to the Legislative Assembly, from 
their party accounts, from their personal accounts. 
 
That member personally has done the exact same thing from his 
personal account, Mr. Speaker, in discussing these matters. So, 
Mr. Speaker, a great piece of advice I got is, when you’re living 

in a glass house, you shouldn’t be throwing stones. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — If they’ve been doing government work 
through their party this whole time, how are we supposed to 
believe that they haven’t been doing party work through this 
government the whole time too? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I’m not entirely sure if there was a 
question in there, Mr. Speaker, but we could ask the exact same 
thing of members opposite, whether they’re doing party work 
off of their NDP caucus account. My suspicion is that they may 
have been. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but they can answer that 
question themselves, I guess. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, we all have many accounts. We do 
our very best — I know all members do their very best — to 
ensure that the appropriate account is utilized. On occasion, 
whatever pops up, that might be the one we’re sending 
something to if we’re in haste, if we’re doing it quickly, just 
like members opposite have sent government stuff to my 
personal account even though it was government business. They 
seem to have no problem when doing that. They didn’t raise an 
issue at that point in sending stuff to my personal account. 
 
As a matter of fact, I’ve got government business from the LAS 
[Legislative Assembly Service] account to my personal account 
and vice versa. So I would say, Mr. Speaker, we can all do a 
better job. We all need to be cognizant of using the appropriate 
account for the appropriate piece of business, but I think 
individuals out there know with multiple accounts there are 
challenges in keeping that straight. And we will endeavour to 
do so in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
government and the Sask Party are not one and the same, and 
the office of the Premier and that current Premier are not the 
same. Since the Sask Party are so confused by these basic 
concepts, how do they expect the people of Saskatchewan to 
believe they’re not putting their party before the people of this 
province? Is this why they won’t get big money out of politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member well 
knows that registered parties must . . . They need to publicly 
disclose, Mr. Speaker, their expenses. And that process is 
transparent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, we have lobbyist legislation in this province, 
Mr. Speaker; legislation, that the genesis of which was an 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

all-party committee, Mr. Speaker. There is transparency. 
There’s openness with respect to campaign donations in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and the process works very, very well 
for the people of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Status of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. McCall: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, if they could be so kind 
to the House to table the documents that they’re referring to so 
they could show if it was when we were negotiating NAFTA 
[North American Free Trade Agreement] that we sent these 
emails, or perhaps it was the Caramilk secret, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I’m not sure what they’re referring to, but one thing is 
absolutely certain, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier’s been 
anything but transparent when it comes to his private email 
server. And the Sask Party’s been anything but transparent 
about their plan to carve up and sell off 49 per cent of SaskTel. 
 
They refused to give us straight answers in committee and they 
refuse to give us straight answers here in this Chamber. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what’s absolutely clear is that the Sask Party’s 
friends and insiders have been lining up with tens of thousands 
of dollars in donations to lobby for the big phone companies 
who all want a piece of the action. 
 
Given the Premier’s lack of transparency, how are we supposed 
to believe anything from the Sask Party when it comes to the 
sale of SaskTel? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said in the past, 
the government will listen to opportunities for building 
partnerships, but only on the grounds of Saskatchewan residents 
maintaining majority ownership of any of the Crown 
corporations, including SaskTel. And it would only be 
considered if it created new jobs in Saskatchewan, improved 
services, kept SaskTel services affordable, and protected the 
head office here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is almost, frankly, word for word, verbatim of 
a memo with respect to SaskEnergy TransGas, September of 
2001 under the NDP, when they said, key issues to be 
considered in assessing the potential benefits of a partnership 
include, can the partnership assist in filling transmission 
capacity; can new reach and growth opportunities become 
available to SaskEnergy TransGas? And does the partnership 
retain or grow jobs in Saskatchewan? These issues need to be 
explored more fully with both potential partners, but 
SaskEnergy is convinced that the right partner could produce 
the desired results.  
 
Mr. Speaker, another case with the NDP of hello, kettle; it’s pot 
calling. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, can the member opposite clarify 
for me the following: was that memo from before the 2003 

election where privatization was a central issue? And was it 
before the 2004 vote of that Premier and so many people over 
on that other side where they said they would support the 
Crown protection Act? Was it before then, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give the member 
another example. In the lead-up to the 2003 election, February 
28th, 2003: 
 

We’re always ready and willing to listen to anyone who is 
interested in partnering with us in growing Saskatchewan’s 
energy industry. If and when such a business arrangement 
is finalized, we will announce it. Any business 
arrangement we undertake will have two conditions. First, 
it will grow this company and keep jobs in Saskatchewan. 
Secondly, it will keep control of TransGas in the hands of 
its owners, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the only time anybody ever heard of 
that in the lead-up to the 2003 election which the member’s 
referring to was the day after the leaders’ debate when . . . the 
first time it was ever revealed to the people of Saskatchewan 
through that leaders’ debate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, including that member who ran in that 
election, have zero credibility on this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if it’s 51 per cent 
credibility over there or 49 per cent or what it is, because 
frankly the position changes from day to day, year to year, on 
the part of those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t 
matter what the Premier voted for in 2004 or promised in the 
2007, ’11, or ’16 elections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here we are at a place where they’ve come to asking the 
people of Saskatchewan to sell off 49 per cent of the Crowns 
that had been protected by the Crown protection Act, except 
they haven’t asked the permission of the people, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I’ve heard it said that when you’re going to sell 
somebody’s house, maybe you should ask the owner, Mr. 
Speaker. And the same holds true if you want to sell off 49 per 
cent of that house.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is this. The Premier said that 
whatever they do is going to be better than what the NDP was 
going to do. So the Crown protection Act promised an election. 
The Premier’s mused about a referendum, and he’s stood down 
from that. So what’s better than a referendum and an election to 
ask the permission of the people of Saskatchewan when it 
comes to selling off 49 per cent of our Crowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that would be 
required in the event that we were privatizing one of the Crown 
corporations, which we’re not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll refresh the member’s memory. September 
13th, 2001, Enbridge is potentially interested in a minority 
interest in both SaskEnergy and TransGas, Mr. Speaker. Now 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

you’d think, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite — and 
there’s three that are sitting over there that would have been 
around at the time — they would have felt, well we can’t have 
these conversations. We can’t have a MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] drafted up between the companies. People may 
question our decency because we haven’t spoken one word to 
the people of Saskatchewan about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they went so far as to, and I’ll remind the 
member opposite, they went so far as to hire CIBC World 
Markets and KPMG Corporate Finance to conduct a review of 
not just SaskEnergy, but SaskPower as well. Did any member 
on that side, did the three members that are sitting there, did 
they ever say, whoa, whoa, whoa, we can’t do this? The people 
might question our decency, Mr. Speaker. No, they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do what the members opposite 
were going to do, is look for partnerships to strengthen the 
Crown corporations for the benefit of the owners and all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Sexual Violence Strategy and Support for Women 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, these ministers need to stand up 
for their ministries for once, or stand behind their failures. Last 
week we asked the Minister Responsible for the Status of 
Women why there’s currently no one working in her office. The 
best answer that minister could come up with was that they 
have not found a single woman in all of Saskatchewan for the 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more believable is that they just didn’t make the 
Status of Women office a priority. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
they did make women a priority when it came to the cuts in 
their budget. More women work in public sector jobs and more 
women are single parents, so the Sask Party cuts, tax hikes, and 
fee increases hit women the hardest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the Minister Responsible for the Status 
of Women have to say for her actions and those of her cabinet 
that are clearly hurting Saskatchewan women? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services 
and the Status of Women. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I have spent my 
entire life advocating for women, and I will continue to do so. I 
do so with other members of our side of the government, Mr. 
Speaker, who do so on a regular basis, particularly the member 
from Regina Rochdale, Mr. Speaker. So to say that we are 
doing nothing with respect to women, Mr. Speaker, is frankly 
wrong. 
 
In addition to all of the child-care spaces that this government 
has introduced, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the emergency 
shelter spaces that this government has invested in, Mr. 
Speaker, with addition to the work that the Justice and Attorney 
General has done, Mr. Speaker, with respect to domestic 
violence, we have done a ton with respect to women, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
As I said last week, this is not one person’s responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker. This is all of our responsibility. And 50 per cent of 
women on Crown boards is one way where we’re making a 
difference. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it really seems as if the minister 
doesn’t even understand the importance of her own office. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s Sexual Assault Awareness Week. Saskatchewan 
has the second-highest rates of sexual assaults, and we are the 
only province that doesn’t have a sexual violence strategy. We 
also have no domestic violence strategy, but we have tragically 
high rates. 
 
How is the Sask Party, how is that minister not concerned about 
dismantling the Status of Women office? Even though she 
seems entirely unwilling to stand up for her ministry, will she at 
the very least stand up for the women of Saskatchewan who do 
not deserve to be the only women in Canada who live in a 
province without a strategy to decrease sexual assaults? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that question to 
be quite remarkable, Mr. Speaker. Our government has done a 
lot over the last number of years with respect to this very 
important issue. The member will know that recently we’ve 
passed some legislation in this House with respect to domestic 
violence, Mr. Speaker. We’re also moving forward with the 
development of a domestic violence strategy, Mr. Speaker, and 
we expect, as part of that, there will be elements of a sexual 
assault strategy, Mr. Speaker, to help curb these devastating 
effects on the people of Saskatchewan, particularly women, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to say that we haven’t done anything, Mr. 
Speaker, is quite objectionable. Over the past number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, $1.2 million that we’ve spent, Mr. Speaker, on 
programs that provide direct support to victims of sexual 
violence. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly more to be done, but I can 
tell you this, Mr. Speaker: you can count on this side of the 
House to get that work done, Mr. Speaker. We’ll work 
diligently on it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Provision of Housing Units 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the Minister for 
Social Services if the Sask party would be selling off any assets 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. The minister 
appeared to get angry but failed to answer the question, which I 
thought was strange because shortly after she answered to the 
media that the answer was yes. Yes, they plan to sell the assets 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Yes, this 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

cash-strapped government is looking for money wherever they 
can find it, and yes, that even means affordable-housing units.  
 
She was asked yesterday how many units they were looking to 
sell, but failed to provide an answer. So, Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister tell us today how many housing units are they looking 
to sell, and are they already talking to buyers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, there’s so much 
wrong with the fearmongering that just went in the premise of 
that question. First of all, we’re going to continue to ensure that 
our housing units are being used consistently and efficiently 
across the board and focused on people who are the most in 
need. 
 
As is good practice, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at the whole 
portfolio to see where we can maybe repurpose, yes; right size, 
yes; and refocus, Mr. Speaker. This is not new. The better-use 
policy that we have had in place started in 2003 under the 
members opposite. Since that time we have divested 600 units, 
Mr. Speaker. Since that time we’ve divested 600 units, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no line item in this budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in answering these 
questions, the minister referenced efficiency, and that tends to 
be code for cuts, Mr. Speaker. This is a minister that was 
supposed to come in and fix this file, but instead she’s working 
with her cabinet colleagues and bringing more cuts and sell-offs 
on the backs of the province’s most vulnerable. When it comes 
down to it, that’s failing to stand up for her file and for the 
people she’s supposed to support. 
 
Yesterday she also refused to come clean about just how much 
money they’re looking for in the sell-off of affordable housing 
units. Is this how the government plans to deal with its 
ballooning deficit? Are we looking at a summer of sell-offs, Mr. 
Speaker, or can the minister provide us an answer of just 
exactly how much she’s looking for in this sell-off? Just how 
much are you hoping to recover from selling off affordable 
housing units? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in 
question period the member of Regina Lakeview said, and I 
quote, “. . . one thing is clear: that the Sask Party’s lack of 
leadership on social housing is hurting . . . families . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2015 the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
converted 2,700 units in the affordable housing program to the 
social housing program, as the affordable housing program was 
not serving the needs of tenants with the lowest incomes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To be clear, affordable housing sets rents below market rates, 
Mr. Speaker. Social housing, by contrast, sets rates dependent 
on income, Mr. Speaker. That conversion led to the largest 
influx of social housing units to the province in recent history, 

Mr. Speaker, and ensured tenants would not pay more than 30 
per cent of their household income for housing. About half of 
the tenants’ rents were reduced as a result of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I would add further, Mr. Speaker, with respect to our 
impact on families, Mr. Speaker, more recently . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And you might want to hear the answer. The 
member from Nutana might actually want to hear this answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to repurposing units . . . And we look 
at our, we look at our social housing file, Mr. Speaker, as a 
totality. With respect to repurposing, we have repurposed 40 
units, Mr. Speaker, to serve as emergency receiving spaces for 
children. Since I’ve been minister, in the short period of time 
since I’ve been minister, 28 of those have been repurposed for 
emergency receiving that keeps children out of hotels, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, that’s all very nice, but direct 
answers to direct questions please. How many units are you 
planning to sell, and how much money are you planning to 
recover through those sales? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member opposite for the question because we have a fulsome 
. . . We are taking a fulsome look at our social housing. 
 
Yesterday in scrums, the member opposite who posed the 
question said that we should have a reasonable approach to our 
housing portfolio, Mr. Speaker. He also referenced that perhaps 
we could use some of our existing housing for Housing First, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let me just give the member opposite a couple of examples 
of what we’re looking at in our current housing file, Mr. 
Speaker. For example, we’ve been approached by a number of 
communities in rural communities, particularly at SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], Mr. 
Speaker, for communities that would like to have professionals, 
nurses, and teachers in their community. Could we maybe relax 
some of our social housing policy so they could live there? I 
think that’s reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s also reasonable to think about repurposing some of 
our existing houses for the hard-to-house which, by the way, 
we’ve invested a ton in. But there’s still more need. That’s 
another place for us, Mr. Speaker. We have many vacant units 
for seniors. We have a high demand for families. That’s another 
place we’re going to look at, Mr. Speaker. All of this is part of 
the mix. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on this bill, 
and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General has requested leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
and that the bill and its attachments be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Agreed. When shall this amendment 
be read the first time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection  
of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that the amendments be now read a first 
and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — You may proceed to move third reading. I 
recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection  
of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

An Hon. Member: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 31 and that the bill now be read a third time. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 31 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 59, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills?  
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill No. 
59 and the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 59 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title.  
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bills on Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill now be read the third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 60, The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title.  
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 44, The 
Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill now be read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency Amendment 
Act, 2016 and the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment  
Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — I’m instructed by the Standing Committee 
on the Economy to report Bill No. 62, The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 with 
amendment. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Economy has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 62, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill and its amendments now 
be read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may now proceed to 
first and second reading of the amendment. I recognize the 
Minister of the Economy. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that the amendments be now read a first and second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that Bill No. 62 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

The Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 61, the 
Saskatchewan commercial innovation incentive Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Economy has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
61, the Saskatchewan commercial innovation incentive Act and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation 
Incentive (Patent Box) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that Bill No. 61, the Saskatchewan commercial 
innovation incentive Act be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts to present its first report which 
reflects the work of the committee for the period February 10th, 
2016 to May 15th, 2017. I move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 385 through 411. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the 
responses to questions 385 to 411. 
 
[14:45] 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — The business before the Committee of Finance 
are appropriation resolutions. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move the 
following resolution: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $132,169,000 be granted out of the 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2017 

General Revenue Fund. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $132,169,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you again, Mr. Chair. I move the 
following resolution: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2018, the sum of $12,591,463,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2018, the sum of $12,591,463,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to the resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 
committee has agreed to resolutions and asks for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I call this Assembly back to order. I recognize 
the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions and has instructed me to report the 
same, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 71, The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 71, The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1) be now introduced 
and read the first time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that Bill No. 71, The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1) be 
now read a second and third time. 
 



May 16, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has asked for leave 
to move second and third reading on Bill No. 71, The 
Appropriation Act, 2017. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. I recognize 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move second and third 
reading of Bill No. 71, The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1). 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
and third reading of Bill No. 71, The Appropriation Act, 2017. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second and third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:52.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2535, 2537 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2535 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2535 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2537 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2538 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2538 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2538 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2538 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Celebration of Buddha’s Birthday 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2539 
 Birth of a Family Documentary Receives Acclaim 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2539 
 4-H Saskatchewan Hall of Fame Inductee 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2539 
 Winner of King Trapper Event Shares His Skills 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2540 
 Redvers Man Receives Legion of Honour Award  
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2540 
 Cosmopolitan Industries Annual Open House 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2540 
 Milburn Place Grand Opening 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2540 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Usage of Private Email Accounts 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2541 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2541 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2541 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2542 
 Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2542 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2542 
 Status of Crown Corporations 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2543 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2543 
 Sexual Violence Strategy and Support for Women 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2544 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2544 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2544 
 Provision of Housing Units 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2544 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2545 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2546 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2548 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2549 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2546 



 

 Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2548 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2546 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2546 
 Bill No. 59 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2547 
 Bill No. 60 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2547 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2548 
 Bill No. 62 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2548 
 Bill No. 61 — The Saskatchewan Commercial Innovation Incentive (Patent Box) Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2549 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2549 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2549 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2550 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 71 — The Appropriation Act, 2017 (No. 1) 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2550 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


