






















































Hansard: March 28, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 65B  TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1971 
 March 28, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I call this Assembly to 
order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure tonight 
to join into the budget debate, the budget that’s entitled Meeting 
the Challenge, and it is designed to do just that. It is a 
somewhat different budget than other jurisdictions in that it 
avoids a massive deficit and it includes a plan, a medium-term 
plan to return to balance within three years. And that is in sharp 
contrast to many other budgets in Canada. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my discussion of the budget, 
and since this is my first opportunity for me to address this 
House since the last election, I would like to extend some thank 
yous to several people who are very important to me. 
 
Last February and March we were all very busy auditioning for 
this job in the April 4th election. Mr. Speaker, I think of it as 
safe to say that probably many of us would not be here today 
without the efforts and support of so many people. So I’d like to 
extend a heartfelt thanks to all those that were involved in my 
campaign, but specifically to Stacey, Shelley, Gregg, Karen, 
Dennis, Terri-Lynn, Bart, Susan, Tatum, Lil, Archie, Don, 
Shane, and Bart 2, and everyone on our phone committee who 
did such a great job, and so many others that I can’t mention 
here this evening. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer my thanks to the 
constituents of The Battlefords for the confidence they’ve 
shown in me. I will do everything that I can to continue to 
represent their interests here in this legislature. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, and most importantly, my thanks to 
my family for their support. It was so very special to me to have 
all of my children and their spouses and three grandchildren 
with me on election night, and I’m equally proud to say that it’s 
now five grandchildren, not three. 
 
And saving the very best for last, I could not do this job without 
the support of my wife, Linda. She has been my main support 
through three elections, two that were successful and one, well 
not so much. And she is the one that keeps the home fires 
burning while I am here in Regina. 

Every one of us in this Assembly feels they have a great 
constituency assistant and certainly I am no exception. Lil 
Robinson is the most efficient, professional and, perhaps most 
importantly, compassionate constituency assistant that anyone 
could ask for. She keeps tabs on a very busy office in The 
Battlefords, and I appreciate all the great work that she does. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments 
about our budget released last Wednesday. I would like to offer 
my thanks to our Finance Minister and to treasury board for the 
countless hours spent poring over the finances of this province. 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciated the opportunity to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan in our cabinet recently, and I would 
like to thank our Premier for the confidence that he has show in 
me. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, having gone through the budget 
process in the ministry, I know full well how much work goes 
into developing a budget. And my hat certainly goes off and I 
certainly appreciate all the hard work done day in and day out, 
not only at budget time, by our hard-working cabinet ministers 
for all the work they do all year round. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, the Meeting the Challenge budget, 
will serve this province well going into the future. This budget 
features many measures, controls spending while we’re facing a 
revenue shortfall of $1.2 billion. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, this budget also incorporates a 
three-year plan to return to balance here in this province. Even 
with our revenue restraints, we will continue to invest in 
infrastructure to support the growth in our province. Total 
infrastructure spending in this budget is pegged at $3.7 billion 
— 2.1 billion by our Crowns and 1.6 billion in executive 
government capital spending for such things as new schools, 
highways, hospitals, etc. 
 
Our revenue for the ’17-18 fiscal year is budgeted at $14.17 
billion, up 1 per cent from the ’16-17 budget, but up 471 
million or 3.4 per cent from the Q3 [third quarter] forecast; 
while expenses are $14.8 billion, up 2.4 per cent from budget, 
but actually down 183 million or 1.2 per cent from the Q3 
forecast. 
 
Budget 2017-18 introduces a number of revenue initiatives to 
address the fiscal challenges facing our province. These 
initiatives modernize and simplify many aspects of the 
provincial tax system and shift the revenue base away from its 
reliance on non-renewable resource revenues while ensuring 
taxes remain fair and competitive. The budget also supports the 
government’s growth agenda by reducing income tax rates for 
all levels of income and for business investment as well in this 
province and increases the low-income tax credit for those 
paying no tax at all by $100 for adults and $40 for youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been said in this House and elsewhere many 
times that the best indicator of future behaviour is past 
behaviour. So let’s take a look at our record compared to that of 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposite. Firstly, population 
dropped by 22,000 people from 1996 to 2006. Since 2006, 
under our government, population has grown by 130,000 people 
— 17,000 in last year alone according to Stats Canada. That 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

growth of 130,000 people is something that the NDP said was 
farcical. Well it is reality now, but what is farcical, Mr. Speaker, 
is that NDP that will not support this budget and our plan to 
return to balance in three years. 
 
Number two, under that NDP government, we had the worst job 
creation record in Canada, and it was only half the national 
average. Today, Mr. Speaker, we have the second-best job 
creation record in the country, now nearly double the national 
average. 
 
Thirdly, the NDP raised taxes 21 times in 16 years, including 
the PST [provincial sales tax] four times. Twenty-one times, the 
PST four times and raising the gas tax twice, and still they left 
us a billion dollar pothole in our highways. And people are not 
going to forget that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now have the lowest PST of any province with a PST. And 
on the income tax side, a family of four pays no provincial 
income tax on the first $50,495 of income. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the highest tax-free threshold in Canada. 
 
Just a couple of other examples here. Even with the PST 
increase, every Saskatchewan resident at every level of income 
will pay less in income tax-PST combined than they did under 
the NDP. Just for example, a family of four with an income of 
$50,000 today will pay $2,366 less in taxes and PST combined 
than they did in 2007. If that same family earns $75,000 a year, 
they will pay $1,886 in tax and PST combined than they did in 
2007. If that family makes $100,000 a year, they will still 
continue to pay less, a $1,951 reduction than they did in 2007. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, from ’01 to ’06 the NDP lost 450 nurses 
and 173 doctors, closed 52 hospitals, and had the longest 
surgical wait times in the country. Today 750 more doctors and 
3,000 more nurses of all designation are proud to work here in 
Saskatchewan. Our wait times are among the shortest in 
Canada. We’re building hospitals in many locations, including 
the new Sask Hospital, North Battleford in my own 
constituency. I’ll talk more about that later. 
 
Fifth, who is best to care for our seniors? Would it be the NDP 
who closed 1,200 beds in long-term care homes and never once, 
never once increased the seniors’ income plan for 16 years? 
Contrast that to the Sask Party, of opening 15 new long-term 
care facilities and tripling the Saskatchewan income for seniors 
from $90 to more than $270 a month. 
 
Number six, what about education, Mr. Speaker? The NDP 
closed 176 schools, reduced the number of teachers by 400. 
Today we have built 40 new or replacement schools and 
undertaken 25 major renovations. We have 750 more teachers 
and . . . [inaudible] . . . more students. And I’m not making this 
up, Mr. Speaker. This is actual fact. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in 16 years the NDP opened 2,856 
new child care spaces. That’s fewer than 180 a year. In 10 years 
we have funded 6,500 new spaces or 650 new spaces each and 
every year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this budget proves we intend to keep 
providing the services that our citizens want and need to 
maintain the quality of life they have enjoyed for the last 10 

years. This budget continues to provide the much needed tax 
reduction to our citizens on top of the $6.6 billion in tax savings 
that have been realized since we formed government, and the 
112,000 people, low-income earners, that now pay no 
provincial income tax at all. These tax reductions will translate 
into working to keep our economy strong. 
 
Yes, we do have a tough budget situation this year. But let’s not 
forget that at the same time, we are seeing some improvements 
in our economy, and we must continue to facilitate this trend by 
making the tax reductions proposed in this budget. 
 
Now a little bit about some of the highlights of the work of our 
hard-working ministers and ministries. With a $388.6 million 
budget, our Agriculture ministry will continue to support our 
farmers and ranchers. We certainly appreciate the value of ag 
products in this province and the longstanding contribution our 
ag producers make to our economy, as they account for a full 10 
per cent of our total GSP and over one-half of our total exports 
with $14 billion going to 147 different countries. 
 
Just a couple of examples here, Mr. Speaker: our producers 
exported 98 per cent of all of Canada’s lentil exports and 72 per 
cent of the total world lentil exports, just from this province 
alone. As well, we exported 94 per cent of Canada’s pea 
exports, which amounted to 48 per cent of the world’s pea 
exports. 
 
We continue to support agriculture in other ways, with support 
to SAASE [Saskatchewan Association of Agricultural Societies 
and Exhibitions], 4-H programs, Agribition, and other related 
ag organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we highly value the importance of education in 
this province and continue to invest in our students. We have 
allocated $2.02 billion for education, which is indeed a slight 
decrease from last year but mostly due to the fact that we have 
reduction of funds of 262 million required for the 18 new 
schools. They are now nearly complete and the funding is no 
longer required. We will continue to support our 28 school 
divisions with $1.86 billion in funding. 
 
As mentioned earlier, we will provide $55.8 million for child 
care funding. We are creating 889 new spaces in this budget 
year. 
 
Our Environment minister has increased funding to Sarcan by 
2.5 million to continue the great work they do in recycling, and 
are now adding milk cartons to the containers they will recycle. 
And this is greatly going to reduce the pressure on our landfills 
in this province. This budget also provides 164 million in 
continued support for our environmental protection. 
 
From Government Relations, we are seeing a major increase in 
infrastructure investment for Saskatchewan municipalities. In 
this budget, municipalities will receive $434.2 million in 
provincial support, an increase of $29.1 million, or 7.2 per cent 
over last year. We have also held revenue sharing to 1 per cent 
of the PST, which was greatly appreciated by our mayors, 
reeves, and councillors. This direct support of $434.2 million 
represents an increase of 192.3 million, or seventy-nine and a 
half per cent since ’07-08 budget. 
 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

Mr. Speaker, our health budget continues to be our largest item 
at $5.2 billion, and that is an increase of 38.6 million. This 
budget includes 3.4 billion for the regional health authorities, an 
increase of 1.2 per cent. Capital investments total 83.7 million, 
and that’s a 17.2 per cent increase over last year. 
 
And something close to my heart, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will receive $170 million this 
year, and that’s a $3.3 million increase in funding to provide 
cancer treatment. And although long-term care fees will be 
increasing, 50 per cent of the clients will still continue to pay 
the bare minimum monthly fee and this government will 
continue to fund fully 83 per cent of the overall cost for 
providing long-term care for our citizens. 
 
[19:15] 
 
In an exporting province like ours, our transportation system is 
so important, so I’m pleased to see that we have committed $1.1 
billion for highways and infrastructure, the second-largest 
Highways budget ever and will allow us to continue projects on 
990 kilometres of provincial highways. This is on top of the 
12 000 kilometres of highways already built, repaired, or 
resurfaced. Mr. Speaker, No. 1 Highway, the Trans-Canada 
Highway is 7 821 kilometres long, so we are nearing 
completion of highway work nearly double the length of that 
national highway. 
 
Of note in my area is funding for the planning of passing lanes 
for Highway 4 north of North Battleford, something that both 
myself and my colleague for Cut Knife-Turtleford have felt was 
necessary for many years. Most of that highway is in his 
constituency, but a short portion is in The Battlefords and this 
highway is used extensively by residents traveling north on 
business or to the lakes. And I would certainly like to offer my 
thanks to the Minister of Highways for including funding in this 
year’s budget. 
 
Our Social Services budget this year has increased by 6.9 per 
cent to 1.25 billion — the largest ever in Social Services’ 
history. Mr. Speaker, we are absolutely committed to helping 
those in our society most in need. We have increased funding 
by 25 million for TEA [transitional employment allowance], 
15.9 million for SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability], 10.5 million for Sask Assistance Program, and 14 
million for the rental housing supplement. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude — and 
probably much to the delight of my colleagues — by speaking a 
little bit about my constituency of The Battlefords. And those 
across the aisle I might add, too. 
 
Since 2007 revenue sharing for North Battleford has increased 
from 1.158 million to 2.697 million, an increase of a whopping 
133 per cent. And for the town of Battleford, the increase is 132 
per cent, from 407,000 in ’07-08 to 944,000 in this budget. Our 
two school divisions will receive 79.73 million in operating 
funding. Our Prairie North Health Region that serves a large 
portion of the Northwest of our province will receive 220.4 
million, a slight increase over last year. And not to be forgotten, 
Mr. Speaker, 155 million to continue construction of our 
beautiful new Sask Hospital North Battleford, a long-overdue 
reconstruct that was talked about prior to 2007, but it was never 

budgeted for. 
 
And this is on top of the $10 million invested since 2007 to 
develop 200 rental and homeowner units in The Battlefords. 
Other investments in The Battlefords include 3.18 million for 
the town water treatment plant, a total of 9.1 million for our 
new CUplex [Credit Union complex] and Aquatic Centre, 11.6 
million under the urban connector program for highway 
improvements to the town of Battleford. And as previously 
mentioned, funding is now announced for planning of passing 
lanes on Highway 4 North. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government is certainly making a 
commitment to continue improving the lives of residents in my 
area. For that reason and the others outlined previous, I will 
certainly be voting in favour of the budget but cannot support 
the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker. Well, folks, Mr. Speaker, I can say 
that without risk of hyperbole that this is the worst budget since 
I’ve become a legislator. Although the flip side of that, I 
suppose, is I shouldn’t press too much . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes exactly, and hopefully this will be the best 
budget speech since I’ve become a legislator. 
 
Okay, well the reality is that’s probably all the levity that I’m 
actually going to get out in this speech because there really isn’t 
a chance to enjoy a great deal in this budget. There’s not a lot to 
be really excited about. This budget came out with the title of 
Meeting the Challenge but that’s a pretty difficult title to 
swallow. I think it probably should be referred to as failing the 
test. And this a budget that fails the test on so many levels. 
 
You know I was elected, Mr. Speaker, just about a month ago. 
And it’s become pretty clear to me why, given the window that 
the government had to call this by-election, why they chose to 
have it prior to this budget and not after — because they knew 
what was in this budget and they knew how people would 
respond. 
 
All of this was planned out but none of it was shared with the 
people of the province. Despite that, despite the fact that so 
much was hidden, people still chose to send that message from 
Meewasin. They still chose to elect a member of the opposition 
because there was enough concern, enough distrust of what this 
government was up to. There was a clear no in that by-election 
— a clear no to cuts, a clear no to privatization. 
 
But this government chose not to heed that message. They 
chose not to listen to that message about no cuts and no 
privatization. They chose to move full steam ahead and, in fact, 
they appear to have chosen to shoot the messenger with a deep 
cut to Saskatoon Meewasin’s deeply treasured Meewasin 
Valley Authority and deep cuts to the city of Saskatoon. Who 
knows — is there a bit of a vindictive streak in this 
government? 
 
I recently spoke in this House about the importance of, rather 
than hitting back, rather than making decisions based on 
ideology, we really need to be focused on outcome, focused on 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

what will make this biggest difference in the health and 
well-being of the people of this province. 
 
We see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, the opposite approach. 
Here we see a blind commitment to an austerity model, flying 
in the face of all of the evidence here in this province and 
around the world that that approach does not work. That 
approach does not work. Either we’re seeing a crisis that has 
been manufactured . . . Whether this was a crisis that was 
desired or whether this is a crisis that you’ve stumbled into, I 
see a government that’s trying to take advantage of a crisis to 
push through things that are not popular, that people in this 
province don’t want, deep cuts and privatization of services that 
people don’t want and that will not help. Well perhaps calling it 
a manufactured crisis is giving too much credit. The reality is 
what I think when we see this test being failed is that a failure 
to plan is a plan to fail. And that’s exactly what we’ve seen 
here, is a failure to plan and serious failure. 
 
We’ve seen a government that’s drained its reserves — drained 
its reserves, drained the rainy day fund and now is pointing at 
everyone else and saying, got any reserves? Got any extra 
money in your pocket? We want that too. Pass the hat. Cities, 
universities, schools, even people on social assistance being 
told that they’re not going to be allowed to save as much as they 
could before. Going into everybody’s pockets because they’ve 
already emptied their own for their friends. Now they want 
everyone else to do the same. 
 
We needed to see major improvements in planning. We needed 
to see a better response. We needed to see a sovereign wealth 
fund. Every other jurisdiction that has a major dependence on 
resource royalties has gone down that road, whether it’s 3 
billion in our neighbours to the West or 847 billion in Norway. 
How many in Saskatchewan? Zero, zip, zilch, nada. That is not 
long-term thinking. That is not planning; that is failing to plan. 
We need an upstream approach. We need a government that’s 
actually thinking long term, thinking about what the impacts of 
their decisions will be, not on the next budget, not on the next 
election, but on the next generation. 
 
And in an economic downturn like we’re in, the tendency to 
scale back . . . You know, we understand that. That makes 
sense. You’re struggling; your finances aren’t what they should 
be, but it’s the wrong thing to do. It’s a panicked reflex 
response and it doesn’t work. 
 
This is actually the time when we need to invest more in people. 
It’s like having a furnace in your house. Social investment, the 
way that we invest in the people of this province, that’s the 
furnace. That’s what will actually allow us to stay warm in the 
long run. If you’re in a cold snap you don’t turn off the furnace; 
you don’t shut down the furnace; that’s not what you’re going 
to do. You’re not going to pull back on that social investment. 
In a cold snap, if you do that, well people will shiver and shake 
and some who are left out in the cold might even freeze to 
death. But even worse is the pipes are going to freeze. The 
ability to rebound, the ability to get back to work, the ability to 
actually succeed after that tough time is so much less if you cut 
back on social investment in difficult times. 
 
One of those major areas of investment in the future, one of 
those major areas on which we really need to concentrate if we 

want to be successful in coming generations, is in the area of 
advanced education. Our universities and colleges, the 
education that they provide, the research that they do in this 
province adds so much to our current economy and to our 
possibilities for the future. 
 
We know that the University of Saskatchewan, for example, 
returns over $1,500 per person per year to the provincial 
economy. That’s the highest of any of the U15 universities 
around the country. It’s an engine for the economy. But this 
government has decided to look at that engine and the 
University of Regina, the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] programs, all of the colleges 
across this province, and they want to slam on the brakes. They 
want to slam on the brakes and they want to, in the process, 
slam students and slam families, a 5 per cent cut across the 
board — historic size of a cut — cutting into the quality of the 
education and the accessibility of the education that we’re able 
to offer. 
 
We also saw the cut of the first home program. Now I had some 
skepticism about that program. I’m not sure that really targeting 
a retention program on that sliver of the graduating population 
that’s ready to buy a home, not dealing with the rest of their 
debt, that that was the wisest thing to do. But it was one of, 
what, five promises in the Sask Party platform? Very little was 
told to the province about the state of our economy, about the 
state of our finances, and very little in terms of real concrete 
policies in the last provincial election. 
 
One of them was this HomeFirst program where people who are 
recently graduated got a $10,000 grant to invest in their first 
home. One year later, not even a year later, that’s gone. That’s a 
pretty quick turnaround for a broken promise. Whether it was 
the smartest plan or not, that first home program, people were 
counting on it. There are families who now will not be buying a 
house this year because that was their chance to get in. And 
there are homebuilders who have less business in that 
important, all-important construction industry in the time of a 
recession, who now have less business that they’re able to do. 
They’re less able to contribute to our recovery. 
 
We also saw an overall decrease in the available student 
support. And I think it’s worth at this time mentioning some of 
the comments that we’re hearing about what that’s going to 
mean for schools. We’ve got the University of Regina 
president, Vianne Timmons, saying: 
 

It’s a huge number. It’s millions and millions of dollars. So 
it will mean that we lose positions — absolutely, there will 
be positions lost. Services for students potentially lost. 
We’ll have to look at everything we do. It will be a tough, 
tough year for us and tough to manage this . . . 

 
We also saw the president of the University of Regina Students’ 
Union — on this page, here we go — saying: 
 

It’s really like the government lives in an alternate reality. 
They don’t understand the struggles that people are faced 
with.” 

 
And I really do think that’s a pretty good quote because we’ve 
already got the highest tuition in Western Canada, second 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

highest in the entire country, and now it’s going to go up. 
We’ve heard it from the University of Regina. We haven’t 
heard it yet from the University of Saskatchewan but it’s going 
to be hard for them not to go down that road if this continues. 
And at the same time, at the same time as those tuitions are 
going to have to rise, we’ve seen the elimination of the tax 
deduction that people can use for tuition. So you’re getting the 
students and the families at the point where they’re paying for 
education and they don’t even get the tax relief. You’re hitting 
them twice. 
 
Who else is getting hit twice? The University of Saskatchewan. 
And this one is the most egregious to me. Our biggest school, a 
very important element of our education system and our 
economy, getting cut 5 per cent like everyone else, but also 
getting told — which I’m not sure is actually within the 
government’s purview to tell them to do so — but getting told 
that they have to apply an extra $20 million to the College of 
Medicine. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So this government took the College of Medicine’s base budget 
and said, sorry, you’re getting $20 million less. They did that 
year before last. They did it last year, and they knew that this 
year that was going to happen again. And if that happened again 
this college — my alma mater, this college that has turned out 
so many physicians for this province — was going to be in 
danger of not being accredited. So rather than coming up with 
the 20 million to make sure that that college stayed in shape, 
well, they decided to give it a huge cut. They decided to give a 
huge cut to the rest of the university by saying they have to 
push 20 million over. And Peter Stoicheff, the president of the 
University of Saskatchewan said, “I can’t side step the fact that 
a minus five [per cent in funding] is probably the largest single 
budget cut we’ve ever had in . . . history”. But if you take that 
20 million out of the rest of the budget, it becomes a 10 per cent 
cut. 
 
And you’ve now got Preston Smith, the dean, the leader of the 
College of Medicine, having to explain to the rest of the 
university why his college is having to take those funds. Really 
what you’re doing, what you’re doing is you’re robbing Peter to 
pay Preston and that, Mr. Speaker, is not helpful. That’s not 
helpful to the rest of the university. It’s a 10 per cent cut to the 
rest of the university and it’s not helpful to the College of 
Medicine. That college can’t thrive on its own. It needs to have 
good quality students coming in from the rest of the university. 
It needs to be part of the research environment of the university. 
If we starve the rest of the university to save the College of 
Medicine, we’ll save nothing at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s why certainly on the question of 
advanced education this budget can only be called failing the 
test, and that extends further into all different areas of 
education. We’ve seen cuts to libraries. Today six employees of 
the Palliser Regional Library, the Moose Jaw library — such a 
beautiful building where I used to go as a kid growing up in 
Moose Jaw — six employees gone. Are we going to be able to 
keep that library even open at all? So many libraries across the 
province at risk of closure and the libraries in the big cities 
being told they’re not getting any funding. It’s all got to come 
from the cities, cities that have already been told they’re losing 

money from grants-in-lieu. They’re losing money from all 
different sources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also are seeing cuts in education, in that 
primary and secondary school education, increased taxes and 
decreased services. I think we have a new slogan for the Sask 
Party. I think it should be called pay more, get less. I think that 
would be a more accurate slogan for what we’re getting out of 
this party. 
 
At the same time cutting school supplies, cutting coverage of 
school supplies for people on social assistance and specific 
schools comme l’École canadienne-française. Et les autres 
écoles francophones de Saskatchewan ont perdu presque deux 
millions de dollars, quelque chose qui va vraiment mettre en 
risque les services offerts au minorités langues de cette 
province. 
 
[Translation: such as l’École Canadienne-Française. And other 
Saskatchewan francophone schools have lost almost $2 million, 
something which will really put minority language services at 
risk in this province.] 
 
You know, failing on education, on libraries, universities, 
primary and secondary school education . . . You know, 
sometimes, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 
it seems like the Sask Party thinks we’re stupid. But you know, 
with these choices, maybe it seems they’d be better off if we 
were. Maybe they feel they could get away with more of what 
they’re doing. These cuts are deeply damaging to people. And 
they’re not in learning alone. 
 
The closure of, the privatization of, the cut to that service that is 
essential of STC, the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
this is a service that is crucial to rural people, mostly used by 
low-income families. Seventy per cent of those who ride the bus 
live in low income; 60 per cent are seniors; used by cancer 
patients going back and forth; used by grandmothers and 
grandfathers going to help out their grandkids — deeply 
important program just being shut down. 
 
You know, I met today . . . There was a rally today in Regina. I 
met today a woman among the hundreds who were out there 
rallying to save STC, a woman who just got off the bus. She 
was carrying her luggage and she’d just come in from Fort 
Qu’Appelle. And she came up to me and she said, she asked 
what this was all about, and we said we were there to show 
support for STC. And she said she had to quit her job in Regina 
because she lives in Fort Qu’Appelle, and the way she gets back 
and forth to work . . . You should listen to this because there’s 
going to be lots of stories like this. She’s had to quit her job 
because she doesn’t have a way to get back and forth anymore. 
And that’s not going to be the only one. This is going to hurt a 
lot of people. It’s going to hurt a lot of people in small towns, 
on farms, and all over this province. 
 
Not to mention the fact that it’s going to get rid of good jobs for 
the people who drive those buses, who service those depots. 
Among hundreds of other good jobs that are being cut in this 
budget, over 500 jobs directly gone right away, and we expect 
hundreds more to come in indirect losses because of all of these 
cuts. These are quality jobs, reliable, good jobs that families can 
count on, jobs that contribute to the economy, the kind of jobs 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

you don’t cut in a downturn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the only area that we’re actually seeing a 
significant increase is in the area of social services. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m the critic for poverty, so I had to give a lot of 
thought to that. But it’s really interesting to see how we’re 
getting an increase in the total amount going to social services 
but we’re not actually seeing any more for people on social 
services. In fact, we’re seeing less. We’re seeing a decrease in 
the transition to employment allowance. We’re hearing talk of a 
decrease in diet allowances, cutting school supplies, cutting 
travel allowances, and introducing PST on kids’ clothes — 
something that’s going to make it even harder for the people 
living in poverty. And even talking about going after people’s 
savings and going on some sort of a witch hunt to weed out 
those who are undeserving. That sort of expensive effort that 
bounces needy people off of the rolls and only costs more in the 
long run. 
 
We know how much poverty costs: $3.8 billion lost, $3.8 
billion lost to the provincial economy, $3.8 billion each year 
and that is only going to go up. And now we’ve seen the 
budget, now we’ve seen the budget for social services go up 
because, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
actually going to give the people on social assistance any more; 
they’re just expecting more people to be in poverty because of 
the policies of this government. 
 
Nothing to address poverty in any serious way in this budget. 
Nothing to respond to the recommendations or even put into 
place the watered-down version of a poverty reduction 
non-strategy that they put in place. The only thing I see 
regarding poverty is the tacit acknowledgement that it will get 
worse under this government. 
 
A failure to plan is exactly what we’ve seen. A failure to 
prepare for the inevitable commodity downturn. Still no savings 
plan; just a contingency fund, a contingency fund which at the 
rate that this government has enjoyed expanding its deficits, 
will be eaten up in the first quarter by taking measures that we 
know won’t work. 
 
Taking measures that we know won’t work: deep program cuts 
and the sell-off of public goods. This is austerity. It’s been tried 
around the world and it doesn’t work. It didn’t work here. It 
doesn’t work anywhere else. It has been described, this budget’s 
been described as a tough pill to swallow, a tough pill to 
swallow. 
 
It’s hard times, but Rod Gantefoer, the former Finance minister 
for the Sask Party government, was worried that this kind of a 
budget might be the medicine that kills the patient. Because the 
choices that are being made today will not improve the 
economy; they’ll worsen the economy. 
 
On top of hard hits to Saskatchewan people, we saw a very 
strange decision, a very strange decision, and that was the 
decision to cut the corporate tax rate. If we’re going to make . . . 
This is Peter Gilmer from the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry: 
 

If we’re going to make cuts toward the most vulnerable 
people in the province, we think it adds insult to injury to 
be looking at corporate tax cuts and tax cuts to the wealthy. 

Well whether it’s insult to injury or not, it’s not smart 
economics. It’s not good policy. It just doesn’t work to have the 
effect that you think it’s going to have. 
 
This government is predicting a significant increase in growth 
resulting from corporate cuts. But it doesn’t work that way; the 
fiscal multiplier on corporate tax cuts is point three. For every 
dollar that you cut you get back 30 cents. When you do cuts to 
personal income tax, tends to be a wash, one for one, but in 
terms of GDP [gross domestic product] growth, only 30 cents 
on the dollar for every dollar cut in corporate income tax. 
 
When you look at investments in housing, it’s 1.5, $1.50 back 
for every dollar you put in. In infrastructure, 1.6, and in 
programs and measures for low-income and unemployed, 1.7. 
This is the area . . . If you want to improve your situation in an 
economic downturn and you want to invest, you don’t cut the 
corporate tax rate; you invest in people. You do social 
investment. That’s where the return is and that’s where you take 
care of people, which is really the purpose of this position. 
 
The services they’re cutting would help us, Mr. Speaker. This 
corporate tax cut will not. It fails the test. But perhaps not so 
drastically as what they’ve done in terms of the taxes on 
Saskatchewan people. It’s a fundamental principle of taxation, a 
fundamental role of government to use taxation to curb the 
tendency towards greater inequality in society, to balance to a 
degree the difference between those who have benefited the 
most and those who have the least. It’s a principle based on a 
sense of justice. 
 
You know, there’s an underlying value of how much we care 
about human beings in that, but it’s also based on outcomes. 
Inequality worsens the quality of our lives. The greater the level 
of inequality in a state or country, the worse the health 
outcomes, the worse the social outcomes. And what have we 
seen in this budget? We’ve seen a significant effort towards 
worsening inequality. 
 
With the tax cuts from the personal income tax and the tax 
increase from PST, the effect is that if you’re in the bottom 10 
per cent of the population in terms of income your taxes go up 
by two per cent. If you’re in the middle, if you’re at 50 per cent, 
your taxes go up by one per cent. If you’re in the top 10 per 
cent your taxes don’t go up at all — zero, zilch, nada. The PST 
balances out the personal income tax cut — nothing. So those 
who can afford the most to pay, those who actually have 
benefited the most in recent years, those who can afford the 
most to pay get a pass. The more you make, the less you pay. 
Look it up in Maclean’s. It’s a chart that describes very clearly 
the way in which at each income level . . . It’s a very clear line. 
The higher your income, the lower the taxes you’re going to 
pay based on this decision. And the low-income tax credits 
don’t come near to countering that serious problem. 
 
You know, we’ve heard this budget sold as pain for all, that, 
you know, we’ve all got to swallow this bitter pill. But it’s very 
clear that some will hurt far more. There will be short-term pain 
for long-term pain and long-term damage. 
 
Now we’ve been criticized; we’ve been criticized, saying 
where’s your plan. I tell you what. Our plan would certainly not 
be to make taxation more regressive, to make those who make 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

the most pay the least. Our plan would be to maintain social 
investment in order to strengthen the economy. And our plan 
would not be to get sucked into a panicked response, get pulled 
into a panicked response and do things that will only make the 
problem worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve been urged not to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the relative 
honesty of this budget. But I think it’s clear enough to say that 
whether it’s been telling the truth or not, whether it’s been 
honestly presented or not, it’s not smart. If we had some way of 
measuring its degree of smartness, like a smart meter perhaps, it 
wouldn’t even register. 
 
You know, it’s not a smart budget, and it’s not a kind budget. It 
was hidden from people. A month ago we were on the doorstep 
. . . Every single detail, you knew this. They knew this already, 
but it wasn’t shared because they knew that the people of 
Saskatchewan would not want this anti-growth, anti-learning, 
regressive, short-sighted, ham-fisted, mean-spirited, terrible, 
awful, no-good budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to give my support to the amendment 
because the reality is that this budget is a result of a lack of 
foresight, a lack of planning ahead. In fact, the only piece of 
foresight I see in here, Mr. Speaker, is — the one sign of 
clairvoyance — is the decision to cut funeral costs. Because the 
decisions made in this budget are going to cause worse health 
outcomes, we’re going to see more people dying in poverty. 
And that’s going to be an expense that this government doesn’t 
want to handle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the member didn’t adjourn debate. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
[19:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll let the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 
clarify his remarks at the end. I did not put the question, so if he 
could repeat what he said at the end, I think we should be okay. 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks and 
apologize for any errors. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to enter into this budget debate, but before I do I 
would like to take this opportunity to thank some very 
important people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to thank my team, headed 
up by my campaign manager, my wife Valerie, in the April 4th, 
2016 election, which saw us receive 80 per cent of the vote. It 
was truly a humbling experience to see that kind of support 
from the constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford. It also was my 
first 80 per cent in my life, so it’s good. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say just a few more things about my 
wife — my best friend, my wife, grandma, bookkeeper for my 
daughter, you name it. But most importantly, most importantly, 
to the member from Meadow Lake, the Minister of the 
Economy, my wife does her share to keep retail sales up. She’s 
there all the way, all in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank and recognize my 
constituency assistant, Cheryl Hume, for all her hard work and 
dedication to running a very effective constituency office. 
Maureen Paron is our casual office person and is a valued part 
of our office. These two ladies serve the Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituents very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, preparing a provincial budget is a long and trying 
task. I would like to thank the Finance minister for his 
leadership through this process. The minister, along with 
Treasury Board members and all the ministries, have been 
going hard basically since the April 4th election. Many difficult 
decisions had to be made, but at the end of the day a fair and 
realistic plan has been established. So a very special thank you 
to everyone involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of this year’s budget is meeting the 
challenge. The budget is a plan that meets our challenge 
Saskatchewan is facing. Our challenge is clear. Resource 
revenue has declined by more than a million dollars over the 
past three years, mainly due to oil and potash prices that have 
stayed persistently low. Mr. Speaker, our plan is also clear: 
return the budget to balance in three years while ensuring 
important government programs and services remain affordable 
and sustainable. 
 
We are meeting the challenge by controlling and reducing 
spending, modernizing and expanding the tax system, and 
ensuring the economy remains strong. At the same time, 
supported by a strong foundation of base funding that has 
grown over the past 10 years, this budget continues to invest in 
the programs, services, and infrastructure valued by 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past nine months our government has 
consulted and listened to people of Saskatchewan, stakeholders 
from a broad section of the economy. We heard many different 
views and one consistent message: take time to make the 
necessary changes, be sensitive to the needs of Saskatchewan 
people and the economy, and create a plan that returns the 
province to a balanced budget. We have listened and we have 
acted. 
 
While many of the decisions in the budget 2017-18 were 
difficult, they strike balance expressed by many. Meeting the 
challenge requires changes in the delivery of services, 
transformational changes that can be complex and require time 
to take hold. Mr. Speaker, we are seeing some of these changes 
take shape in the area of health, education, and social services. 
The goal is to ensure our programs and services are more 
effective and sustainable in the long run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we also taking revenue measures to 
help meet the current financial challenge, provide greater 
revenue stability, and move our revenue base away from its 
reliance on resource revenue. The PST rate was increased and 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

the base expanded, but at the same time personal and corporate 
income taxes are being lowered and net growth incentives 
introduced to keep our economy strong. 
 
Meeting the challenge is vitally important now and for the 
future. Mr. Speaker, some facts about the taxes after the 
2017-18 budget are, Saskatchewan still has the lowest PST rate 
of any province with a provincial sales tax. A family of four in 
Saskatchewan pays no income tax on their first $50,494 of 
income, the highest tax-free threshold in Canada. I’m hoping 
the member from Athabasca is listening to that. 
 
As a result of the budget, Saskatchewan individuals and 
families will pay among the lowest income taxes in Canada, 
ranging from the lowest to the third lowest or more depending 
on the level of income. Mr. Speaker, even the PST increase, 
every Saskatchewan resident at every level of income will still 
be paying significantly less in income tax and PST combined 
than they did in 2007 under the NDP. A single person with 
40,000 income will pay $749 less than in 2007. A family of 
four, $50,000 income, will pay $2,366 less than in 2007. A 
family of four with 75,000 income will pay $1,886 less than in 
2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the tax changes announced in this budget 
are fully implemented, Saskatchewan will have the lowest 
corporate tax, the lowest taxes on manufacturing and 
processing, and nation-leading research and development 
incentives, giving our province a tremendous advantage and 
attracting new investment, jobs, and opportunities to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When this budget is fully implemented, Saskatchewan will be 
the only province in Canada with no carbon tax of any kind. It’s 
too bad the member from Meewasin wasn’t here to hear that, 
but anyway. Mr. Speaker, the 2017-18 budget maintains the 
municipal revenue-sharing formula of one percentage point of 
the provincial sales tax, the PST revenue. As a result, municipal 
revenue sharing will be 257.8 million, a decrease of 5.1 per cent 
from the record funding in the last budget, reflecting the reality 
of lower PST revenue in more challenging fiscal times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, urban revenue sharing for all cities, towns, and 
villages and resort villages will amount to 165.7 million in 
2017-18. Revenue sharing for rural municipalities, which 
includes organized hamlets, will total 72.8 million. Northern 
municipalities will receive 19.2 million in the coming fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon, the province’s largest city, will receive 
46.4 million and Regina will receive 40.5 million in municipal 
revenue sharing. The budget also provides 42.2 million in other 
funding to municipalities from the ministries, including grants 
for such services as policing, libraries, urban parks, and transit 
assistance. Direct provincial support to these municipalities has 
increased by 192.3 million or 79.5 per cent since the 2007-08 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the 2017-18 budget, the government has 
established the education property tax or EPT mill rates for 
2017. Mill rates for all classes of property have been lowered. 
However, because of reassessments and increased property 
values across the province, actual tax revenue collected through 

EPT will increase by 67 million or 9.8 per cent. The EPT 
change for each property will vary based on reassessment value 
of the property. Mr. Speaker, the education property tax system 
was redesigned and property taxes were lowered significantly in 
2008-09. As part of that redesign, the government committed to 
a 60/40 split for the funding of education, 60 per cent coming 
from government grants and 40 per cent from EPT. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recent years the EPT has remained unchanged 
while education costs have continued to increase. The share of 
the education costs funded by EPT has been approximately 35 
per cent. This budget restores the 60/40 balance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agricultural mill rates will go from 2.67 mills to 
1.43, residential will go from 5.03 to 4.12, 
commercial/industrial will go from 8.28 to 6.27, and resource 
will go from 11.04 to 9.68. Since 2009, residents of 
Saskatchewan have seen a $1.3 billion reduction in property tax 
savings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget for 2017-18 
of 388.6 million continues to support Saskatchewan’s strong 
agricultural industry. Business risk management programs will 
be fully funded, with an investment of 264.1 million, an 
increase of almost 4 per cent. Mr. Speaker, our agricultural 
industry is a very important part of our diverse economy . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Coronation Park 
would agree with that. 
 
This budget invests in programs and services that support our 
farmers and ranchers to drive sustainable growth in the sector. 
Mr. Speaker, funding of 71.2 million is again being provided 
for strategic initiatives under the federal-provincial Growing 
Forward 2 agreement. This budget continues the province’s 
investment in agricultural research with 26.8 million; and for 
crop insurance premiums and program delivery, 172.2 million 
is being provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2017-18 budget includes the decision to end 
the Saskatchewan pastures program and consult on the future 
management of the land. 
 
This will be the last year that the SPP [Saskatchewan pastures 
program] will operate in its entirety. The SPP was originally 
created to help support the diversification of the industry; 
however, our industry has evolved as have the needs of the 
producers. Managing private cattle is no longer a core business 
function of the government. Public and stakeholder engagement 
along with First Nations and Métis communities consultations 
on how the affected pasture land should be managed in the 
future will start in the coming days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2017-18 budget will see a significant 
enhancement to the regulatory oversight of the oil and gas 
industry, a very important industry in my constituency. The 
petroleum and natural gas division of the Ministry of the 
Economy, which is the provincial regulator of oil and gas 
activities, will receive an additional 1.4 million and 13 full-time 
equivalent positions in the 2017-18 budget. The additional 
funding will be allocated to the following initiatives: 600,000 
start-up funding for a multi-year pipeline regulation 
enhancement program called PREP to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s approach to pipeline regulation; 500,000 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

increase in core funding to increase the number of field 
inspectors in the ministry’s field offices in Estevan, Swift 
Current, Kindersley, and Lloydminster; and 250,000 funding to 
expand the technical capacity of the ministry to support the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s climate change commitments 
related to the upstream oil and gas industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also includes 460,000 in capital 
spending to begin the expansion of the integrated resource 
information system better known as IRIS to support the 
implementation of PREP. IRIS is a custom-built online business 
system that supports the development and regulation of 
Saskatchewan’s oil and gas industry. This funding will allow 
for web-based pipeline licensing, including flow lines as well as 
additional reporting and mapping capabilities related to the 
pipeline regulation. 
 
In addition to these recent developments, in 2016 the 
Government of Saskatchewan introduced Bill 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. This bill, slated for Royal Assent later 
this spring, will provide the legal foundation allowed for the 
implementation of PREP and enhancements to IRIS needed to 
support efficient industry regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of the new operational funding 
announced in this budget will be offset by an administrative 
levy assessed against the well and pipeline licence holders to 
accommodate expanded pipeline regulation. The existing well 
levy formula under The Oil and Gas Conservation Act will be 
amended to include a levy for pipeline licences. Changes 
announced in this budget, including the amendment to the 
administrative levy, will enable the Government of 
Saskatchewan to deliver on significant improvements to its oil 
and gas regulatory program. Public confidence in our regulatory 
system is vital to the long term growth and development of our 
oil and gas industry. Consultation with the oil and gas and 
potash industries on the regulations needed to implement the 
changes to the administrative levy will occur over the next few 
months for implementation this year. 
 
In addition to the pipelines being covered under the new 
administrative levy, other planned changes include: 
 

Introduction of a base levy for all licensed wells, with the 
exception of abandoned wells, to ensure all well owners 
are paying an equitable share of the cost of regulating 
active and inactive wells; and 
Elimination of fees for seismic licences and explosive 
permits since these costs will now be fully offset by the 
proposed changes to the levy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the initiatives included in the 2017-18 budget will 
continue the trend of strengthening oil and gas regulation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

In recent years, the Ministry of the Economy has 
implemented the following initiatives: 

 
Created IRIS, which is a custom-built web-based 
business system that supports the development and 
regulation of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas industry and 
enables industry to complete regularly performed 
business and regulatory tasks online; 

Developed and implemented an administrative levy to 
recover 90 per cent of regulatory costs from industry 
including the cost of expanded regulatory programs; 
Increased the number of FTEs assigned to oil and gas 
regulation; 
Established a single window with the Ministry of 
Environment and Ministry of Agriculture using IRIS to 
streamline the regulatory oversight of the industry; 
Created a division within the Ministry of the Economy 
fully dedicated to oil and gas regulation to operate at 
arm’s length from oil and gas investment attraction 
activities; 
Enhanced air quality monitoring; and 
Enhanced pipeline monitoring. 

 
[20:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan is investing $5.2 billion this year in core 
health [care] services and infrastructure to meet the health 
care needs of Saskatchewan people. The 2017-18 Health 
budget has increased $38.6 million (0.7 per cent) from 
2016-17 and more than 51 per cent since 2007. 

 
“Our government is investing in health care that supports 
Saskatchewan patients and families by focusing on 
important front-line services.” . . . “Health system 
transformation and the shift to a single Provincial Health 
Authority will support our efforts to meet the challenges 
Saskatchewan is facing. We’re committed to controlling 
costs, reducing administration and finding ways to provide 
more efficient, sustainable front-line health care services 
for Saskatchewan people.” 

 
Mr. Speaker:  

 
The Health budget includes $3.4 billion in funding for 
Regional Health Authorities. This is an increase of 1.2 per 
cent over last year and 57.9 per cent more than the RHA 
allocation in 2007. It includes a new $12 million 
investment to address overcapacity pressures and 
emergency department wait times in Regina and 
Saskatoon, and $24.4 million in funding to address service 
pressures and operating costs. 
 
Government will meet its commitment to provide 
additional funding to the Canadian National Institute for 
the Blind, with a $250,000 . . . increase in 2017-18. 
 
The province is also . . . [supplying] $750,000 to begin a 
human . . . (HPV) vaccination program for boys, 
expanding availability of the program that began in 2008 
for Grade 6 girls. 
 

Mr. Speaker:  
 

Capital investments in 2017-18 total $83.7 million, a 17.2 
per cent increase. Affirming the province’s commitment to 
the Children’s Hospital of Saskatchewan, investments 
include $15.5 million for the CHS, which will also receive 
$8 million for information technology needs and $4.4 
million in operating funds. The Leader Integrated Facility 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

will receive $6.7 million, and $3.5 million will fund 
electrical renewal projects at Regina General and Pasqua 
hospitals. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency will also receive more 
than $170 million, a $3.3 million increase in funding to 
provide cancer treatment to more patients. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the $1.1 billion 2017-18 Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure budget will see work continue on major 
projects on 990 kilometres of provincial highways across 
Saskatchewan over the coming year. This is the second-largest 
transportation budget in Saskatchewan’s history and the second 
year in a row that we invest more than a billion dollars into our 
highways and roads. The budget is a testament to our 
government’s commitment to provide infrastructure that grows 
our economy and improves safety while keeping our physical 
house in order during these challenging times. 
 
This year’s budget includes 343 million to start or continue 
construction across the province, as well as 500 million for the 
Regina bypass. Mr. Speaker, highlights include major projects 
to improve safety and increase capacity on some of 
Saskatchewan’s busiest highways. We continue work on the 
new overpasses at Warman and Martensville, continue work on 
twinning Highway 7 between Saskatoon and Delisle, continue 
work on twinning Highway 39 between Estevan and Bienfait, 
construction of two sets of passing lanes on Highway 5 between 
Saskatoon and Humboldt, further planning for future twinning 
and passing lanes on highways 6 and 39 from Estevan to 
Regina, and begin planning for passing lanes on Highway 4 
north of North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, this is a long time 
coming, a very, very busy section of highway in our province, 
Highway 4 north of The Battlefords, with all the SAGD 
[steam-assisted gravity drainage] development and the lakes in 
that area, so we’re looking forward to this. 
 
150 kilometres of rural highway upgrades, including Highway 4 
south of Cadillac, Highway 51 near Kelfield, Highway 80 north 
of Esterhazy, and Highway 322 north of Silton. Repairing and 
upgrading 990 kilometres of provincial highways, including 
150 kilometres of rural highway upgrades, 300 kilometres of 
repaving, 140 kilometres of sealing, and 400 kilometres of other 
treatments. Investing more than 53 million to build, operate, 
and maintain highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan. 
Thirty major bridge rehabilitations and replacements, as well as 
the numerous culvert projects across the province. More than 20 
million for urban and municipal road projects and airports, 
funding that is over and above revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to invest in our highways and make 
improvements throughout Saskatchewan, but we know there is 
still more work to be done, and this budget is a good step in that 
direction. However our commitment and track record is clear. 
With this year’s budget, we’ve now invested more than $7.4 
billion to improve more than 12 000 kilometres of road and 
highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Legislative Secretary to Highways and 
Infrastructure, I’d like to take this opportunity to recognize 
Nithi Govindasamy, deputy minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure who is retiring March 31st. Nithi graduated from 
the University of Alberta in 1975 with a Bachelor of Science 

and Agriculture. He received his Masters of Science, majoring 
in agricultural economics from the University of Alberta in 
1983. 
 
From September 16th, 2013 to present, he’s been the deputy 
minister of Highways and from . . . when was it here? From 
1983 to 2008 he was Alberta Agriculture executive director of 
policy secretariat. Other positions include resource economist, 
trade statistician, farm income specialist, and director of 
international government office. Mr. Speaker, Nithi worked in 
Malaysia as an agrologist and . . . [inaudible] . . . director of 
extension. His board membership includes the Canadian 
Agriculture Hall of Fame. Mr. Speaker, we thank Nithi for his 
40 years of government service and he will be missed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency has growth 
in the resource sector with new SAGD plants being completed 
in the Edam area. Three Husky SAGD, one owed by Serafina, 
are all producing oil right now. Husky Energy is constructing 
another plant north of Maidstone and Serafina is constructing 
another plant at Meota. Husky, I would also say, has two plants 
going up at Spruce Lake and along with Serafina with a plant 
up there also. Mr. Speaker, these construction sites employ 
hundreds of people, and when completed they have 
good-paying, full-time jobs. The SAGD process is able to 
extract oil between 7 and $9 a barrel. This year with good 
moisture conditions and resource industry investment, we are 
looking forward to a very good year in the Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a couple of minutes to refresh 
our memories of the NDP budget of 2004. Now that was the 
first budget after they won the 2003 election, which I’m sure 
nobody was more surprised than Mr. Calvert and his members 
over there. Their masterful, I guess, implication of 
fearmongering seemed to go all the way. But anyway, their first 
budget, the NDP increased the provincial sales tax by a point to 
7 per cent. It included elimination of 500 government jobs. 
More than half those jobs came from Ag and Environment. 
Funding was reduced by 12 government departments. Changes 
were made to the health delivery which included facility 
closures and conversions as well as reductions in long-term care 
beds. 
 
Cuts to agricultural support programs and consolidation of 31 
rural service centres into nine rural and northern environmental 
offices were also closed. All these cuts were especially 
punishing to the people in rural Saskatchewan. They pulled 
158.1 million out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Centre 
champions himself as being the representative of labour, and he 
also talks in this House many times of consultation, 
consultation with constituents and whatever. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
when that minister . . . or when that member was the minister, 
this is what he had to say: 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately as a result of this need to 
reduce expenditures, we also had to reduce staff and this 
was not an easy decision to make. 
 
But in order to govern effectively, we had to have 
responsible finances and not back down from these 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

difficult choices. 
 
That was from the member from Saskatoon Centre. Mr. 
Speaker, along with the decisions of the NDP, let’s not forget 
what else the NDP think tank came up with. Instead of opening 
provincial parks May 20th as usual, they decided to open parks 
on June 18th in order to save $100,000 by delaying the 
openings. They also introduced the $3 charge for campfires 
which was labelled the wiener roast tax. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
like a good hot dog, you know, and this was a real, real test to 
the hot dog industry. I’m sure that Fuhrmann’s Meats or Maple 
Leaf Foods or Schneiders were not consulted by the member 
opposite. But you know, Mr. Speaker, I guess different 
governments have different priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, there continues to be a divergence 
between the renewal we see in the economy and what we’re 
experiencing in government. The economy is getting stronger. 
We know that not just anecdotally but statistically. But 
revenues in government are still weak, and by now you 
probably are familiar with some of the numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fiscal year, non-renewable resource revenues 
are down about 1.2 billion from the 2014 levels. That’s 1.2 
billion on a $14.4 billion budget, a drop of about 8 per cent. 
That’s what we’re facing today. Oil has fallen back below $50 a 
barrel. West Texas Intermediate and most experts say that the 
ceiling for the increase is $60 a barrel. That’s when American 
Shell producers will get busy and bring on more supply. We’re 
not going to see $100 a barrel of oil soon and we’re making 
matters worse. Uranium and potash prices are near record lows, 
and the recovery in those markets will be prolonged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, resource revenues are lower and so too is tax 
revenue from the government. This fiscal year, tax revenues 
have dropped 400 million from what we forecasted in our 
budget. On the expenditures side, there are pressures in health 
care, social services, and corrections, in part because of our 
growing population. So we’re getting hit hard at both ends, 
revenues and expenditures. 
 
Our deficit this year is much bigger than expected. The forecast 
right now is 1.2 billion. Deficits at this level are unsustainable. 
Mr. Speaker, over time they will erode our ability to provide the 
services that support quality of life in our province. They will 
put in peril the Saskatchewan advantage we have created 
together. 
 
We have to take action on the deficit today, not tomorrow, not 
at some undetermined point in the future. Because we’ve seen 
other governments in Canada kick the can down the road for 
years, postpone the day of reckoning, perhaps in the belief that 
somehow deficits will magically take care of themselves. It will 
take a determined, disciplined effort on the part of everyone in 
government, at all levels of government, to deal with this 
challenge. Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
amendment, but I will be supporting the budget. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
and honour to rise in the Assembly to participate in this budget 
speech debate, a budget based on the values of Saskatchewan 

people. As I get further into my speech, you will realize it’s an 
approach that believes our government is there to do the best 
they can to improve our communities and improve on our 
quality of life here in the province, as the people of 
Saskatchewan have instructed this government to make some 
important decisions that will seriously affect their communities 
and province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can rely on the guidance of our enduring 
Saskatchewan values of working together to build a secure 
future, one of co-operation and fiscal restraint. And I’m pleased 
to say that this budget demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to balance based on sound principles and the 
important fiscal objective of reducing debt. 
 
Before I continue though, there are a few people I would like to 
mention and thank for presenting this strong budget. Thank you 
to the Finance minister, the member from Regina Northeast, 
and the colleagues who put many hours into this process, with 
an end result of a well thought out, realistic solution. And I 
would also like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the strong role 
that you play in the Assembly as my colleagues display their 
appreciation and passion of working in this historical 
monument of democracy, so thank you. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Foremost in my mind, Mr. Speaker, my constituents in the 
riding of Saskatchewan Rivers, and I’d like to express my 
appreciation to these hard-working people of this region for 
giving me the opportunity to represent them one more time. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, I was first elected to take my 
seat in this legislature in the fall of 2007. Throughout these 
years, I’ve been privileged to work for these wonderful people. 
They’re my neighbours. They’re my friends, and I’m very 
honoured to continue seeking to maintain their trust. I’ve met 
many caring constituents and many of them have made positive 
contributions to the quality of life in Saskatchewan. Thank you 
to all you unsung heroes who have asked for no recognition or 
mention. It must be in our Saskatchewan DNA or culture to 
volunteer and donate with no thought of reimbursement except 
the word, thank you. 
 
I would also like to thank the men and women who have 
worked in their communities across our province, dedicated to 
Saskatchewan in the work that they do to ensure our safety, our 
health, and the education of all the citizens of this great 
province. 
 
A great expression of appreciation to my constituency assistant, 
Marcus Abrametz. He handles the issues that arise and are 
brought to our main constituency office. He’s been with me for 
nine years, so we kind of grew up together in the political 
world. In our Big River office, Jason Beebe helps me keep in 
touch with the concerns of the people in that community and 
area. Joan Strube is a welcome addition to the office on short 
notice and when needed quickly, so thank you for her 
compassion towards our constituents whenever I need to call 
her quickly. Cora still assists me in many ways, and also Rupel 
in the building helps me and keeps me informed of my 
scheduling. Thank you to Jason and the protocol staff for all 
that they do for myself and the province. The dedication of all 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

these Saskatchewan people are a reminder of why I’m thankful 
to live and work and to have raised my family here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would like to recognize and thank my family for their 
continued love and support. Our son Matthew and 
daughter-in-law Katie live on the same farm quarter with their 
five children. The two older boys are Casey and Reid and the 
twin girls are Hanna and Laura, and the toddler, sweet Georgie, 
brings it up at the end. With all the horses, cattle, and the arrival 
of the piglets last year, it’s a busy, very busy farmyard. Oh, and 
also the pup, Lenny, came into the yard. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re busy. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — They are a very busy group. 
 
I was rather worried when the full-grown pigs — Snowball and 
Scratch My Back is the names — were ready to be processed 
into the food chain, if you catch my drift. But that’s a story for 
another day. 
 
I was a 4-H leader for close to 15 years and now this new 
generation of grandchildren have entered into the 4-H family. 
This spring, when I was home on the weekend, I looked out the 
kitchen window and the two boys, aged six and eight, were 
leading their 4-H steers through the yard. One was a Polled 
Hereford and the other one a Shorthorn, so there’s going to be a 
little bit of competition there. I think grandma’ll be bidding on 
the steers at the show and sale in the spring. I usually go in to 
the Prince Albert 4-H show and bid on the grand champion, but 
this year I think grandma will be bidding on the two grandsons’ 
steers. 
 
Our daughter, Brigitt and son-in-law Chris, live close in the 
Prince Albert region. And Brigitt by trade is a social worker and 
a nurse, but politics must run in our blood as she’s currently 
working for the local Member of Parliament in that city. Chris 
is a newcomer. He’s an Afrikaner from Capetown, South 
Africa. He went to school in Stellenbosch then went on to 
England, and then he made his way here to practise in 
Saskatchewan in Prince Albert. 
 
He also has a clinic where he works in rural Saskatchewan at 
the Big River Health Centre once a week. They have two 
beautiful daughters, Ella and Jane, who will have a new baby 
brother this summer, so there’s more love in my heart. My 
family just keeps growing. 
 
Now Lacey is married to Seth and lives in Yorkton. For some 
reason, most of the children are in the health field. Lacey works 
at the hospital there as a speech language pathologist and she 
deals with stroke patients, mainly seniors who’ve had strokes 
and they come in and she has to get them to swallow again. Her 
husband, Seth, is a professional firefighter and he works with 
the EMS [emergency medical services] there. 
 
Now our youngest son, Markus, is at the College of Dentistry at 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. He spent many years 
in school, both in the States and here. He claims he wants to 
remain in Saskatchewan and work when he’s done. He has one 
more year, so I feel I’m very blessed that all of my four children 
live and work in Saskatchewan. 

And my husband, Doug, who I’ve been married to for 37 years, 
has put up with me and all that I am. So thank you to him. He 
values the farm and the family and flying. He’s building an 
amphibious float airplane. He has a little Cessna that he likes to 
fly, but this is his other hobby, is building airplanes. So he 
keeps very busy on the farm with the airstrip, the livestock, the 
puppies, the grandchildren. It’s a very lively place. But I can 
rest assured that Doug is our rock and he takes care of our 
flock, our family. So with his support, I’m able to focus on this 
place and help out how I can to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s budget is about future, balance, 
and a vision for a healthy province and a healthy society where 
Saskatchewan citizens contribute to a caring and creative 
democracy. It’s a vision inspired by our past behaviour and our 
successes, but faces the future with confidence in a society of 
responsibility, which individuals in the broader society 
willingly take personal responsibility and supports those in 
need. We can rely on the guidance of our enduring 
Saskatchewan values of working together to build a secure 
future, one of co-operation and restraint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us acknowledge some of the changing 
circumstances in the province and challenges being faced today. 
The revenue measures contained in the budget provide 
increased revenue to our vital public services, while ensuring 
Saskatchewan’s taxes are fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the riding of Saskatchewan Rivers where I 
represent — a geography of many aging highways that has been 
acknowledged by this government and have been repaired, 
repaved, or still in the construction stage of removing 
dangerous blind spots and curves — a great deal of highway 
work was completed this summer. And this includes resurfacing 
along No. 264 near Elk Ridge, 8 kilometres along 120 near 
Candle Lake, Highway 3 near Holbein, Highway 2 north of 
Prince Albert, and Highway 263 through the district of 
Lakeland near Christopher, Emma, and Anglin lakes. 
 
All this work was to widen highways, improve safety, improve 
lighting, and designated turning lanes, create modern and safer 
designs, drainage plans implemented, and this will keep our 
highways safer for years to come. Safer for the children riding 
the school buses, the tourists hauling boats and trailers, and the 
long RV [recreational vehicle] units who use our beautiful parks 
and lake systems, the NRT [Northern Resources Trucking] 
trucks travelling north and south, the livestock and grain trailer 
units delivering farm products to market. 
 
We take our government’s commitments seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are meeting the challenge with this budget. 
This year’s budget improved 990 kilometres of provincial 
highways, investing 86 million to upgrade and repair 150 
kilometres of rural highways, repairing and upgrading bridges 
and culverts, over 30 major bridge rehabilitations and 
replacements. The highway budget exceeds 1 billion for the 
second consecutive year. 
 
There is no minimizing the impact of the low-commodity prices 
of our resources on our Saskatchewan families, businesses, and 
workers. The downturn on the price of our natural resources has 
implications on the budget. Therefore we’ve decided to build on 
our strengths for a stronger economy for the future, building an 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

economy that is resilient to energy price swings, and proceed 
with long-term recovery. 
 
We also understand this economy is driven by fundamental 
changes in the world market, and we will need to weather this 
economic storm and batten down the hatches to prevent further 
damage. However the dynamism and the duality of the 
economic and cultural vitality of our diverse communities 
across Saskatchewan will grow and strengthen our province. 
Meeting this challenge, our government budget provides 210 
million in program funding targeted primarily for First Nations 
and Métis that will benefit the quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be amiss if I didn’t mention Canada’s 
upcoming 150 anniversary this July. It marks 150 years since 
Confederation, and I remember the 1967 centennial and all the 
attention and imagination it brought to Canadians, whether it 
was a confederation train or Montreal Expo. Our Canadian 
legacy ties each and every one of us and our families, 
connecting Canadians to each province. 
 
Other Canadians are getting together to look back at our rich 
history, diversity, and reflect on changes and challenges ahead. 
A lot has happened in 150 years. How we celebrate as 
individuals and families is up to us. My family will celebrate 
Jane’s fourth birthday as our granddaughter has the distinction 
of being born July 1st. Our budget also celebrates our legacy as 
a province, Mr. Speaker. With the resiliency, determination, and 
grit that carved our province into being today, we will still show 
the same strength to make decisions for a strong future for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve had the privilege and honour to engage in conversations, 
and also call him a friend, the longest serving parliamentarian 
as of 2016. The Hon. Barry House was elected in a by-election 
in 1987 and has served as president of the Legislative Council 
of Western Australia since 2009. Barry and I, amongst other 
topics, discuss finances of our respective countries. In respect to 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, I have found similarities of each 
legislature. 
 
According to the theory of responsible government, parliaments 
are required to be ethical in decision making and responsible to 
public opinion while ensuring equality of opportunity by 
precluding discrimination and meeting appropriate service 
standards. I believe our government has practised this work in 
our budget. 
 
As such, the legislature and its practices should not only be 
structured to ensure transparency is shown, but also provide 
opportunities for public participation and engagement, which 
this government has demonstrated in this current budget. 
 
Engaging with local communities form a vitally important 
aspect of the budget process as public feedback. Our 
government has found the most successes are those with public 
empowerment and engagement. Advancing the implementation 
of the budget is up to the government, but we need the backing 
and trusting of the people of Saskatchewan. Those are the ones 
who rely on us to ensure the quality of life we so enjoy and 
want to continue into the future. With the good work shown and 
the opportunities in this province, I feel that we are very secure 
in the future. 

Now Saskatchewan Rivers’ investments have been many. Since 
2007 some of the revenue sharing has increased quite 
substantially. In Big River, there was an increased 97 per cent 
since 2007 to 2017. In Candle Lake, there was an increased 115 
per cent. 
 
[20:30] 
 
In some of my discussions with other countries, I’m humbled 
by the show of respect and admiration they show to our 
province. Saskatchewan products and resources are used in 
many countries every day. Ninety per cent of India’s lentils and 
60 per cent of its pea imports are grown by Saskatchewan 
farmers. A grain farmer, who happens to be a friend of mine 
from Birch Hills, sells to Quaker Oats and is in their 
commercial. Oats is the key ingredient in Cheerios breakfast 
cereal. 
 
So Saskatchewan’s economy is more diversed than ever. There 
are more than 300 food companies that generate more than 4 
billion in revenues. Saskatchewan exports have doubled in the 
last decade. Even our Saskatchewan mustard seed has made it 
to the baseball stadiums in America. In 2015 Saskatchewan 
exports to Bangladesh were valued at over 507 million, an 
all-time high. 
 
As the world’s largest producer of potash, our government is 
pleased to play a role in helping the global impact improve the 
productivity of their crops that feed the world. We, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are meeting the challenges with this strong agriculture 
budget and municipal support. Agriculture research continues 
with an investment of over 26 million. Rural municipalities will 
have an increase of 50 million to support their programs of 
Clean Water, a New Building Canada Fund. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud that our government 
continues to think about all the good things we can do for the 
quality of the people who live here, all the newcomers that are 
coming; over 150,000, I believe, have come in nine years. So 
saying that, Mr. Speaker, I think the good work shown and the 
opportunities in this province, I feel very good about the future. 
I feel good about the future for my children, my grandchildren, 
my neighbours, my community, my province. So I will not 
support the amendment but I will support our government’s 
budget, and I will support our government’s future vision. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always nice to be recognized, and it’s always great to be in 
Regina. I’m sure all my colleagues will recognize that here, 
later in the evening, represent the people of Saskatchewan here, 
west of the 100th meridian where the great plains begin. And of 
course I’m representing the good folks of Regina Gardiner 
Park. Just a few quick words about that area of our great capital 
city. 
 
I notice that the economy is taking a little bit of a hit lately but 
that doesn’t seem to have slowed things down too much in 
Gardiner Park. I notice for whatever reason, there are more 
burger joints in that jurisdiction; a new one just opened up. I 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

won’t say what it is because there is so many. If I say one I’ll 
have to say them all. But they’re doing a great amount of 
business. And coincidently on the other side of that, I don’t 
know if it’s complementary or contradictory, there’s all kinds of 
gyms opening up as well. So that seems to be a growing 
enterprise very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So just a few thanks if I can. I haven’t been up too much since 
the past election. We have so many great speakers, so many 
great members on this side, so I find myself kind of at the end 
of the list which is certainly fine. But just a quick thanks to my 
family. My wife Tami, she does great work. She’s a nurse and 
does great work in that area, a very important job in our 
province obviously. 
 
If you notice, Mr. Speaker, any of my colleagues notice, my 
hair is getting a little bit greyer and, you know, I seem to be a 
little bit more on edge. The reason is my 15-year-old has started 
driver training, and so that’s some stressful trips around town. 
But no, he’s improving and doing good. And I can’t believe, 
I’m sure all of us feel this way, how quickly time is ticking on. 
The older you get, the quicker it goes. 
 
I had the opportunity, speaking more specifically of the budget, 
had an opportunity to serve on treasury board this time, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a little . . . And you do as well, and several 
members on this side. And certainly a bit of a tougher year on 
the revenue side that’s for sure. We’ll get into that in a second. 
But my first time being able to deal sort of not directly but 
closer with all the folks in the public service and specifically in 
the Ministry of Finance, and those people do a great job. They 
know exactly what they’re doing. They have a very stressful 
job, I would say, at this time of year or just prior to this time of 
the year. They do a good job. So Clare and Denise and Arun 
and Joanne, thank you very much for putting up with the 
treasury board and all the changes we make and the things we 
want to see. And I can’t imagine the amount and time, the 
amount of work that is put in. 
 
And I’d like to also quickly talk about the person, the member 
from Northeast that I share an office with here in Regina. We’re 
always doing our best to try and use the taxpayers’ dollars as 
judiciously as possible. I’ve seen his work in the constituency 
but now on that board also as the Minister of Finance. We’re 
very well served by his leadership and knowledge. He does a 
great job. 
 
So as we mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, this, as we all know, 
is quite a tough budget. The revenues have decreased by quite 
. . . persistently decreased by about a billion dollars the last 
three years. They’ve stayed stubbornly low, much lower than 
what was anticipated in previous budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we took the track, this government, that you have to get in 
line with that amount of revenue that’s coming in, Mr. Speaker, 
so and again some very tough decisions. We have increased 
usage and a lot of our programs are open ended, and so that is 
sometimes difficult to budget. 
 
And we, as I mentioned a few times before already, that we’ve 
had a 10 per cent decrease in that non-renewable resource 
revenue. That’d be very difficult. I know the cities are saying 
they’re going to have a very difficult time with a one and a one 

half per cent decrease in their part of their revenue sharing from 
the province. We’re dealing with a 10 per cent, so that’s going 
to lead to tough, tough decisions, and we certainly had many of 
those. 
 
I think there are some things in the budget, Mr. Speaker, we can 
point to, that even in that atmosphere, in this climate we’re in. 
We’ve seen the seniors’ income plan — stability there. 
Increases to SAP [Saskatchewan Assistance Plan], SAID, TEA 
in the area of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. Cancer Agency saw 
increases. HPV [human papillomavirus] vaccination for boys. I 
have three boys and they’re a little older now, Mr. Speaker, but 
I think that’s an important project to announce that was in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Building 21 new schools in one year, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
very, a significant milestone. I haven’t checked, but that’s got to 
be the most in any year in our province’s history. That’s 
something to look forward to. St. Elizabeth and Wascana 
Plains, not directly in my constituency but many of my 
constituents’ kids will eventually go there in the next few years 
as it comes online. That’s certainly exciting for those kids to 
open up a brand new school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk just quickly about the Regina bypass, very 
important project, not only for Regina, our region, but my 
constituents as well. Victoria Avenue East is certainly a very 
busy road. And I’ve talked about this quite often before, but I 
think it’s . . . We’ve heard from members opposite that seems to 
be one of their things they point to as an overspend on our part, 
Mr. Speaker. But I certainly don’t agree with that sentiment. It’s 
the biggest thing for me in that project is safety, Mr. Speaker. 
We know along No. 1 East there are overpasses coming, and 
people out there have been waiting for that for many, many 
years. We’re finally getting that done. 
 
The NDP, they have an interesting pass with that. Of course 
they never got it done even though the need was there. It’s been 
looked at for close to 20 years. And when we announced that 
we were finally getting that job done, they initially had no 
comment on it, and then after awhile they wanted to stop it. 
They wanted to stop it. The gutting of that contract would have 
cost hundreds of millions of dollars. Folks would still have had 
to cross No. 1 very unsafely, and of course it’s certainly not a 
billion-dollar overrun, Mr. Speaker, the scope of the project 
increase. 
 
A lot of people think that it’s, you know, 1.2 billion and then 
1.8 billion for the . . . or 600 for the operation and maintenance. 
We’ll get it brand new back to the people of the province in 30 
years. That does seem like a lot of money, but when you look at 
other projects in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s not 
always an exact apples to apples comparison. 
 
But in Alberta, there’s the Anthony Henday ring road. I did 
some research on this, Mr. Speaker. It took 26 years and $4.3 
billion. And those are not inflation numbers; those were actual 
dollars spent. The final link in that, you know, was the northeast 
part, 1.81 billion for 9 kilometres only, Mr. Speaker. So these 
things you can’t just . . . It’s not resurfacing. It’s not, you know, 
just doing the little repairs on thin membrane. It is new 
overpasses. It is service roads. It’s double lane. It’s clearing, 
clearing for double lane traffic, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a very 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

involved project. 
 
Calgary Southwest, the Ring Road piece there, just the 
southwest piece, 31 kilometres, 1.42 billion; the South Fraser 
freeway, four years it took, 40 kilometres $1.264 billion. So 
again these are extensive projects. They’re done . . . These were 
all done P3 [public-private partnership]. I know the members 
opposite don’t like P3. 
 
It was interesting to note in the Alberta situation, the Alberta 
NDP chose a P3 route. They said in the article that I read that 
they’re not in favour of that necessarily, but they admitted it’s 
the best and quickest way to get it done. And so that’s the 
choice we’ve made, and the members opposite aren’t interested 
in that. And it was interesting that there was some debate in 
Calgary whether it should be all done at once. You may as well 
do it now rather than pay dollars in the future, which are sure to 
go up. That’s what we did. It’ll save, as the minister has said 
over and over, in excess of $300 million. So it’s all important 
work for our Queen City, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the NDP, they were happy. They didn’t want to spend 
money on roads. I think the member from Athabasca was the 
minister. They were fine with Saskatchewan people driving 
down a corduroy road. Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in 
highways in this budget and in the next in the years that follow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, well I’m quickly running out of time 
already. 
 
Now I heard the member from Meewasin speak earlier. He 
seems to think that the NDP would have, the NDP would have 
solved all the problems. If they just would have had that 17th 
and 18th year in government, all things would have been just, 
just peachy-keen, all fine. They would have had billions in the 
bank, solved poverty, all roads would have been paved in gold 
and silver, Mr. Speaker, maybe a few diamonds in there for the 
traffic lights, I don’t know. It would have been great. It would 
have been a socialist dream. All industries nationalized and 
everything would have been great, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Of course, I hope the folks in Hansard can pick up 
my sarcasm there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, you can blame all you want, Mr. Speaker. You 
can lay blame. Should have done this, Mr. Speaker. But at the 
margins, we’re here now. What would they have done 
differently? What would you do now? What are you going to 
do? Show us how . . . Now we know of course this House has 
its politics, and we want to have a strong debate of ideas. 
 
It’s interesting now that the members opposite, even from 
question to question in question period, within their own same 
speech, they contradict themselves. And many members have 
pointed that out. They pointed that out in the House here in their 
speeches. You know, they don’t want deficits. They don’t want 
tax increases, but they don’t want programs to be cut. So which 
is it? I’m not sure how that can possibly work. That just doesn’t 
work in real life. 
 
It was interesting that CUPE, Canadian Union of Public 
Employees, usually the NDP and those folks are pretty much 
from the same page, Mr. Speaker. They said when it came to 
debt, and I’m quoting here: 

With government borrowing rates close to record lows, 
Saskatchewan’s annual debt payment costs and the ability 
to pay for this debt . . . are also close to record lows as a 
share of the province’s economy . . . 

 
So according to the folks at CUPE, we haven’t overspent. And I 
continue, and I quote: Saskatchewan’s current rate of public 
spending is at 18 per cent and the economy is 8th lowest in 36 
years and well below its 36-year average of 19 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. The rating agencies have weighed in, third-party, 
national, independent newspapers and columnists have called 
this a budget that hasn’t overspent. It is a reasonable choice that 
we’ve made, a reasonable three-year plan in order to get back to 
balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So the members opposite are confused. They’re not sure which 
is best. I think maybe the member from Meewasin, in his 
speech just recently, laid out that he wants to see a lot more 
debt. He wants to see investments, as he calls it. He wants to 
see stimulus, Mr. Speaker. That certainly gets my wallet and my 
financial position, that gets me worried when they start talking 
that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m sure there’ll be many more debates from that sentiment 
once we find out concretely exactly what the NDP wants to do, 
Mr. Speaker. So what they’ve talked about won’t come close — 
won’t come close, it won’t come within 100 miles of closing 
that budget gap, Mr. Speaker. So are they similar to the Alberta 
NDP, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I remember I watched The Simpsons quite a lot, Mr. 
Speaker, and there was an episode where Homer has to take the 
. . . he has to learn about nuclear safety. He works in a nuclear 
power plant and they send him to school, and of course Homer 
struggles the whole time. He doesn’t attend class. He parties all 
the time. And when it came for the final exam, he’s not 
prepared. He’s not even close. So his great plan to deal with this 
is to go to the back of the room and hide under the coats and 
hope everything just turns out fine, everything goes to plan. Go 
hide at the back of the room and hide under the coats until it’s 
all over. 
 
And I think that’s what we’re seeing from some other 
governments. Things are just fine. Don’t worry about that 
massive debt we’re piling up. It’ll take care of itself. Maybe not 
by us, but somebody will be forced to. We’re just going to keep 
on with the blinders. We’re going to keep the blinders going on. 
 
Or are they like the Alberta NDP? Now I heard a lot of . . . I 
think the member from Meewasin’s speech could have been 
taken right out from the Leap Manifesto, Mr. Speaker. I think 
there’s a lot of similarities there, Mr. Speaker. And I was, if I 
had time, I was going to go to my very interesting document. 
The Leap Manifesto is right here. I was going to have a few 
interesting things to say about that. But of course it would be 
devastating Saskatchewan’s economy, Mr. Speaker. We never 
want to go there. You know, I don’t know what their plan is, 
what their ideas are. This beautiful building we have here, we 
come here for many weeks a year. Let’s have a debate. Let’s see 
where they’re at. Let’s have an exchange of ideas, a debate 
about ideas. Let’s see what they have, Mr. Speaker. 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

So I think, I think what we have here, tabled by the Minister of 
Finance, is again a reasonable plan. There’s some tough 
decisions, no doubt about it, but I think that’s incumbent upon 
us as leaders, Mr. Speaker. We’re here to make tough decisions 
sometimes. It’s unfortunate but that’s the situation we’re in, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d love to hear from the members opposite what they 
would do if in a similar situation. 
 
Many, many years ago we saw what they did — cut hospitals, 
cut roads, 176 schools. All of my members have gone over that 
extensive list over and over, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s 
important that we talk about their record as well, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s all we have to go on. They refuse to take a stand 
much on anything, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s good news 
though, based on what we heard from the member of 
Meewasin. They won’t take a stand. If they don’t have any 
ideas for what they would do or how they would do things 
differently, Mr. Speaker, they’re destined to sit on your left for 
a very, very long time. And I think that might be a net good for 
the province, that’s for sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d say our plan is ahead by a century, Mr. Speaker. We will 
get through this. People of Saskatchewan are strong. They’re 
very resilient and we’re going to work together with them in 
order to get the job done, Mr. Speaker. I think with some will, 
determination, grace too, we’re going to get the job done, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s been my pleasure to have the floor tonight, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
[Applause] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
usual, when I stand up, the applause stops. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
do want to thank . . . At the outset, a couple of thank yous that I 
would like to get on, and the first one is for the riveting speech 
from the member from Regina Gardiner Park here just prior to 
me in putting some of the facts on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to the budget that was introduced by 
our Finance minister just last week, Mr. Speaker, the budget 
that has been put forward is a plan over the next three years to 
meet the challenge that we’ve been faced with here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take, as I said, a few moments at 
the outset to thank first of all and foremost my family, Mr. 
Speaker. My wife, and my children who don’t live at home 
anymore, Mr. Speaker, but for allowing me the time to serve . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, my wife still lives at home, that 
she does, Mr. Speaker. But I do thank the effort that they make 
to allow me to serve down here on behalf of the constituents of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. As we all know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
serve here alone. We serve with our families, Mr. Speaker, in 
this Assembly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say thank you to Sally Fitch, my 
constituency assistant who mans the office back in Shellbrook 
and around the constituency when required, Mr. Speaker. Quite 
a large constituency now; three hours from corner to corner, 
Mr. Speaker. I do want to put on the record my thanks, my 

appreciation for the good work that she does in our office on 
behalf of the people of Rosthern-Shellbrook each and every 
day, and the courteous and gratuitous way that she approaches 
those individuals that contact us each and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also just . . . Another thank you, a couple of 
other thank yous before I move on to the budget that was 
introduced here, Mr. Speaker. But first of all, to the community 
leaders that we have across the constituency. As I said, it’s a 
large constituency. We have 17 rural municipalities now, I 
believe; five First Nations communities; 12 villages; five towns 
that we service out of our office, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
thank those leaders in each of those communities for the 
constant contact and guidance that they provide myself and 
other members of the Government of Saskatchewan — the odd 
time even the opposition, Mr. Speaker — but for the most part, 
Mr. Speaker, myself. And I want to sincerely, from the bottom 
of my heart, thank them for their support and their guidance that 
they provide me, Mr. Speaker, not just during the campaign but 
also the guidance that they provide as we sit in government on 
their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And lastly but not leastly, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to thank each and every one of the constituents in 
Rosthern-Shellbrook for their support, their outreach, Mr. 
Speaker. And again the guidance that they provide, Mr. 
Speaker, in the good times, Mr. Speaker, and the guidance that 
they provide, most importantly, during the times that we are 
faced with meeting the challenge that we’re faced with here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and one last thank you would be to our Finance 
minister who rose in the House last week and introduced a 
budget, Mr. Speaker, a budget that most definitely starts to lay 
out the plan for our province as we move through the next three 
years, Mr. Speaker. A plan to get us back to balance, Mr. 
Speaker. A plan that will meet the challenge that we’re faced 
with here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 
challenge with respect to our resource revenues, Mr. Speaker, 
and how they’ve declined, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of over a 
billion dollars over the last two to three years, Mr. Speaker, a 
challenge that starts to shift our tax revenue here in the province 
of Saskatchewan away from being . . . relying on those variable 
prices that we’ll have in resource revenues over a period of 
time, Mr. Speaker. There’s a challenge that was met in a much 
different way a couple of decades ago, Mr. Speaker, which I 
might get into in a few moments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a challenge that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan with population growth, with more than 160,000 
people that have arrived and made Saskatchewan home over the 
last decade or so, Mr. Speaker, and the challenge that those 
people also provide on the services that we provide. And I think 
this is a budget, as I said, is the first year of us putting forward 
our efforts to meet that challenge, Mr. Speaker, and get this 
back to budget over the course of the next couple, the next three 
years. 
 
With respect to meeting that challenge, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to say that there’s also some investment in this budget with 
respect . . . There’s been investment over the last number of 
years. And I’ll speak to education first and foremost, Mr. 
Speaker, K-12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education, but we’ve 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

had back in 2009 . . . And we all know the infrastructure deficit 
that this government was left with in highways and health care 
facilities and lack of physicians, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, and 
lack of nurses and lack of people in our facilities, lack of 
teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in 2009 in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, there’s 
about a million dollars that was invested in three different 
school roofs across the constituency, in places like Glaslyn, in 
communities such as Spiritwood. Again in 2010, more roof 
repair done in places in Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, and in 2011 
more investment in the Canwood School. All infrastructure 
investment, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t happening in the years 
leading up to that. Hafford Central School, again in 2011, 
received almost a million dollars just from the ministry, Mr. 
Speaker, with additional input from the community to upgrade 
that school in that community. 
 
And this in this last budget, I believe there’s $2.1 million that 
was put forward to start the planning for a couple of schools in 
the province. One in the community of Weyburn, and I’m 
certain that my colleague from Weyburn-Big Muddy will be 
speaking of that, the Minister of Energy and Resources, Mr. 
Speaker. And the second investment in the planning stages of a 
school — a much needed school, I might I add — is in the 
community, in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook and 
that’s in the community of Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a very exciting day. We had the mayor and a number of 
council members down to the budget announcement, Mr. 
Speaker, and they were thrilled to see that that commitment was 
there in these financial times to have a commitment like that to 
the community, a rural community in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a growing rural community in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to that much-needed school that will 
be there for decades to come, for generations to come in that 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, the mayor and a couple of councillors joined us on 
budget day. I also had the opportunity as there was a video that 
was being shared around on social media of when the 
announcement came to the students in the school, Mr. Speaker, 
by the principal there. And the reaction of the kids when they 
found out that they’d be getting a new facility and there’s 
planning dollars in place for that facility in the community, Mr. 
Speaker, was pretty special. 
 
And it makes, I think . . . All politics aside, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
one of the most rewarding moments that you can have in this 
job when a community and the children in that community see 
the investment and the faith in the community on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. The excitement in that room, I 
think, just makes all of the hard work as we go forward all the 
more worthwhile so that we can continue to make those types of 
investments in education, in health care, in social services, in all 
of our ministries, on behalf of the people of the province, but 
make those investments in communities across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. This is excitement. 
 
This is excitement, I might add, that hasn’t always been here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is excitement 
that many of the members opposite may not be familiar with, 
Mr. Speaker. Over the 16 years that they presided in 

government they were much more apt to be closing a school a 
month, Mr. Speaker, rather than investing in new schools. As a 
matter of fact, I believe there’s about 176 schools that they 
shuttered here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those schools left teachers, as teachers left 
the province, were not employed in the province. There was 
about 400 teachers that left the province between the years of 
2000-2007. We’re proud to say now, Mr. Speaker, with that 
school in Rosthern and the 40 other schools that we’ve built, the 
25 major renovations that we’ve done across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s now 754 more teachers. There’s 164 more 
student support teachers here in the province of Saskatchewan 
to work with those students, Mr. Speaker, that have shown up 
here, the 160,000 people that have came to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Many of those are students and, Mr. Speaker, we 
have the teachers in the schools, in the new facilities in many 
cases, and upgraded the facilities to teach those kids, which is 
our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, a very large constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, about three hours from corner to corner, 
from the St. Laurent bridge all the way to north of North 
Battleford, west of Glaslyn. Highways are a very important part 
of our constituency as our major industry is agriculture and 
there is not a rail line in the area, Mr. Speaker, so everything, 
virtually, leaves by truck. As well as we have a number of other 
industries as well. 
 
[21:00] 
 
We have a swine genetics company, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
largest in the province and quite likely the largest in Canada, 
based out of Spiritwood, Fast Genetics; Mr. Speaker, one of the 
larger honey apiaries in the province, just outside of Shellbrook; 
a few manufacturing facilities, Mr. Speaker. A vodka distillery 
now has popped up in Blaine Lake and doing quite well, Mr. 
Speaker, with some of the shows and exposure that he has got 
all throughout North America, and doing very, very well, and 
interesting to talk to him at Radouga Distilleries. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the highways are very, very important as, you 
know, many of the people in Rosthern-Shellbrook, as well on 
the west side of the constituency, will commute to the 
community of North Battleford on the east side, Mr. Speaker; 
will commute to the community of Prince Albert; and in the 
south side, in the Rosthern-Laird area, will commute quite often 
to Saskatoon. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s been tremendous investment in 
highways over the last number of years. And I think of the 
investment in Highway No. 12 and continued investment in that 
particular highway, Mr. Speaker. I think of the twinning of the 
highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert. And I always 
think, when I was growing up, as Prince Albert being the 
Gateway to the North, Mr. Speaker. Well very much the 
southern connection is important as well, as those products 
come in and out of Prince Albert from the South as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it was just a few years ago that that twinning of that 
highway was completed, not only for the traffic volume and 
truck volume that’s on that particular highway, but also for 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

safety reasons, Mr. Speaker. And we were happy to see that 
twinned, as it’s greatly enhanced the safety of that highway. 
And I think we’re seeing much less fatalities and injuries and 
accidents on that highway due to the investment that was shared 
with the federal government and this provincial government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s been, Mr. Speaker, great investment in culvert 
replacement, which doesn’t seem like a large investment or a 
necessary investment in many cases, but I can assure you that 
we’ve had some fairly major failures of the culverts across the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, starting about three years 
ago with the five feet of snow that left in about a week, ran off, 
took out numerous roads. 
 
I remember one RM [rural municipality], Mr. Speaker. I was 
quite thankful to have revenue sharing, stable funding at that 
particular time. Quite thankful to have programs such as PDAP 
[provincial disaster assistance program] and the emergency 
flood and disaster reduction program, Mr. Speaker. We had 130 
roads that were washed out that particular spring, and we had a 
number of highways as well, Mr. Speaker, that were washed 
out. And we invested heavily, we invested heavily in culvert 
replacements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also think of the investments in Highway 40 
between Blaine Lake, Marcelin, and Leask, all the way to the 
two mile corner just west of Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker, heading 
through Shellbrook out into the Holbein area. And those are 
much needed investments, Mr. Speaker, as that’s a main 
throughway for crop products, both coming in in the spring, but 
also our agricultural exports that head out of that particular area, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m pleased to see in this year’s budget again, Mr. Speaker, 
over a billion dollars invested in highways and some investment 
in . . . the second-highest budget investment ever in highways, 
Mr. Speaker, in the province. And I’m happy to say that there’ll 
be investment this year as well throughout our constituency to 
upkeep, maintain, and improve the highways so that we’re able 
not only to commute to our jobs from our rural communities, 
Mr. Speaker, not only able to get, you know, safely down the 
highways for recreational reasons, but also to get our products 
to market throughout, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I touched on revenue sharing with respect to the 17 RMs, the 12 
villages, and the five towns in the community. Mr. Speaker, 
revenue sharing in our communities, I mentioned that our 
communities are growing. In the case of Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, 
our revenue sharing since 2007 is up 145 per cent; 147 per cent 
in the community of Shellbrook. These are important numbers, 
Mr. Speaker. These are important numbers because it was an 
area that was not funded appropriately, not funded properly by 
the members opposite. In addition to the revenue sharing, some 
of the infrastructure dollars that have been provided to our 
communities across the constituency.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just continue to speak a little bit louder to 
ensure that you’re able to hear the good words that are coming 
on this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, and how we meet the 
challenge on behalf of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections] 

The Deputy Speaker: — There is a lot of chatter across the 
aisle. Once again I would ask members, if they want to carry on 
a conversation, go behind the bar. Otherwise, respect the 
member who is speaking. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I think of the infrastructure 
investment in our communities across the constituency. I think 
of the sewer treatment plants. I think of the water treatment 
plants, the lagoons that have been built. I think of the hockey 
arena that was built in Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, the hospital 
that was built with over $20 million invested by this province as 
part of the 13 long-term care facilities across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s infrastructure investment that was necessary. It’s 
infrastructure investment that was provided, Mr. Speaker, by 
this government, and it’s infrastructure investment that’s being 
well utilized by the individuals in the area. 
 
I think of the investment, Mr. Speaker, in the College of 
Medicine, in increasing the seats at the College of Medicine that 
were underfunded at a rate of 60 seats, Mr. Speaker, increasing 
up to 100 seats now, training our best and brightest, Mr. 
Speaker, to be doctors in our communities across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could, a couple of words on our ag water 
management strategy and then I want to also make maybe a 
couple of comments with respect to another topic. But we are 
making moves after three and a half decades of not changing 
our ag water management legislation, regulation, or policy here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re making moves that started in 2012 with the 25-year 
Water Security Agency plan, Mr. Speaker, was followed up 
with some online consultations, followed up by the Minister of 
Agriculture and myself in the day, consulting with agricultural, 
municipal, as well as conservation groups on what a proper ag 
water management policy in the province of Saskatchewan 
should look like. That was subsequently followed up, Mr. 
Speaker, by regulations that were introduced in 2015 and then 
— not lastly, Mr. Speaker, not leastly — by some introduced 
legislation that’s before the House as we speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of our ag water management strategy that 
was widely consulted, Mr. Speaker, is really based on . . . The 
goal is to control and organize our water movement in the 
province through the installation of gates, through people 
working together, Mr. Speaker, and it’s based on two topics: the 
first being permission to move water off your land; and the 
second, that water needs to end up in an outlet that could be 
adequate, which would be adequate. Mr. Speaker, the ways to 
do this are through joint applications of farmers working 
together, our ag landowners working together through 
conservation and development authorities, the formation of 
those legal entities, Mr. Speaker, or through the formation of 
watershed groups or jointly working of municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that there’s continued support in 
this budget for the formation and continued support for those 
entities so that we can organize and control our water 
movement here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
with the proper ag water management strategy. And we’re 
working very hard to do that. 
 
And it’s never without a bump or two, Mr. Speaker. I think my 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, has indicated that 
whiskey may be for drinking, but water most certainly is for 
fighting over. And that may be the case quite often, Mr. 
Speaker, but very much as we move forward with a properly 
managed, controlled, and organized ag water management 
strategy in the province of Saskatchewan, I think the outcome 
of that is that we’re going to find that agricultural landowners 
are very much going to be part of the solution and managing 
and organizing our water flow here in the province, and most 
definitely not, not part of the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to touch on one item that I know that the 
critic of Environment, the member from Nutana, doesn’t really 
want to talk about a whole big bunch. I know the presumptive 
leader, the member from Meewasin, had a few comments on it 
in the lead-up to the campaign, Mr. Speaker. But I want to talk 
about sometimes what isn’t in the budget, Mr. Speaker. And 
what wasn’t in this budget, what most definitely wasn’t in this 
budget was a carbon tax. 
 
There was no carbon tax in this budget, Mr. Speaker. I’ve stated 
this before and I state it again, that a carbon tax, a federally 
imposed carbon tax would be the case in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that would be supported by at least a couple of 
those members there. I’m not sure about the interim leader of 
the NDP. I would like to know where he’d be. What I would 
offer to the interim leader of the NDP is that maybe he’d take 
himself and the other eight members, come on over, support the 
government in standing up on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
Leave the critic. Leave the presumptive leader over there, and 
let’s ensure that we don’t have this cost on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because what that cost is, Mr. Speaker, if the interim leader of 
the NDP supports the presumed leader and the critic, Mr. 
Speaker, what that cost will mean to the economy of the 
province of Saskatchewan is two and a half billion dollars will 
be removed from it. Eleven cents on a litre of fuel, Mr. Speaker. 
I don’t think the interim leader of the NDP wants to be 
responsible for everybody fuelling up and costing him 11 cents 
more. Fourteen cents on a litre of diesel — I’ll remind every ag 
producer of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A family of four in our province are going to see their taxes rise 
$1,250. Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is going to see their costs go 
up 10 to $15 an acre, Mr. Speaker, with this federally imposed 
carbon tax, supported by at least two members opposite, likely a 
few more. They’re just a little nervous about talking about that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and here’s the corker to it. All the while, all 
the while, Mr. Speaker, with that two and a half billion dollars 
— $1,250 to a family of four, 11 cents on gasoline, 14 cents on 
farmers’ diesel and all our transport diesel, Mr. Speaker — all 
the while of that going to that carbon tax will provide very, very 
little in regards to any actual impact on reducing emissions and 
ultimately climate change. That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact of the 
matter. 
 
In an economy such as we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, an export economy in the neighbourhood of 
about $30 billion of exports each and every year by 1.15 million 
people — which is a number that I think we’re very proud of — 
Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker, with that type of a cost 

on them may decide to operate in other jurisdictions. 
 
In our province, Mr. Speaker, 34 per cent of our emissions 
come from oil and gas, the oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. 
Twenty per cent of our emissions come from electrical power 
generation, Mr. Speaker, some of our coal-fired natural gas 
power generation. The ag sector produces about 12.7 million 
tonnes of emissions. We’re going to come back to that in a 
minute, Mr. Speaker. That’s about 16 per cent of our emissions 
here in the province. 
 
And as you can see, just with those categories there — those 
categories that a couple of the members opposite would like to 
tax a little bit, Mr. Speaker; tax quite a bit, I might add — those 
categories are also our main wealth, our main employers. 
They’re our main points of source wealth in this province. 
 
This is what we do, Mr. Speaker. Our $30 billion of exports, 
this is what we do. It comes out of mining, manufacturing. It 
comes out of our energy industry, Mr. Speaker. It most certainly 
comes out of our energy industry, Mr. Speaker, and it most 
certainly comes out of our agricultural industry. These sectors, 
Mr. Speaker, are also known, and this is well known, are also 
energy intense sectors and their trade exposed around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just say this and I would put this on the 
record. With all of the positive work that our Saskatchewan 
agricultural producers are doing — and I’m going to get to 
some of that — with all of the positive work that they were 
doing, I think it’s fair that this Assembly should unanimously 
praise our farmers, Mr. Speaker, not tax them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what the members opposite would be trying to 
do with an agriculture, with a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the carbon intensity, the carbon intensity in our 
province has been greatly reduced. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
greatly reduced in agriculture due to investment in genetics, 
investments in agronomy, fertility, and zero till. Much of that is 
invested through genetics at the Crop Development Centre at 
the University of Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people. It’s 
investment in the Global Institute for Food Security at the 
University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to get this on the record: 12.7 million tonnes in 
agriculture are emissions. Zero till agriculture, Mr. Speaker, has 
taken our soils to a point where they sequester 11.4 million 
tonnes. You add to that 2 million tonnes being averted by pulse 
crops being incorporated, Mr. Speaker, again out of the Crop 
Development Centre at the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, you add to that $17 million of grasslands at 11 to 20 
tonnes an acre, 187 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. You add to 
that our wetlands, Mr. Speaker, across the province. 
Saskatchewan’s emissions, as I said, are 75 million tonnes 
relative to Canada’s emissions at 750 million tonnes. Mr. 
Speaker, you add to this, you add to this the effort that we’re 
making in Saskatchewan in addition to agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, are the investments that have been made on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan in the way of cleaning up our 
emissions, our electrical generations emissions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re all aware of our investment, Mr. Speaker, our investment 
that is removing 800 000 tonnes of carbon, Mr. Speaker, off a 
coal-fired electrical plant at Boundary dam 3, an investment 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

made on behalf of Saskatchewan people to lower emissions and 
part of our plan moving forward to lower our emissions in our 
electrical generation here in the province, Mr. Speaker. That 
will merge up with our effort to go to 50 per cent capacity of 
renewable electrical power generation here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, these all merge together. 
 
I might note, these all merge together, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
happening already. We’re already at 25 per cent renewables, 
power generation capacity here in the province of Saskatchewan 
relative to our friends in Alberta. Their goal is 30 per cent by 
2030, Mr. Speaker. We far exceed that. We’re approaching that 
number already. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, you add to this potential opportunities in nuclear, 
Mr. Speaker, wind power, Mr. Speaker, which we look at wind 
power backed up by natural gas, and we’re building natural gas 
to back up wind power and solar generation, Mr. Speaker. As 
we all know, windmills do not operate on their own as they do 
not provide that baseload power. They need to be backed up, 
Mr. Speaker, by another source, either coal with CCS [carbon 
capture and storage] or natural gas. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker . . . and I apologize for being a little 
rushed at the end, because I wanted to talk about the 
investments in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. But as 
you can see, Mr. Speaker, as all members possibly outside of 
two can see, Saskatchewan has an opportunity to be very much 
a leader in regards to reducing carbon emissions in a far more 
effective way than any carbon tax. 
 
With 16 CCS facilities operating now around the world, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to be part of this global conversation beyond 
Saskatchewan’s 10 per cent emissions, of Canada’s 1.6 of 
global emissions. This is possible, Mr. Speaker, through our 
uranium exports. It’s possible through partnerships and the 
knowledge centre with carbon capture and storage and, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s possible with what we’ve done and shown and are 
continuing to do in the agriculture industry. 
 
We need to ensure this certainty for Saskatchewan people and 
for all industries, Mr. Speaker, in the province that employs 
Saskatchewan people. So while many decisions were made in 
this budget — and I would say very, very many challenging 
decisions, Mr. Speaker, in order to meet the challenge on our 
three-year plan — many of those decisions were made and they 
were difficult to make. Very much the easiest decision in this 
budget was to avoid implementing a federally imposed carbon 
tax, supported by at least two members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
on the people of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be supporting the 
budget, not the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in my place today and present my support for the 
amendment that’s being proposed by our party and to really 
shine the light on what the Sask Party is doing to the people of 

Saskatchewan with this particular budget. 
 
And I listen, Mr. Speaker, with a lot of, a lot of attention on 
some of the comments made by members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. And I say today to them, that’s one of the reasons why 
people in Saskatchewan simply don’t trust the Sask Party 
anymore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you what I think is a very proper perspective as it 
pertains to the legacy of the Premier. And this is really 
important for the backbenchers to know this as well. What 
happened at the budget several days ago, Mr. Speaker, was a 
message to the people of Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan’s 
future has been squandered. And I look at some of the messages 
that we’ve received from a number of organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, and I say to the backbench and to the Sask Party with 
all honesty, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not about, it’s not about the 
Premier’s legacy anymore. It is not about the backbenchers 
trying to salvage what they think is important for them to do as 
backbenchers for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened on budget day was a very dire 
message and great consequence for many people across our 
province. And when I say many people across our province, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m talking about all areas — northern Saskatchewan, 
southern Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, and the list goes 
on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, during the last election as we all know, the 
Premier gets up and he doesn’t hold a budget. He holds an 
election before the budget. And everyone knew what the plan 
was at the time, and that was to hide the true state of our 
finances from all the people of Saskatchewan. The cabinet and 
the minister knew, Mr. Speaker, and the ministers knew exactly 
what was coming down the pipe as it pertains to our financial 
position as a province. They deliberately hid all that 
information from the people of Saskatchewan. They 
deliberately hid all that information from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what’s really important to note, Mr. Speaker, is that when 
you . . . when I hear comments about the Premier’s legacy, 
because we all know the Premier is going to be heading out of 
Dodge as quickly as he can because he has squandered our 
future and so has the Sask Party front bench. 
 
And this is my message, my message to the backbenchers. 
You’ve been given notes to read from, and you’re dutifully 
following those notes and making fun of the NDP as that’s all 
you probably can do, Mr. Speaker. That’s all you can do, 
because you’re given notes to read and to follow. Now, that’s a 
great disservice to not only your constituents but to the people 
of Saskatchewan, because what has happened is you have given 
unfettered control over the finances and the direction to a select 
few in the front bench. And today now as a reminder, as a 
reminder of how the backbench should get a backbone and start 
speaking up for the people of Saskatchewan and their 
constituents, is you’re having a growing mountain of debt, Mr. 
Speaker. A growing mountain of debt. 
 
This is from their own finance book. This is from their own 
finance book, page 47, and what it showed when the Sask Party 
government came into power, Mr. Speaker, they had an 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

operating debt of $10.5 billion. The province of Saskatchewan 
had an operating debt, money we owed. $10 billion is what the 
province of Saskatchewan owed when the Sask Party assumed 
government, Mr. Speaker. To the backbench: in a short eight or 
nine years, folks, in a short eight or nine years, and by the time 
we hit 2021, that deficit or that debt is going to be $22.8 billion. 
They have more than doubled the debt on the province of 
Saskatchewan in the short nine years that they have been in 
government. 
 
Now this is very serious, Mr. Speaker, and the reason why that 
was allowed to occur, the reason why that was allowed to occur 
— and I’m telling this to the backbench — is that you’ve got to 
find your backbone. And the reason why you’ve got to find 
your backbone is because you shouldn’t be taking care of your 
own political interest, of your own political interest at the 
expense of our future. And that’s exactly what is happening 
with this budget, Mr. Speaker. This is what’s happening with 
this budget. 
 
So it’s not about the Premier’s legacy. It’s not about the 
Premier’s legacy. It’s not about the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s not about anything else as to what you’re leaving our 
children and grandchildren. And all I see on this particular page 
from their budget book, Mr. Speaker, is $22.8 billion in debt, in 
debt by 2021, a short four years from now, four years from 
now. 
 
And how could the backbench stand up and make fun of the 
NDP and totally ignore what I think is their responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s to hold that front bench to account? And when 
you have unfettered control to the Premier’s office with a select 
few ministers making the decisions around the budget, this is 
what you get, backbench. This is what you get. You get dire 
circumstances like this, $22.8 billion in debt. 
 
And how can the people of Saskatchewan afford to continue 
paying that debt while the Sask Party backbenchers continue 
slapping themselves on the back, bragging about what they 
have achieved, Mr. Speaker, all the while calling down the 
NDP? And the people that are celebrating the Sask Party’s style 
of management are the bankers of New York and people that 
have bought the Sask Party and put this province deep in debt. 
 
And I say to the backbenchers, shame on you. Shame on you 
for not standing up and speaking up. By simply blindly 
following whatever the Premier and the Finance minister, 
blindly following what they laid out in front of you because all 
you wanted to do was get elected the third term. And you’re 
going to wind up with a legacy of debt, not a third term 
achievement. 
 
And that’s why a lot of people are so angry. They are so angry, 
Mr. Speaker, at this Finance minister, that Premier, and that 
government, and they should all be held to account. Because 
this is not about legacy. It is about debt, and that debt is going 
to hurt our generations for years and years and years to come. 
And all I hear from the Sask Party is rhetoric about what the 
NDP had done 15 years ago. That’s not leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m asking them to desist and start coming up with a 
better plan for the people of Saskatchewan, because so far you 
have failed miserably in your responsibilities as a backbench 
MLA. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is hurting all of us. It is hurting the 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program] students. It is 
hurting the Buffalo Narrows correctional workers. It is hurting 
the northern housing program. It is now hurting STC. It is 
hurting families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, get this. Get this. We’re not even in the 
ballpark to solve our annual deficit. We’re talking . . . We’ve 
got our debt rising. We still haven’t tamed the deficit, because 
more important to the Premier and the front bench was the 
legacy of having a third term. What happened after that? Well 
it’s not their concern, because they’re heading out of Dodge. 
And that is a crying shame, Mr. Speaker. Because who’s going 
to clean up the mess? It’s going to be our children and 
grandchildren for years to come. They have put this province in 
a financial situation that would make the former Premier Grant 
Devine blush. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is really also startlingly just amazing 
in terms of what the Sask Party backbenchers are prepared to 
do, is to continue propping up that kind of action and to 
continue defending that kind of arrogance. And I’ll give you an 
example. The city mayors were here today, and I predict that 
the cities are going to go to war with this government. Because 
the grants-in-lieu in which they withdrew with no city’s prior 
information or knowledge, Mr. Speaker, this is really impacting 
the cities right across the board. And I’m telling the city folks in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, Prince Albert, that when you get 
your tax bill, when you get your tax bill for property tax, do not 
blame your mayors or councillors or the administrators within 
these cities, because they did not do this. It was the 
Saskatchewan Party government that did this to you as a 
taxpayer for your properties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what happened when the city mayors asked the current 
minister, the member from Humboldt, why they would be doing 
this? And her response is, and I quote, “. . . I don’t think the 
intent of the revenue sharing is for (cities) to build their bank 
accounts,” she said. Well, Mr. Speaker, the cities aren’t 
building bank accounts. Those reserve funds, Mr. Speaker, were 
for emergency use. You cannot on an annual basis do your 
budget based on the fact that you have a one-time savings 
account, Mr. Speaker. That is not how you run a city. Those 
reserve funds are meant for emergency purposes, and this 
government took that opportunity away. You cannot budget 
multi-year based on the fact that you have some money in 
savings. 
 
And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government 
comes along and they say, listen municipalities and the cities, 
you guys are not allowed to go in deficit, but we can. We can. 
The province can. So the cities do their very best, and then the 
province comes along and says, well we don’t want you to have 
any reserve funding, so we’re going to make you use your 
reserve funding, one-time funding, for one year and then that’s 
how you’re going to cover your operating deficit. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance comes along and says, we’re 
going to have a little surplus account set aside for rainy days, 
but it’s not good enough for the cities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a memo should go to every Sask Party 
MLA, that you have driven this province to the brink of 
bankruptcy once again. The conservatives are back. They have 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

doubled the debt since they have assumed government. They 
have doubled the debt, Mr. Speaker. And more so, they haven’t 
even tamed the deficit monster yet on operating year to year. 
And they’re putting this cost onto the backs of the cities. 
They’re putting the costs onto the backs of the taxpayers, of 
people buying children’s clothing. And now STC is also 
shutting down, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve listed already all the 
things that they have done. 
 
And yet today they have the audacity and the arrogance to talk 
and stand up and pat themselves on the back, but call down the 
NDP in the process. That is not leadership, Mr. Speaker. That is 
not leadership. And this is one of my messages to the 
backbenchers. You have to get with the program, because the 
problem that you have is that you have five or six people within 
the front bench that control all of you. You’ve got to have the 
proper process in place to make sure that you manage the 
finances that the people of Saskatchewan have entrusted you 
with, and the backbench has failed miserably. 
 
And that’s why they have these processes called caucus 
finalization on the budget. They have treasury board. They have 
subcommittees, Mr. Speaker, and it’s all been set up. But so far, 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened is the backbench have blindly 
followed the Premier, have blindly followed a few members of 
the front bench. And this is why today we have the predicament 
of a growing debt crisis. It’s going to be a crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
And we still haven’t tamed the deficit monster. 
 
So as I listen to their rantings and as they backslap each other, 
Mr. Speaker, and as they brag about what they did, I say to 
them today, it is not about bragging. It is not a debate on the 
Premier’s legacy. It is not a debate between the NDP and the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. It is really a realization that our future 
finances are in this critical stage, that it’s going to break the 
backs of the people of Saskatchewan. Yes, we have 1.1 million 
people, Mr. Speaker, but we have $22.8 billion in debt in four 
short years. How could we sustain that kind of debt, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s going to be a very difficult task. 
 
[21:30] 
 
So we ask the question, how could the Sask Party, how could 
the Sask Party, despite having record — and I emphasize record 
— revenue the past eight years, Mr. Speaker, how could they 
have record revenue, how could they inherit a booming 
economy, and how could they benefit from a growing 
population, and eight to nine short years later, Mr. Speaker, we 
are in this crisis mode. 
 
Simply because the backbench did not rise to the occasion. 
They simply put their own political futures ahead of the tough 
decisions that were necessary seven or eight years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. For what? For a political gain and for the third term 
for the Premier. And guess what? The legacy you’re going to 
achieve for your leader is not going to be one of a third term, 
but the huge debt load that you are leaving the future people — 
and I’m talking about the young people, the children, the 
grandchildren — that they will have to pay that debt, Mr. 
Speaker. They will have to pay the debt. 
 
And we haven’t even asked, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even 
asked how the P3 deals are going to impact the future of our 

province. That as well is the reason why, under this particular 
government, we have seen them simply take Saskatchewan 
once again to the abyss of financial ruin. We are in this 
situation. I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan that any 
tax increases that you pay — property tax, tax on Pampers, Mr. 
Speaker, tax on meals, any cuts that you see — it is the direct 
result of the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandals, and waste, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now can I say to the backbench, how could you sit there and 
allow this kind of thing to continue? You had the opportunity 
then. Now the people of Saskatchewan are not very pleased 
today. Today they’re going to see an increase in their property 
tax. To every conservative member out there that’s listening to 
this particular program, Mr. Speaker, you are now members of 
the tax and spend provincial conservative movement called the 
Saskatchewan Party. They have put a billion dollars of taxes 
onto the backs of families today. They have clawed back money 
from our working people. They are now making you pay more 
property tax in the city. You’re having less, Mr. Speaker, you’re 
having a lot less service. And the list goes on. The list goes on. 
 
Now let us not forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where they started 
from. They inherited billions in the bank, Mr. Speaker. They 
inherited a booming economy. They inherited a growing 
population, Mr. Speaker. A short eight or nine years later, and 
where are we now? They have sold Crown after Crown after 
Crown, and they’re still going to continue doing that particular 
work. And yet despite, despite all the largesse that they 
inherited, Mr. Speaker, in terms of money and opportunity, why 
are we broke? After selling the Crowns, why are we broke? 
After all the tax increases that they have, Mr. Speaker, they put 
in place a few short days ago, we’re still going to be broke for 
the next three years. 
 
So you tell me, who failed here? Was it the voter that failed the 
people of Saskatchewan by trusting the Sask Party? The voters 
are never wrong, Mr. Speaker. The voters were betrayed. And 
they’re betrayed by a system that collapsed around a power base 
that is called the Premier’s office, and three or four chosen 
cabinet folks that made a decision around the budget. And I 
would dare say that 60 or 70 per cent of the backbench didn’t 
even know what was in the budget the few months before the 
budget was unveiled. I would dare say, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
probably close to the truth. And today now the backbenchers 
stand up, they stand up in their place. They have prepared notes 
that they have to read from and they ignore the hurt and harm it 
does to their constituents back in their home riding, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But people, people have had enough. I think this budget really 
sends a solid message, Mr. Speaker, that this party, the 
Saskatchewan Party, they have broken our province. They have 
broken our province. And I would say to them, I would say to 
them, just as an example . . . This is an example, Mr. Speaker, 
and this is from the Leader-Post. I would say to them, Regina, 
you’re now losing almost 30 per cent of dollars in the province 
that you have to come up to tax or property tax increases. 
Saskatoon, almost 27 per cent more of the operating of the city 
of Saskatoon will now have to come from increased property 
taxes. For Yorkton, it’s 58 per cent. Yorkton’s getting 
especially hit hard. Moose Jaw, it’s 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. For Weyburn, it’s 44 per cent, Mr. Speaker. P.A. 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

[Prince Albert], it’s 44 per cent as well, and for North 
Battleford, 49 per cent; for Melfort, 41 per cent. 
 
These are all increases that the Saskatoon StarPhoenix . . . 
There’s no NDP sign here, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix have reported those are the property tax increases 
that the people in those cities will now have to cover out of their 
own pockets, out of their own pockets, thanks to the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s no question in my mind. It is no question in my mind 
that the mature and solid backbenchers would get up and say, 
yes, we have followed long enough, that it’s time for them to 
speak up. Because what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that 
every single one of their names will be entered on record as the 
people that sat on their hands, that sat on their hands, while the 
Premier and a select few members of the front bench put this 
province in definite ruin. Every single one of their names will 
be recorded, Mr. Speaker. And the legacy that they’ll leave 
behind, every single member, we’re going to make sure that 
their names are recorded for history, Mr. Speaker, every single 
one of them. 
 
Remember the following words to describe the Sask Party. 
Trying to blame the cities for municipal tax increases; it was the 
Sask Party. Neutering the school divisions, not giving them any 
authority, any powers; it was the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
Penalizing families through unfair taxation; it was the Sask 
Party, Mr. Speaker. Selling the Crowns; it was the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker. All the property, all the tax increases today; it is 
the Sask Party. Mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, mismanagement 
galore; it was the Sask Party. Waste, Mr. Speaker, it was the 
Sask Party. We have all those examples of how they wasted 
opportunity. Scandals, Mr. Speaker, that is the Sask Party 
record. 
 
So as you remember the Sask Party, remember those words 
because, Mr. Speaker, they have hurt our province long enough. 
And the worst part of this all, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the 
outset of my address, is that before the last election, the Premier 
called an election before the budget. And when people asked 
me for my response, I said the first thing that does not come to 
my mind is the word “courage.” I think the people of 
Saskatchewan needed the truth before the last election, not a 
year after the election. 
 
And now the truth is coming out, and the people of 
Saskatchewan feel betrayed. They feel angered. And 
everywhere you go, whether it is the school divisions who are 
being neutered, or the people in the cities that have to pay more 
for their property tax because of mismanagement, or the future 
generations, our children and grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re going to pay for the schemes devised by the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, including the Premier and the 
cabinet ministers. They are going to pay for that 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
And I say to the backbench, that time for you to wake up 
because you’re going to continue along the debt to continue 
ballooning. And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is the 
people that are leading you right now, they have no plans to 
stick around and help clean up this mess. Instead they sit there 
day after day, spout out the same nonsense, talk about how 

great they were and how bad the NDP are, and they think that’s 
good enough for the people of Saskatchewan. I say to them, 
they should stop insulting the people of Saskatchewan with that 
kind of silly rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, and start doing their jobs as 
members of the Sask Party government and really protect the 
people of Saskatchewan’s interest, not their own political hides, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why day after day, as an opposition members, we 
stand. There’s 11 of us strong today, thanks to the most recent 
election of my colleague from Saskatoon Meewasin, Mr. 
Speaker. We do have a plan. We do have a plan. And I’ll tell 
you, our plan is radically different, much more well thought out 
than the Saskatchewan Party could ever figure out. 
 
And I say to them, to all the backbenchers who are given notes 
and they’re told, read these notes and don’t deviate from these 
notes, I think it’s time that you stand up. You stand up for your 
constituents. You stand up for your grandchildren and their 
great-grandchildren. Because I don’t want to leave them a 
legacy of debt, and that’s all I see from the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s all I see from them. 
 
And some of these Crowns, some of these Crowns that are out 
that they’re trying to sell — STC being one of them; next on the 
chopping block is the SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. And you look at all 
of these issues. 
 
And the member from Humboldt laughs in her seat, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the same member who stood idly by as there 
was a faulty furnace in one of the old folks’ home in Humboldt 
that claimed three lives. Now, Mr. Speaker, is that a default? Is 
that a default in the system, making sure that some of these 
facilities are kept in top-notch? Well I think there was some 
negligence, Mr. Speaker, in that regard. 
 
So today, today I’m talking about the future of the finances of 
our province, and it’s going to have dramatic, negative effects 
for years and years and years to come. And the last people 
that’ll be held to account are the ones that I think are going to 
be heading out of Dodge pretty soon, and that’s probably half 
the Sask Party caucus across the way. They will not be here 
answering the call when it comes to tough measures required to 
reclaim the financial strength of our province. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing evidence for the first 
time, evidence that the finances of the province of 
Saskatchewan are as dire as they are today. A year ago, nothing 
was reported, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the election, no mention of 
selling off STC. Prior to the election, nothing on NORTEP, Mr. 
Speaker. Prior to the election, nothing on taxation. Prior to the 
election, nothing on withholding any grants-in-lieu from our 
cities, and we’re seeing massive increases. 
 
How do you budget a city’s budget with 49 per cent less dollars 
from the grants-in-lieu income, Mr. Speaker? It’s just simply 
not possible. It is a very difficult situation. So it’s not a 
laughing matter. It is not a laughing matter. There’s going to be 
a lot of people hurt by this budget. We’re talking about 
everybody from the cleaning staff in this building to the STC 
employees. We’re talking to people whose jobs were contracted 
out under the Sask Party. 
 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

And, Mr. Speaker, the worst part of it all, the worst part of all is 
the people of Saskatchewan trusted them and that trust was 
betrayed. That trust was betrayed. And that’s why I say under 
Bill 40 . . . And any efforts, any efforts to sell the Crowns, I 
think we should have an election on that and see how well the 
Sask Party do then, and see how much they brag then, Mr. 
Speaker. They will not do it because Bill 40, Bill 40 says they 
don’t have to have a plebiscite or a public vote. 
 
Well I think they should not lose the second opportunity to have 
courage. And let’s go back to the people of Saskatchewan. Let’s 
ask them for their endorsement of this budget. Let’s ask them 
about the future of our Crowns. Let’s ask them about having 
information around the bypass, Mr. Speaker. These are basic 
things I think the people of Saskatchewan ought to know. 
 
And when I knew, Mr. Speaker, and when I lost confidence on 
that day that the budget and all the betrayal that was so evident, 
Mr. Speaker, all the betrayal that was so evident, Mr. Speaker, 
when we asked information on the Regina bypass. The costs 
started off at 400 million. Now it’s almost 2 billion. What does 
the opposition want? The opposition wants an account. Where 
did the money go? How much money did we spend on the 
bypass? Who got the money? Who got the contracts? Who got 
the work? Two billion dollars on a 40 kilometre bypass, Mr. 
Speaker. Even with the overpasses, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take 
a rocket scientist to figure out it shouldn’t be $2 billion. So 
where did the money go? And that’s why we’ve been asking on 
this side of the House. 
 
And the response we get when we ask for detail, information 
about how the bypass is being paid for and who’s being paid for 
what, Mr. Speaker, is we got a response from the government 
saying, oh, it’s proprietary interest of the company or the 
corporation overseas, we can’t disclose that. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
how about the people of Saskatchewan’s interest? How about 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are going to be paying that 
for years and years and years to come? 
 
The P3 schemes designed by the Sask Party, we’re going to be 
paying for that for years and years and years to come. I’m 
hearing figures that 90 or $60 million on maintenance alone. 
And some of these new schools for the first seven or eight 
years? Well if they’re new schools, if they’re new schools, why 
are we so rich in the maintenance, Mr. Speaker? These are 
private sweetheart deals that will forever cost the people of 
Saskatchewan tons of money. They’ll forever cost people of 
Saskatchewan tons of money. 
 
And when our caucus stood up, Mr. Speaker, on the day of the 
budget and we agreed, we agreed to take a cut in our pay. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we stood by our leader and we said, we will take a 
cut in pay. That was an easy thing for the MLAs and the 
opposition to do. 
 
[21:45] 
 
But what they tried to do, Mr. Speaker, and I think the media 
got a hold of this, what they tried to do is . . . The opposition 
said, if you can cut and amalgamate school divisions, if you can 
cut and amalgamate health districts, then why don’t you 
amalgamate constituencies and let’s have five less MLAs? That 
was the proposal we had in the opposition. So we’ll take the 

check on the pay cut. We’ll check that; we agree with that. Let’s 
do five less MLAs. 
 
All of a sudden the Sask Party started playing games. And the 
reason why, Mr. Speaker, is I think we do have too many MLAs 
in Saskatchewan. So if you can cut back workers, you can cut 
back school divisions, you can cut back on teachers’ contracts, 
you can claw back people that work for the government — 
three and a half per cent, and we were agreeing to do our part as 
well — well shouldn’t you cut back on the number of MLAs as 
well, Mr. Speaker? Well the Sask Party would not do that. 
 
Instead they made up this silly little bill, put a silly little 
argument in front of the media, Mr. Speaker, and once again the 
games will be played. And that’s why on this side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people that were negatively 
affected by this budget: the people that lost their jobs; the 
people that lost hope, Mr. Speaker; the people that continually 
see that Saskatchewan’s future is bleak and grim because the 
Sask Party couldn’t figure out how to take such opportunity that 
they inherited and build it for a lasting future, Mr. Speaker. 
Instead all they have left us is a legacy of debt. It’s a legacy of 
debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll end on this point because obviously I’m not going to 
support their budget. I’m going to support the amendment, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to end on this point, Mr. Speaker: that if 
you think that people do not watch what goes on in the 
Assembly, a lot of people do. A lot of people do. There are 
serious consequences in this bill for a lot of sectors of our 
province. 
 
We are a landlocked province. We have counted on agriculture 
as our mainstay in the economy for years. We need to diversify 
our economy to the extent it has never been diversified before. 
And I said it before: based on what I see from the Sask Party, 
all of them collectively crossing their fingers and toes, hoping, 
hoping, Mr. Speaker, that the commodity prices will rebound 
astronomically, Mr. Speaker, well I tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, that is not a plan that we support in the 
opposition. 
 
There’s got to be some very good thinking, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s got to be some learned people that could give advice to 
the politicians as opposed to the politicians deciding what 
happens to our future. And this is the reason why I made the 
earlier preface, Mr. Speaker, to my argument is the sense that if 
you allow unfettered control and decision making by a select 
few, then the systems of accountability become . . . are 
deteriorated, and the whole notion of properly managing our 
finances, the whole system that’s set up to do that, Mr. Speaker, 
gets compromised. 
 
And that’s why we’re in the state that we’re at today, Mr. 
Speaker. We see this happening time and time again. Each and 
every year the Sask Party has had their control of the finance of 
this province, we have seen each and every year our debt rise by 
what . . . 1 billion. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan cannot afford that anymore. And I say to them, 
join us; let’s get rid of the Sask Party. 
 
There’s going to be some tough days ahead for Saskatchewan, 
very tough days, but let me assure you and tell the people of 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

Saskatchewan that a lot of people are angry. And I think they 
have had enough. So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I will stand in 
my place. I will be supporting the amendment and stand 
proudly against the deficit finance budget being presented by 
the Sask Party. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise in the House to speak on behalf of the 
constituents of Cannington. And listening to the member 
previous to me, he was commenting on, you know, we only 
wanted to be here for the third election. Well I’d like to point 
out to that individual member that I just ran in my seventh 
successful election and every time my percentages have gone 
up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that has happened with the support of my family, Mr. 
Speaker. It has happened with the support of my CA 
[constituency assistant]. My CA has been working in that office 
for as long as I have, Mr. Speaker. In fact she was part of my 
nomination team before the election even happened, Mr. 
Speaker. And the constituents of Cannington have supported me 
very faithfully and very well since 1991. And I met with them 
about this budget, and I will tell you some of the things that 
they had to say later on in my speech. 
 
But in listening to the members opposite today, the member 
from Saskatoon Meewasin was speaking about a woman from 
Fort Qu’Appelle who, because we have discontinued STC, 
can’t get to work now and she had to quit. Every day she rode 
the bus, which I find somewhat surprising, Mr. Speaker, since 
the buses are still running. Why did this woman quit already? 
Because that’s what the member from Meewasin said: this 
woman had quit her job because STC had been sold. STC . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member for Saskatoon Centre, 
the buses will continue to run until May 31st. So why is she 
quitting her job now? 
 
So I thought, okay, you know, it is possible that somebody rides 
the bus from Fort Qu’Appelle to Regina every day for their job. 
So I went online. When does the bus run from Fort Qu’Appelle, 
and when does it leave Regina to get back there? Well it leaves 
Fort Qu’Appelle at 11:05 a.m. every day, arrives in Regina at 
noon, departs Regina at 6:30 p.m. So what kind of a job do you 
have that, unless it’s at the bus depot, starts at noon when the 
bus gets there, and six and a half hours later, your job is over 
and you go home? This job must be a very unique job or 
perhaps that job doesn’t exist. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, so I looked up at what this fare was — return 
trip Fort Qu’Appelle to Regina, $37.70. So the lady rides the 
bus every day, returns to Fort Qu’Appelle. She pays 37.70, and 
we pay $190. The taxpayer pays $190. But assuming this lady 
rides the bus every day, she could get a frequent rider card, 
which would give her a 20 per cent discount. So she would pay 
$30.20, but unfortunately the taxpayer doesn’t get a frequent 
rider discount and we still have to pay $190 a day for the lady 
to ride the bus. 
 
So how much money would you have to earn to make a tax 
payment of $190 a day? Well it would work out to about $1,500 

for your six-and-a-half-hour workday. That’s what you would 
have to make every day to make the taxes up for $190 a day . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Saskatoon Centre, 
she has to take time off for lunch, so you know, we should 
maybe shorten that up to five, to five and a half hours a day, 
you know, so . . . Maybe it’s a union job. I don’t know. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, STC has been a money-losing proposition 
since 1979. I remember back in the mid-1990s at committee 
asking the president of the day of STC: what is the long-term 
goal for your company, STC, this year? And his response was, 
to lose 98 cents a passenger mile. That was his goal that year. 
 
Now I don’t know how many business people, if you asked 
them what their long-term goal is, is to lose money every day. 
But the members opposite, in their wisdom and their business 
acumen, believe losing money every day is the way to do it. So, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that they have a shrinking caucus 
rather than a growing one. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look at my own constituency. Received a 
phone call from one person about STC. And this person phoned 
to say that there was an elderly lady in one community who 
used the bus once a month to come into Regina and because of 
that, we should keep STC. So her fare was . . . I did write it 
down here some place. Let me look it up. Here, yes, her fare to 
come to Regina and back from Carnduff return was $85.90. 
You know, I don’t know if she would qualify for the frequent 
rider discount, but again it cost the taxpayers of this province 
$190 every time she got on to the bus. 
 
You know, and if you live in Carnduff or Oxbow or Alameda, 
maybe Frobisher, you know, you might use the bus. But I’ve 
got a lot of other communities in the Cannington constituency 
who haven’t had STC ever, and they also have a lot of seniors 
in those communities. And you know what? Those seniors 
make it into medical appointments in Regina every time they 
have to go. There’s an entrepreneur in their community that 
perhaps gives them a ride. There’s a service club that will do it 
or their neighbours and family will run them in, sometimes for 
the cost of the fuel. 
 
You know, and what’s better? Ride the bus, so virtually $86. 
That’ll fill up most tanks with fuel and you get on the bus at the 
coffee shop in Carnduff and you get off at the bus depot in 
Regina. There isn’t any medical clinics at the bus depot in 
Regina, so now you’ve got to get from there down to wherever 
your appointment is. 
 
But if you take the entrepreneur, if you take the service club, if 
you take their neighbour or their family, not only do they go to 
their appointment, but they could also go any place else in 
Regina, maybe do some shopping, visit family, whatever the 
case may be. They get picked up at their front door and 
delivered back to their front door — much better service at 
possibly the same price or a lot less, Mr. Speaker. So I think 
STC’s usefulness to the province of Saskatchewan has certainly 
outlived itself. 
 
[22:00] 
 
You know, this budget is a tough budget, but it’s also a fair 
budget, Mr. Speaker. There were no sacred areas in this budget. 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

We all felt the pain. Let me correct that — we all should be 
feeling the pain, but the members opposite won’t show up at the 
Board of Internal Economy to take a reduction of the MLAs’ 
salaries. There’s been at least two meetings called and the 
members opposite refused to show up. So they’re the only ones 
being protected, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of . . . You know, I look at 
what’s happened in my constituency with the drop in the oil 
prices. It’s had a very major impact on employment in my area. 
One of the companies was telling me that they had laid off a 
number of people, which they do in the fall quite often, but they 
were still losing money so they had to make some adjustments. 
 
So they went to their employees — they still had about a 
hundred employees — and they said, we have two options for 
you. Management has already taken a 20 per cent cut, but to the 
employees on the floor, we’re asking that you either take a 20 
per cent cut, or at the end of the month we will be laying off 29 
workers. You guys decide what it is you want to do. 
Management left and the employees talked it over amongst 
themselves. They didn’t know who out of that hundred would 
be the 29 that would be let go. So they voted amongst 
themselves, and they agreed to take the 20 per cent cut. 
 
And yet to listen to the opposition, themselves and the civil 
service should not be asked to take any pain because of the loss 
of revenues from our resource industries. Oil, gas, potash, 
uranium, are all down, and yet the opposition doesn’t believe 
that they or government employees should suffer any of the 
pain. It should only be those workers in the resource industries. 
 
Well I disagree, Mr. Speaker. I believe in this province we have 
benefited by those resources. We have seen over the last 
number of years significant investments in the province’s 
infrastructure because of the benefits paid by those resources. 
And now that the price is down, we have to make some 
corrections to support government to provide those services like 
social services, like health care, like education, Mr. Speaker, but 
we have to do it better and we have to do it more efficiently, 
and unfortunately that means at less cost as well. 
 
Now when I look at the investment in the highways that we 
have made over the last number of years, in my constituency 
under the previous administration there was virtually no work 
done on the highways in Cannington. There was maintenance 
from time to time, but there was no construction. 
 
Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, work has been done on 13, 33 . . . 
Okay, I’m on the wrong list. 13 and 33 are the ones that are 
done, but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, let me go through 
them: 18, No. 8, No. 9, 13, 33, 48, and 47 have all had work 
done on them. But I want to remind the member for Wood 
River, the Minister of Highways, that we still have a couple that 
need some work: 361, 318, and north of Stoughton on 47. 
Those are also areas with lots of oil traffic on them, and that’s 
what causes the difficulties on those particular highways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we still need some more work on highways, 
but there isn’t a single individual in Cannington who would say 
that work hasn’t been done on the highways since we formed 
government. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing in the last day or so 
about the library reductions in funding. Now you know me, I 
read a lot of books, and I buy a lot of books every year. My 
home community is larger than most libraries, Mr. Speaker, in 
rural Saskatchewan. But my own community is not a part of the 
regional library. They have their own library, you know, and 
we’re hearing about the possibilities of the local library perhaps 
moving into the school or into the municipal office. Well a 
number of my communities such as Alida, that library doesn’t 
have a school to move into because the members opposite 
closed it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You didn’t open it up. Why didn’t you 
open it up again? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Because it had been sold by the time we 
formed government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You could have just built it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well the member for Saskatoon Centre 
says we could have just built a new school. And in fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have built 40 new schools — 40 new 
schools, Mr. Speaker. Unlike the members opposite, which 
closed the schools in Storthoaks, Alida, Gainsborough, Glen 
Ewen, Frobisher, Kisbey, Corning, and Creelman. And that’s 
just in my . . . I’m going to have to keep hollering louder, Mr. 
Speaker, to even hear myself. They have closed eight schools 
just in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have built the schools though. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, in 
fact, I was on an ad hoc committee for the school division back 
in 1988-89, and at that time a decision was made by the school 
division that they needed to rebuild the Oxbow high school. 
They applied and got on the B-1 list, and the fact is, the school 
was in such terrible shape for some of those years, it was the 
top of the list. But the members opposite wouldn’t build it — 
wouldn’t build it, Mr. Speaker — because they, I suspect, they 
thought that they wouldn’t likely win that riding. And it’s 
proven true since then, so the members would not build it. 
 
A new comprehensive high school opened in Oxbow in 2011, 
four years after we formed government, Mr. Speaker. They 
wouldn’t do it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he says, 
why. The member for Saskatoon Centre says, why did it take so 
long? Because we had to get the money lined up. Today, we’re 
building 18 new schools with a P3 project and they will be open 
this fall, Mr. Speaker. But they wouldn’t allow that to happen. 
This year Education is getting $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, 2 billion 
— that’s with a “b” — billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. We are 
funding education, Mr. Speaker, for what needs to be done in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shortline rails across Saskatchewan are doing 
well. For a long time they struggled, but they’re doing well 
now, Mr. Speaker. And they have the option to buy the cars 
from the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a very successful shortline rail service running in 
Cannington, Stewart Southern rail, which runs from Stoughton 
into Regina . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, Blair bought 
that line with the thought of hauling about 350 cars a year. At 
the peak of the oil, he was shipping 100 cars every second day, 
Mr. Speaker. They continue to ship not as much, but they 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

continue to ship a lot of cars up and down that rail, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a very successful business, just as a number of 
other shortlines around the province are very successful, 
including the line running from Regina up through Chamberlain 
and up through Davidson, that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, when we formed government, one of the complaints 
we heard prior to that was the high cost of property taxes, that 
everybody was paying way too much for the value. So we 
brought in a plan, Mr. Speaker, that lowered the property taxes 
down for everybody across the province. So the members 
opposite are commenting about it now. 
 
You know what? There was a reassessment by SAMA 
[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] this past 
year, and the values of most businesses, homes, and farm 
property significantly increased across the province, which 
reflects on how well this province has been doing, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we lowered the mill rates on 
most of those properties, Mr. Speaker, on most of those 
properties, so that especially agriculture is paying a lot less than 
they would have been under the NDP scheme which Tommy 
Douglas said education property tax on agriculture was too 
high, but he didn’t do anything about it. Allan Blakeney said it 
was too high, but he didn’t do anything about it. Roy Romanow 
said the education portion of property taxes was too high in 
agriculture. Lorne Calvert said the status quo is not on, and yet 
he changed nothing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it took the Saskatchewan government to lower 
the costs on property. Under the NDP, I believe at their peak, 
that property taxes was carrying 61 per cent of the load on 
education, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s 40 per cent. So everybody has 
benefitted across the board. But I understand that it’s a problem 
for the members opposite to admit that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m supposed to tell you to wrap it up. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I’m getting heckled from 
my own side now because they’re enjoying my speech, but the 
whips seem to be interfering. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, last Friday I had a group of ladies come into 
my office, not to talk about the budget, although that came up 
later in the conversation. So after we had dealt with their issue, 
I asked them about the budget. You know, these are a group of 
farm wives, some of them operate the farm, some of them work 
off the farm. And so the spokesperson kind of looked around 
the room to the rest of her colleagues and said this budget is 
what needed to be done. They had no complaints. They had 
concerns certainly because they were going to pay more as well, 
but they understood that this was the medicine that 
Saskatchewan needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget as presented, and I 
will not be supporting the no-plan amendment presented by the 
opposition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

appreciate and I want to stand on my feet in support of the 
Finance minister’s budget. I will be voting in favour of the 
budget and against the amendment, of course. 
 
You know, and I’m privileged to say that the Premier included 
me in his cabinet this summer and that I was able to contribute 
and I believe contribute well in the involvement of the 
preparation of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, first and foremost before I do anything, I would 
like to put a good friend’s name on the record, Mr. Speaker. His 
name is Richard Bloski. He’s from Greenwater Lake, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I went to school with Richard 
Bloski, and he’s been an acquaintance and a friend of mine ever 
since, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Richard Bloski lost his life to 
cancer, and after a very short illness with cancer again. He just 
found out at Christmastime that he had cancer and he passed 
away yesterday, Mr. Speaker. A solid individual, worked hard 
all his life for the park at Greenwater Lake, and was just a very 
nice gentleman. And I wanted to make sure that his name, Mr. 
Speaker, got on the record. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, I would like thank a few people. First and 
foremost my wife, Mr. Speaker, who . . . It’s her birthday today, 
and she’s quite a bit younger than me, but it is her birthday 
today, and I couldn’t be in Prince Albert to celebrate it with her. 
But, Mr. Speaker, she has worked by my side. We’ve worked 
side by side for many, many years, for 17 years running our 
businesses in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. We work six days a 
week. She’s been just a solid rock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She still oversees our businesses that we have remaining, Mr. 
Speaker, in Melfort. But, Mr. Speaker, I truly admire how 
strong she is. She travels back and forth more than me, Mr. 
Speaker, because she has to run from Prince Albert to Melfort 
to oversee the businesses, and she still makes time to come 
down here and take care of me, Mr. Speaker. So she’s a 
wonderful lady. She is a great woman, and I’m very, very 
fortunate to have her as my wife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have four kids as well, Mr. Speaker. They’re just 
wonderful kids. Trent and his wife and son are good. They live 
in Prince Albert as well, Mr. Speaker. They live actually about 
three blocks from me. And he bought the Dodge dealership in 
Prince Albert. Him and his sister bought the Dodge dealership 
from us, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert and they run that and 
they do a very good job of that. 
 
And his sister is a stay-at-home mother, but her husband as well 
is involved in the business, Mr. Speaker. My other son, Colby, 
he’s a parts man with another firm in the city of Prince Albert, 
him and his wife and two kids, Mr. Speaker. They’re very, 
they’re very good. They live about six blocks away from us, 
Mr. Speaker, and so we get a lot of chance, we get a lot of time 
to spend with each one of them. My daughter and her husband 
and two kids, Mr. Speaker, they live about four blocks away 
from us as well. So we’ve been very fortunate we get to spend 
all this time with our grandkids, our five grandkids, Mr. 
Speaker. 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2017 

But we have one more coming and that’s from our youngest 
daughter who’s 30 years old, and she moved from Prince Albert 
down to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and she’s due here in the 
middle of May. And we’re very excited for another grandchild 
and we just can’t wait for that to happen, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
very, we’re very, very excited. 
 
So other people, Mr. Speaker, that I want to thank, is my 
constituency assistant, Joy Schewaga, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, she’s been offered other jobs and could work for far 
more money. I know she’s earned far more money because she 
used to work for me in one of my businesses, and she could go 
back and she could work, Mr. Speaker, in that industry and 
make far more money than she works for me. But she wants to 
work because she believes that she and I are trying to do the 
right thing for the people of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. She 
strongly believes that we will get things done for our 
constituents. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we can speak all we 
want about the big things, the big things that happen in 
government, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the day-to-day things, the 
day-to-day issues of our constituents where we try to help them 
manoeuvre through the bureaucracy of government, that make a 
difference, Mr. Speaker. And she strongly believes in that and 
works hard to make sure that every constituent, Mr. Speaker, 
gets that full hearing that they deserve from us and that we push 
to see what we can get done for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a small town in northeastern 
Saskatchewan, a town of 75 people, Mr. Speaker. That small 
town, there was . . . I was the youngest of five. My father was 
the grain buyer for the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; my mother 
was a stay-at-home mother. I was the youngest of five. It was a 
small house of 750 square feet. We had nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
We really had nothing. We had no indoor plumbing; we had an 
outdoor facility that we had to use. So it wasn’t a lot of fun. 
 
I did not grow up with a silver spoon, Mr. Speaker. It was a lot 
of hard work. I went after school every day down to the elevator 
to help my father work, Mr. Speaker, because it was a very, 
very tough life in the elevator, working down there, Mr. 
Speaker. And we had this small house, like I say, with no 
indoor plumbing. We had to do that. My mother worked very 
hard, you know, with three gardens and worked very hard in 
helping to raise all five of us kids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
Finance minister, the good job that he did with the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. It was very, very difficult, Mr. Speaker. It was a tough, 
tough budget. We know that, Mr. Speaker. With over a billion 
dollars in shortfall in revenue from the resource sectors, Mr. 
Speaker, it had to be very difficult. And I’m very proud of the 
job that he did in getting that budget put together, Mr. Speaker. 
And the nice thing about that budget, Mr. Speaker: it is a plan. 
It’s a three-year plan to get back, you know, to a surplus, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, we hear from the opposition. You know, they 
complain about the budget, and they complain about pretty 
much everything that we do, Mr. Speaker. In fact I do give them 
one bit of credit; they did support me when we come to the 
impaired driving. And I do very much appreciate that, and I 

hope that we can work together on a couple more initiatives in 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we do have to . . . We are waiting to hear what their plan is 
as opposed to what our plan has been, Mr. Speaker, of what the 
Finance minister’s put together, Mr. Speaker. We know that we 
have a plan and that we have a structure that we can bring this 
back to a surplus situation here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re just kind of waiting, waiting and waiting and waiting 
to hear what their plan is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we know that part of that budget was the 
wind-down of STC. Mr. Speaker, you know that’s wind-down 
with a W not with a P, you know, in case the members opposite 
don’t know. It’s with a W. Mr. Speaker, that was very, very 
difficult. Those 224 employees, we do empathize with them. 
You know, they worked hard for the corporation for a number 
of years, most of them, Mr. Speaker, and it was very difficult. 
 
But we can’t forget, Mr. Speaker, that there was a significant 
decline in ridership over the last number of years, and just in the 
last year, Mr. Speaker. There was 35 per cent since 2012 and 
another 18,000 people less rides this last year than there was 
prior, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, made it so that our 
subsidy had to go up to $17 million a year, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is just not a sustainable figure, Mr. Speaker. We just cannot 
continue to operate that business, and that’s why it has to be 
wound down, Mr. Speaker. And that is exactly what we’re 
doing with that. It was a very difficult thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One other thing, Mr. Speaker. I know that I don’t have that 
much time, but you know one thing . . . I do want to mention a 
few of the things in the budget because we have done a lot of 
work on the highways over the past years. And I know from 
living in Prince Albert and working in Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’ve spent $5 million on the bridge here in the 
last few years. We’ve helped the city out with the bridge. We 
spent that money. And I know that when the opposition was 
actually in power back then and the bridge was in need of 
repairs, the answer come back . . . When the city come and said 
we need money to help fix the bridge, the answer come back 
and it was no. It was definitely no. So and then they talk about 
how we’re not helping out the city, Mr. Speaker, but yet, you 
know, when they were in power they never helped out the city. 
The 5 million, you know, they never put 1 cent towards that 
bridge, Mr. Speaker, and yet they complain about how we are. 
And so again, Mr. Speaker, they talk out of both sides of their 
mouths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I know the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote, Mr. Speaker, she keeps mentioning about how I 
don’t support the community in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know where she would . . . I don’t have any idea where 
she’d come up with that, Mr. Speaker. As a solid member of 
that community, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been there for 17 years. I 
was on the P.A. Community Futures board. I’ve been on the 
Prince Albert police board, Mr. Speaker, the economic 
development board, the chamber of commerce, the Victoria 
Hospital Foundation, and the Rotary Club. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, that and my company’s donated tons of money to a lot 
of organizations and that. And, Mr. Speaker, as the owner of 
that company I was the one who made the decision that we 
donate to various . . . All the building projects that took place, 



March 28, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

they always come to us for support and we supported that 
community extremely well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I still support that community very strongly, Mr. Speaker. I still 
live there. We still support that, and we support the people and 
the other people that are there, Mr. Speaker. There’s other 
companies there like . . . And I know they keep getting dished 
that they’re not a Saskatchewan company, that they’re working 
on the bypass, but really they’re just like a foreign company, 
and that’s Broda Group of companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I know the owner personally, Mr. Speaker. He’s an 
extremely nice man. Him and his father started this business 
many, many years ago with one little gravel truck, and now Mr. 
Broda and Broda Group are national heroes really, when it 
comes to that. And they still choose to live and work out of 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. It would be very easy for him to 
move to Calgary and run his business out of Calgary. It would 
be very easy to move his business into BC [British Columbia]. 
He has businesses in BC. He could very easily do that but he 
chooses to live in this province, pay his taxes in this province. 
He works in this province, Mr. Speaker, and he lives in our 
community and he contributes substantially to the community 
of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you cannot go to a function that he hasn’t been a 
major sponsor of in Prince Albert. He is the first guy they go to 
in Prince Albert for donations, for every function that is carried 
on there. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we hear how, you know, he’s 
not really from Saskatchewan or, you know, they complain 
about the bypass and yet, Mr. Speaker, he’s probably the 
biggest contractor out there and they complain about that. 
There’s 8,000 jobs out there, Mr. Speaker, and Gord Broda is 
one of the main contributors to that, Mr. Speaker. So I want to 
just . . . I want to point that out because, you know, that comes 
up in question period very regular, Mr. Speaker, about the 
bypass, and it’s just not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has done a significant amount of business for 
Prince Albert, and revenue sharing has gone up, Mr. Speaker, 
by 126 per cent. They keep complaining that we’re ditching on 
the cities, Mr. Speaker, but yet, you know what? It’s gone up 
126 per cent since they left power, Mr. Speaker. So the city 
actually is pretty glad that they’re not in power right now, 
because who knows what amount of money that they would get, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Believe me, I know . . . And I’ve been in that city for a long 
time and I know exactly that they know exactly what would 
happen if these guys were back in power. Probably the first 
thing they would do, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is part of 
their plan, is when they get . . . They’d probably sign on and 
jump on to a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, because that seems to be 
the most evident thing coming out, Mr. Speaker, you know, is 
that they’d jump on this carbon tax would be probably the first 
thing they would do. 
 
And who knows what they would do with the money, Mr. 
Speaker, but I know that that would devastate the economy here 
in Saskatchewan if they jumped on to that carbon tax, and that 
seems to be the only part of their plan, because they’d have no 
other plan other than to criticize. 
 

Like I said, Mr. Speaker, we don’t seem to be able to do 
anything right on this side of the House, but I do know we have 
some pretty smart people here. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in 
business for years, so that is why I can actually look and I can 
deal with the Crowns and I can talk to the Crowns. I can look at 
STC and I can look at that business because, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been in business. I analyzed financial statements for years prior 
to being in business, Mr. Speaker. I just didn’t sit on the other 
side beaking and beaking, Mr. Speaker, and not knowing what 
they were even looking at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They know that when they were in power, they also looked at 
STC and they also know that they looked at closing STC. So all 
they have got to do is actually think about that for a minute and 
maybe remember back just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to when 
they were in power. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, they were never part of cabinet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — But there was, there was . . . I think 
one of the members over there was part of cabinet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very short period of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — But they probably still were part of 
that discussion, Mr. Speaker. And it’s very unfortunate. I do 
empathize with every employee at STC, Mr. Speaker. I really 
do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know my time is almost out, so I just want 
to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the budget 
and I will be not voting for the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 10:30, this House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1971 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1977 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1983 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1986 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1990 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1995 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1997 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


