






















































Hansard: April 26, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 78A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2305 
 April 26, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
people here with First Steps and wheelchairs in the legislature. 
 
Today we had a number of MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] who participated by spending their morning in a 
wheelchair. And I would like to thank the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health, the Minister for Social Services, the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers, the member for Regina Lakeview, the 
member for Regina Pasqua, and the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin for participating. 
 
And with us today on the floor, we have Mr. Chris Lesanko, 
and his caregiver, Jenna Schaffer. Chris was one of the original 
founders of First Steps. As well, in your gallery sitting up 
against the back wall, I can’t see them from here, is Owen 
Carlson and his wife, Elisa, and Calvin Chiang. I would like to 
ask members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome this 
delegation to their Assembly. And this is an impressive 
delegation; certainly the day they facilitated wheelchairs in the 
legislature with participation on both sides of the Assembly is 
an important one and gives but a small glimpse into some of the 
realities of those living in wheelchairs every day, and the value 
of accessibility. Of course it can’t go any distance to providing 
some of the most challenging aspects of living in a wheelchair, 
but these are inspirational leaders within our community. 
 
And First Steps Wellness is an organization that’s changing 
lives day in day out: those with spinal cord injuries, those with 
neurological health issues, working with those with MS 
[multiple sclerosis] and more, Mr. Speaker. And the group that 
delivers service, the board of directors that are there, I’d like to 
say thank you to each and every one of them. It’s a pleasure to 
see Chris Lesanko on the floor of the Assembly. This was 
Saskatchewan’s best lacrosse player, Mr. Speaker, and a leader 
still in lacrosse within our province. He was once Bishop’s male 
athlete of the year, Mr. Speaker, an education student and a 
good person, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also we have Owen Carlson and his wife here. And I know 
Owen is a remarkable guy that’s dedicated his life, and First 
Steps Wellness is a real labour of love that’s truly benefited the 
lives of so many and brought independence and happiness to 
those that truly deserve it. So I ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming First Steps Wellness and to thank all those, 
including all of the MLAs here today, that participated in the 
wheelchairs in the legislature. 

While still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I see a lot of friends and 
new friends and people from across the province that are here 
today, Mr. Speaker, and they’re here to stand up for their 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. We have many that work 
directly for Crown corporations across Saskatchewan, that of 
course have been built by and for generations of Saskatchewan 
people through hard work and innovation. And this is a group 
of people and individuals who have been rising up all across our 
province amidst a terrible threat to our Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re hoping that common sense will prevail on this 
issue, that Bill 40 will be scrapped, Mr. Speaker, because we 
know the value of our Crown corporations. 
 
What I want to say today to the people that are here today and 
the thousands and thousands of others across the province who 
have stood up, who have rallied to stand up for our Crowns, I 
say, thank you. You’re going down in history in an important 
battle on the right side of the equation. 
 
And I also see Member of Parliament Erin Weir up in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, who is here along with, I understand, 
those concerned about our Crowns here today. 
 
So I ask all members of this Assembly to show some respect 
and some care to those that are here today to fight for our 
Crowns. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to please ask for leave 
for extended introductions the next time. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming all of 
the guests who are here today joining us, including the guests 
that the Leader of the Opposition, the interim Leader of the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] just highlighted in terms of the 
debate around Bill 40, Mr. Speaker. This place is all about 
debate and the expression of our respective opinions. Certainly 
that should always be the case for citizens who want to make 
those views known. That’s what this place is all about. 
 
I would just want to, for the record, say and assure all of our 
guests that their interests in terms of our Crown corporations 
are also our interests: that they would be strong for the long 
term, that they would be here for the long term, that people 
would continue to be employed by them, not just in the 
complement we have now, Mr. Speaker, but frankly in a larger 
number, not just here in Regina but across the province. And I 
want to join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
my pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to welcome a 
young man that I met earlier this morning, Mr. Brenden 
Branscombe, up in your gallery. 
 
I met with him earlier today, Mr. Speaker, to talk about mental 
health and his experience, his positive experiences in the mental 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

health system, in our health system and also to discuss some of 
the challenges that he also met with and to see where we could 
go from there, Mr. Speaker. So we had a great, great meeting. 
He’s a great young man. 
 
He’s from Nipawin, currently lives in Regina. He’s a manager 
at Save-On-Foods and we had some really good conversation 
around his experiences there as well, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome Brenden to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
welcome a friend of mine now from Prince Albert, used to be 
from Yorkton. He assured me he didn’t move because of the 
MLA; there was other issues that he had to move to P.A. 
[Prince Albert] for. But Dave Dennis is up in your Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, your gallery. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members welcome Dave as well 
as Al Kirchgessner and John . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kirchgessner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kirchgessner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Kirchgessner I don’t have the proper 
pronunciation. And John . . . How do you pronounce John’s last 
name? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Scissons. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Scissons. Also here with Dave, they 
are here for the Full Gospel MLA banquet that’s going to be in 
the Assembly tonight that I’m honoured to speak at, Mr. 
Speaker. So I ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Minister of Health in welcoming Brenden to his 
legislature today. It’s always appreciated when people who 
have lived experience with our system here have an 
opportunity, or take the opportunity, to share how it’s worked 
for them and how it could work better. And we all know very 
well, one in five of us has been touched by mental health, Mr. 
Speaker, and the goal should be to make the system better for 
everybody. Mental health is no different than physical health, 
Mr. Speaker. So I want to join with the minister in welcoming 
Brenden and ask all my colleagues to do the same as well. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce guests in the west gallery, in 
that tonight and tomorrow we have what we call our WESTAC 
[Western Transportation Advisory Council] conference. And 
I’d like to introduce some delegates that will be participating 
from across Western Canada. 

Maksim Mihic is the general manager of DP World (Canada) 
Ltd. is here, and I ask you to give a wave. Also Bob Fitzgerald, 
the national representative from Unifor is also here. Stan 
Hennessy and Grant Coleman representing Teamsters Canada is 
also here; and Monty Reich and Bob Chapman representing 
South West Terminal are also here. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them to our Legislative 
Assembly, representing industry from across Western Canada 
that will be discussing transportation issues over the next couple 
of days. And I look forward to meeting them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I’d like to join the 
minister in welcoming these folks to our legislature and the 
work that’s going to be happening over the next few days. It’s a 
pleasure to have you in the House, and we hope your meetings 
are fruitful. The folks from Unifor and Teamsters and others, 
the working people have an awful lot to offer in terms of insight 
of what makes our province and Western Canada work. So 
thanks so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, sitting in the west 
gallery, I’d like to introduce the Worthy Grand Matron, 
Cannida Coventry, and the Worthy Grand Patron, Ernie Butz, 
from the Saskatchewan Order of the Eastern Star. Give us a 
wave. I’d be honoured to bring greetings at the Grand Chapter 
session tomorrow. 
 
The Grand Chapter of Saskatchewan consists of all chapters 
located in the province of Saskatchewan. They have about a 
thousand members located in 17 chapters. Each chapter has a 
number of charitable projects that its members undertake within 
their communities. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
Al Kirchgessner. Al has been a . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes, I said it right. Al has been a member of the Saskatoon 
University constituency for over 38 years, Mr. Speaker. Him 
and his wife, Lana, are both successful small business owners in 
Saskatoon in investment and insurance as well as real estate. 
They’ve raised three sons and one daughter in Saskatoon. And 
Al is an avid car buff. He has a 1970 Plymouth Roadrunner and 
is a member of the Mopar association. He wanted to make sure 
I said that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s here to participate in the Full Gospel 
Business Men’s Fellowship banquet tonight that I’ll be joining 
several of my colleagues at. And I’d just like to ask all members 
if they can welcome Al to his Legislative Assembly. 
 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine sitting 
in your gallery, Mr. Dave Dennis. Dave is a retired farmer from 
Wawota who’s seen the light and decided to move to Prince 
Albert for probably a better MLA. And so I’m sure that was the 
case. 
 
Him and his wife, Elma, they retired to P.A. They have four 
children, 13 grandchildren. They’re actively involved in the 
church and their community. And, Mr. Speaker, right now 
they’re retired, but they spend their time between Yorkton and 
Brandon and Prince Albert, spending time with their 
grandchildren and being involved with the church there, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like everyone to join me to 
welcome Dave to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I would like to welcome 40 grade 
10 social studies students from Melville Comprehensive 
School. So they are accompanied by Mr. Andrew Rondeau, 
who’s also a city of Melville councillor, city councillor; and 
their principal, Mr. Brandon Needham. 
 
And if you remember yesterday, I had the privilege of 
congratulating 10 of their fellow students in the Skills Canada 
competition. So I’d like to ask all members to welcome 
Melville Comprehensive School to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to welcome everyone to their 
Assembly, and I’d like to remind our guests that we are not to 
take part in debate on the floor, which includes applause. If this 
is your first visit to the Assembly, it is also not permitted to use 
electronics in the galleries as well. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people that signed this petition are opposed to the 
Saskatchewan Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. They would like us all 
to know that STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
provides a vital service to many seniors, workers, and families 
throughout the province; and that by scrapping STC out of the 
blue and without asking permission of the owners, the 
Saskatchewan people, the Sask Party is sending a clear sign 
about how little they care about protecting our Crowns like 
SaskTel; and that STC helps to drive the economy with a parcel 
service that serves farms and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 
[13:45] 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 

the plan to scrap and the sell-off of Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Spiritwood, 
Leoville, Unity, Medstead, Krydor, Blaine Lake, Hafford, 
Radisson, Lloydminster, Borden, and Saskatoon. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care in our health care facilities, Mr. Speaker. The 
petitioners believe that this government had no idea what 
spiritual care actually means in our health care facilities, nor do 
the petitioners think that the government actually gets the extent 
of how this cut will impact people’s health and well-being. 
 
They point out that in the 2017-18 budget, the Sask Party 
eliminated funding for spiritual care which provided spiritual 
care within Saskatchewan’s health facilities; that we will be the 
only province within Canada to not fund this support for 
patients, residents, and their families seeking wellness; that the 
Sask Party hid their plan to scrap funding for spiritual care 
within health region facilities during the last year’s election; 
and that spiritual care responds to the spiritual and emotional 
needs of patients and residents and provides a compassionate 
listening presence in times of crisis. And the petitioners point 
out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and residents 
in making difficult decisions, and that spiritual care can provide 
support for all families, patients, and residents, regardless of 
faith belief, in obtaining comfort and supports. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for pastoral care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in my place to answer the call and the direction 
from the member from Prince Albert Northcote for anyone in 
the Assembly, anyone to stand up with her to fight for her city, 
the city of bridge. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a petition as it pertains to a bridge for 
Prince Albert that serves all of northern Saskatchewan, and the 
need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert and all the communities 
north of Prince Albert and all the businesses around Prince 
Albert and north of Prince Albert that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. So the people that 
have signed this petition respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask the 
Sask Party government to stop stalling, hiding behind 
rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling for 
action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular 
page, as we present day after day, page after page, week after 
week, month after month, the people that have signed this 
petition are from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this 
particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this 
petition are primarily from Prince Albert. And I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with considerable sadness 
that I rise to present this petition one last time in the House. It’s 
a petition opposed to Bill 40 and the potential 49 per cent 
Crown corporation sell-off. 
 
We know a majority of the people of Saskatchewan are opposed 
to this bill. We have people in the Assembly here today who are 
dressed in black because they know that this is going to 
fundamentally change our province. 
 
I’ll read some of the points that they’re making in this petition. 
What they’re saying is that Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new 
definition for privatization that allows this government to wind 
down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that in ’15-16 alone, Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations returned $300 million in dividends to pay for our 
schools, our hospitals, and our roads. We know those dividends 
should go to the people who own these corporations, the people 
of Saskatchewan, and not private investors. And we know that 
our Crown corporations employ thousands of Saskatchewan 
people across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that’s really disturbing about this, Mr. 
Speaker, is under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of Canada, 
Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income tax if 
not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by a government. 
And we know this proposal would allow up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized. So, Mr. 
Speaker, this is short-sighted legislation that risks sending 
millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than the people of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know this government is about to pass this bill 
under third reading today. This is our last chance to petition this 
government to change their minds and do the right thing. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

We respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan immediately stop the passage of Bill 40, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, and start protecting jobs in 
Crown corporations instead of selling them off to pay for 
Sask Party mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of people from different 
communities who are signing this final batch of petitions that 
I’m presenting today. They come from the communities of 
Neudorf, Yorkton, Churchbridge, Saskatoon, Warman, Prince 
Albert, Vanscoy, Martensville, Langham, Davidson, Dalmeny, 
Riceton, Moose Jaw, Nipawin, Loon Lake, Rapid View, 
Meadow Lake, Dorintosh, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
proud to submit these petitions today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the undersigned residents of this province 
want to bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of 
this province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth, and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction; 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly; and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan, 
within the private sector, to eliminate the wage gap 
between women and men. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
stand in my place to provide a petition to increase the funding 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

to Prince Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, due to a cut in 
funding, Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its 
door during daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to 
people in distress. Mr. Speaker, just yesterday we had some 
individuals come to the legislature and talk to us a little bit 
about mental health and how important it is to have mental 
health first aid training for individuals in our communities 
because when people are in crisis situations they need to have 
someone that’s available to help them receive the services they 
need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people who work at mobile crisis, 
they’re crisis-trained individuals. They know how to do suicide 
risk assessments and they know how to identify individuals that 
need support and provide them the appropriate support they 
need in the time of crisis. And to not have that type of support 
available during the daytime hours in Prince Albert, our 
third-largest city, is so unbelievable in a province like 
Saskatchewan. We need to have this important service for these 
individuals. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile crisis has put 
stress on Prince Albert Police Service and Victoria Hospital 
staff and other agencies who are not trained and are not 
qualified to provide the counselling and intervention services to 
clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across the province realize that this is 
something that needs to be reinstated and this service needs to 
be provided. And these petitions are signed by individuals from 
Regina and Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Those 
who’ve signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: to the fact that across Saskatchewan, licensed 
non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently; and to the 
fact that many of our licensed non-profit child care centres pay 
commercial property tax and this is something that is not done 
in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. And child 
care centres are institutions of early learning and childhood 
development and it’s appropriate that they have the same tax 
treatment as schools. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempting all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 
 

As with many of the petitions, these are being signed by 
citizens from all over the province. The pages I present today 
are signed by those residing in Saskatoon, Simmie, Kelvington, 
and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a reversal of cuts made by this 
government to the Lighthouse stabilization unit in Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. The petitioners point out that in April of 2014, the 
minister of Social Services — then minister, Mr. Speaker — 
said that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure 
off of existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” On 
the same day, the then minister of Health said, “We want to 
ensure that individuals with mental health and addictions issues 
have a safe place to stay.” And then not too long after that, Mr. 
Speaker, they cut the program. 
 
In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners 
respectfully request: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan immediately 
reverse their cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon. They call on them to revisit 
their imposition of a strict and narrow definition of 
homelessness in November of 2015 which forced the 
Lighthouse to cut back its hours of essential services in 
February of 2016; and they call on this government to take 
immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from right 
around the province. This particular page of the petition is 
signed by citizens from the good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having 
the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate partners 
amongst all Canadian provinces. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic 
violence and for many of them, the violence follows them to 
work. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct 
and indirect impacts of domestic violence, Mr. Speaker. I for 
one have had enough of hearing about another person who has 
died at the hands of their intimate partner in this province. I 
know that the provisions in this petition, which are the same as 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

the provisions in our private member’s bill, will not solve the 
entire problem, but it will provide financial stability for those 
who are trying to flee from very dangerous situations. And we 
as legislators are incumbent to do everything we can to make 
sure that this doesn’t happen again. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. Our universities and colleges contribute greatly to 
the economy of this province and to the future of students in 
this province, yet students here pay among the highest tuition in 
the entire country, and we’ve seen in recent years a precipitous 
drop in the number of students from lower income families 
attending higher education institutions. 
 
And yet in this budget we’ve seen another significant cut, 5 per 
cent cut to universities and colleges, already resulting in job 
losses from Sask Polytechnic. We are certainly concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, alongside that, with the cuts to the Saskatchewan 
Student Aid Fund and scholarship of $8.2 million — measures, 
Mr. Speaker, that will make it more difficult for families to 
afford education, for students to afford education. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Moose Jaw, Regina, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Wheelchair for a Day 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to do something I 
wasn’t able to do earlier, which is get out of my chair. Today I 
was participating in this opportunity for us to try out what it’s 
like to be in a wheelchair for a day. This program was initiated 
by the First Steps Wellness Centre, and it was a pretty serious 

challenge, Mr. Speaker. Hallways are narrow in this building. 
Doors are difficult to open. I know the member from Regina 
Lakeview had a tough time with her morning coffee. I was 
grateful to the member from Cannington for helping me with 
my tray in the cafeteria so I didn’t end up with a lap full of 
soup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the First Steps Wellness Centre is a non-profit 
organization that provides innovative services to people with 
spinal cord injuries and other neurological conditions such as 
head injury, muscular dystrophy, and multiple sclerosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are there physical challenges, but we 
were also informed of the financial challenges for people 
dependent on wheelchairs. For example, some members today 
were riding around in light and agile $5,000 chairs, while others 
got less manoeuvrable $400 chairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Steps’ programs go well beyond what’s 
currently offered through most rehabilitation programs in 
Canada through exercise and nerve stimulation, giving hope to 
people who have suffered from spinal cord injuries. As we 
further understood today, living in a wheelchair is no easy task. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the First 
Steps Wellness Centre for all the amazing work they do. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Event 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to bring 
greetings to the Holocaust Memorial Program last night at the 
Beth Jacob Synagogue. The event honoured the late Amek 
Adler who was a Holocaust survivor who dedicated his life to 
sharing his experiences of living in the Lodz and Warsaw 
ghettos, his time spent in the Radom forced-labour camps, and 
what it was like being sent to the Natzweiler and Dachau 
concentration camps. Holding on to hope of survival, he wished 
for a life where he and his three brothers could be free, and 
often dreamed of his future beyond the camps. 
 
We must educate our children and future generations of such 
tragedies so these types of events would not happen in our 
lifetime. Though we are fortunate to live in this province, we 
cannot turn our back on the history and the hardship the 
generation before us felt. 
 
I ask all the members to join me in remembering the life of 
Amek Adler, and thanking the event coordinator from the Beth 
Jacob Synagogue for this important and compelling evening. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program] began in 1976 
to help people, especially those of Aboriginal ancestry, to get 
trained and certified as teachers. At the time, there was less than 
1 per cent of Aboriginal teachers in the North, and the teacher 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

turnover rate was very high. 
 
This grassroots program was built by northerners help advance 
northern people for over 40 years. It has inspired many to tell 
their stories and be proud of their heritage and to pass that on to 
the youth of tomorrow. 
 
Since 1976, NORTEP has greatly improved the retention rate of 
teachers and created leaders across the North. Currently 
NORTEP covers tuition costs, books, and a living allowance for 
students, both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal, who have lived 
in the North for over 10 years or half their life. Since 1976 the 
school has seen more than 600 graduates receive a Bachelor of 
Education, Master’s of Education, and a Bachelor of Arts 
degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has decided 
to dismantle and blow up this program. Why scrap a program 
that’s had a positive impact on every community in northern 
Saskatchewan? With ongoing tragic events in our northern 
communities including suicides, shootings, and high dropout 
rates, this decision has made more challenges for the North. The 
North is very proud of our program. It has raised the spirits and 
inspired so many. It has brought people together in the North of 
all backgrounds, including First Nations, Métis, and 
non-Aboriginal people. 
 
Since some of you may not be aware, but the loon, the makwa, 
is a symbol of NORTEP. This loon song represents harmony, 
generosity, and peace. And it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has stolen that beautiful voice from the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to stand today in this Assembly to acknowledge 
Administrative Professionals Day. Admins, administrators, 
office assistants, and support staff are the people who work 
shoulder to shoulder with all of us to help us do our job. And 
today we should take a moment to thank them for their hard 
work. These professionals are the front-line employees in our 
offices across the country and around the province. 
 
Today my colleague from Regina Walsh Acres and I had the 
opportunity to acknowledge and celebrate Administrative 
Professionals Day. Over 400 were in attendance at the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce Take a Break Luncheon. 
 
I would like to recognize Kelly Zazula, my constituency 
assistant, and Karalee Croissant in our government caucus 
office for all the work they do to ensure that these offices run 
smoothly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us in this Chamber work with administrative 
professionals every day. And I know I speak for all of us when 
we express our thanks for all the hard work they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in applauding the 
men and women in our lives and in our offices and across the 
province that are administrative professionals and that are 

crucial to keep Saskatchewan offices running smoothly. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Battlefords North Stars Win Canalta Cup 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to rise today and salute our local Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League team, the Battlefords North Stars. The 
North Stars have just done something that has not been done 
since 1982, and that is going through three playoff rounds this 
year undefeated on their way to winning the Canalta Cup. 
 
Their playoff run began with a four-game sweep in the first 
round against Weyburn Red Wings, much to the chagrin of my 
friend and colleague from Weyburn-Big Muddy. In the second 
round they again had the brooms out as they swept the Estevan 
Bruins four games straight as well, and again to the displeasure 
of the member from Estevan. 
 
The final round was against the Flin Flon Bombers, and the 
result was the same — a four-game sweep. In this series, the 
first two games in North Battleford were easily decided with 
scores of 3-0 and 5-1. In Flin Flon, the games were closer, with 
scores of 2-1 and 6-5, but the wins were enough to sweep the 
series and hoist the Canalta Cup. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s on to 
Penticton, British Columbia, where the competition we know 
will be tough with championship teams representing Manitoba, 
Alberta, British Columbia, and host Penticton. However we 
know our team, under the guidance of Coach Nate Bedford, will 
continue with their great work ethic and the entertaining style of 
play that we all enjoyed over the past winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I speak for everyone in The Battlefords in 
thanking the North Stars for a great year of entertaining hockey, 
and congratulate them on winning the Canalta Cup with 12 
straight wins. I would also ask all members to join with me in 
wishing them great success at the Western Canada Cup as they 
continue on their journey to compete in the Royal Bank Cup in 
Cobourg, Ontario, and hopefully being crowned the Canadian 
champions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Talk With Our Kids About Money Day 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 
April 26th, is Talk With Our Kids About Money Day. Financial 
responsibility does not come easy for all, and I believe that 
starting this conversation at an early age can truly be beneficial 
for personal and professional growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of attending the Money Fair on 
April 12th at Gladys McDonald School here in Regina, where I 
was delighted to bring greetings to this event and serve as a 
judge for the projects. Projects on display at the event included 
topics of world currency, the odds in gambling, and the most 
cost-effective extracurricular to be involved in. I commend the 
students for the time and effort that went into all the projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are the workforce of tomorrow. The financial 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

education students will receive such as personal finance or 
career and work exploration will greatly benefit the individual, 
the community, and the province as a whole. Preparing our 
youth for the future, while having open conversations about 
financial stability, will continue to make Saskatchewan strong, 
and a great place for younger generations to stay and raise a 
family, as well as having a promising career. 
 
Commitments by our government for opportunity and education 
on financial literacy is being felt throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this day, 
and thank the organizers of the Money Fair for their dedication 
to tomorrow’s leaders of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Combatting Ovarian Cancer 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, cancer is a disease that has 
touched many families across our province of Saskatchewan, 
and it was nine years ago this past March that our family 
experienced the loss of my mother-in-law to ovarian cancer. 
 
Last night, my wife and I were pleased to attend, along with 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, the Ladyballs Show & 
Tell at the Conexus Arts Centre. Mr. Speaker, Ladyballs is 
Ovarian Cancer Canada’s annual event to build awareness and 
raise critical funds for women’s most fatal cancer. This year’s 
Ladyballs Show & Tell featured the live comedy performance, 
Menopause The Musical. And, Mr. Speaker, what a show it 
was, I must say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the fantastic live theatre, performing 
prior and after the main performance was 17-year-old Caly 
Bevier who was a semi-finalist from the hit show America’s 
Got Talent. Mr. Speaker, more moving than Caly’s fantastic 
vocal performance was her story. You see, two years ago Caly 
was diagnosed with stage 3 ovarian cancer and is now a proud 
cancer survivor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ovarian cancer is known as a silent killer due to 
the lack of symptoms, resulting in 85 per cent of cases having a 
late diagnosis. Each and every day, five Canadians are killed 
from ovarian cancer. In Saskatchewan just this year, Mr. 
Speaker, 80 women will be diagnosed and 55 will succumb to 
that diagnosis. 
 
I want to thank Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor for 
attending and showing her support. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the organizing committee, Ovarian Cancer Canada, and 
each of the ovarian cancer survivors that attended last night and 
inspired the rest of us to raise awareness and funds for this very 
serious disease that impacts so many families across the 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day with the Sask 
Party’s growing GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal, 

they try to pass the buck. Let me remind the Premier that he’s 
been the Premier of Saskatchewan for nearly a decade and it 
was the Sask Party that orchestrated a deal that ripped off nuns, 
landowners, and taxpayers, put $11 million in two Sask Party 
supporters’ pockets, and cost all Saskatchewan people $25 
million. Now this week it’s been exposed that they also gave 
more than double that amount of land to CP [Canadian Pacific] 
Rail, 300 acres for free. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier might say here that the previous 
government had a plan for the Regina region gateway and 
corridor project. They did. But how can the Premier, who’s in a 
position of trust, honestly say and stand by false claims that the 
Sask Party’s 300-acre giveaway to CP was organized by the 
previous government? How can he not admit that they took this 
concept and turned it into a scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can say 
that, we can say that because it’s true. Because right here, Mr. 
Speaker, is a briefing note from 2007 when the member who is 
now heckling, who’s beaking from his seat, the Deputy Leader 
of the NDP was the minister of Highways. 
 
[14:15] 
 
It’s his briefing note, Mr. Speaker, and in this note on page 2 — 
and we’ll share it with anybody that wants to see it — they 
canvassed the reasons why it was important for CP’s tracks to 
move out of the city of Regina and to an intermodal hub, as it 
was called, now the Global Transportation Hub. They 
canvassed the reasons. And then they say this, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s the bullet: in April the province approved — that’s the 
NDP government — approved $33 million be invested in that 
project, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he’s 
saying, in that project. Yes, that project, it includes the 
relocation of the tracks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact we know, in fact we know, Mr. Speaker, that in order to 
get that project working they needed, they, the NDP, needed to 
have CP out at the Global Transportation Hub. It doesn’t make 
sense to have an inland port without CP out at the hub. They 
knew that, Mr. Speaker. They approved $33 million. And here’s 
what John Nilson, the former leader of the opposition, said in 
March 5, 2013: “. . . when the New Democrats were still 
government, there were initial amounts set aside that would 
allow this project to go ahead [Mr. Speaker] . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is mischaracterizing the notes that he has before 
him, and he’s making a mockery of his very office, Mr. 
Speaker. The election was in 2007. They signed this 300-acre 
giveaway to the railway giant in 2009. Can the Premier explain 
his lines? How did the previous government possibly 
orchestrate this backroom 300-acre giveaway scandal two full 
years before the Sask Party formed government? Take some 
responsibility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the note that I’m reading 
from, Mr. Speaker . . . And by the way, I can inform members 
opposite that there are cabinet documents from when the NDP 
was in power. He might want to ask the Deputy Leader, who 
was then the Highways minister, and ask him, what were in 
those cabinet documents approved by the former government, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
In the note that I just read from, this entire second page has to 
do with Canadian Pacific Railway . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the answer. The 
answer doesn’t fit with their narrative. The whole second page 
is about Canadian Pacific Railway, Regina intermodal facility, 
currently located in the downtown area of the city. 
 
The memo is about relocating it, Mr. Speaker. It speaks to the 
construction of a modern intermodal facility, not yet physically 
viable in the downtown location, talks about valuable 
downtown property that would be a magnet for investment if 
this were moved. Talks about this, Mr. Speaker: “Canadian 
Pacific is unable to expand its track infrastructure in the city to 
facilitate a more efficient movement of trains.” And then, Mr. 
Speaker, later in the note it says, in order to facilitate the project 
and the relocation of the tracks. Quite clearly that’s what this 
means. The NDP approved $33 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we looked . . . We don’t think this was a bad decision. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, when we actually exercised the plan to 
establish the GTH, to have CP moved, we saved, Mr. Speaker, a 
lot of money because we didn’t pay anywhere near $33 million 
that the NDP were prepared to pay in the spring of 2007. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a bunch of nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
This $50 million giveaway happened two years after the Sask 
Party came into office. And speaking of giveaways and spin and 
of trust, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party of course is ramming 
forward with their damaging Bill 40. It fundamentally changes 
the core principles of public ownership of our Crowns that have 
been foundational to Saskatchewan for generations. 
 
Our Crowns like SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and on and 
on have been built by and for generations of Saskatchewan 
people. They’re service-providing, money-making, job-creating 
innovators that have supported and grown our province for 
decades, and they’re owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Rightly, people across this province are concerned that it’s all at 
risk with this government’s Bill 40. Of course during that 
election, the Premier pledged to Saskatchewan people, hand 
over heart, that the Crowns weren’t for sale. He wasn’t straight 
to Saskatchewan people and he has no mandate for this bill. 
Why does this Premier not have the backbone and the decency 
to take his desperate sell-off of our Crown corporations to 
Saskatchewan people for a vote? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 
member for the question. Bill 40 seeks to actually define what 

privatization is. The previous government didn’t do that and, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re using a World Bank definition of 
privatization. What this bill will do, I would submit to the 
House, is protect these Crowns in perpetuity from us ever losing 
control. Control is 50 per cent plus one share, if you will, if you 
want to use that vernacular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill prescribes that the Government of Saskatchewan can 
seek partners, but partners could never control the company. 
Partners could never own a controlling interest in the party. 
That would rest with the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing that that might enable us to do is allow 
for major government investment institutions like the Auto 
Fund or Workers’ Compensation to invest right here at home. 
Right now those institutions, the Auto Fund and WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board], they make investments, in 
utilities perhaps even, in other parts of the country. They make 
investments in markets in other parts of the country. What they 
can’t do, Mr. Speaker, is invest in our own Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if SaskPower wants to help repair the 
infrastructure deficit left behind by members opposite when 
they were the government, it only has one choice, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s to finance. That’s to borrow. That’s to get debentures, 
supported by the Ministry of Finance, to finance infrastructure 
projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have created in Bill 40 is the opportunity 
for a group like the Auto Fund or Workers’ Compensation or 
even teachers’ pensions to invest potentially in SaskPower, a 
minority position, so that it can continue to provide service on 
the strength of stronger infrastructure and give our own 
government institutional investment agencies the chance to 
invest right here at home. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What’s clear is that that Premier has 
broken his word and he’s betraying Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. What they’re also redefining would be ministerial 
responsibility, accountability, Mr. Speaker, by their actions day 
after day. 
 
You know, we have 40,000 people looking for work in our 
province. Over five years, the Sask Party’s doubled the debt. 
They’re hiking taxes on Saskatchewan families and businesses 
by a billion dollars. They’re cutting funds in our cities and our 
towns. They’re cutting in our kids’ classrooms. And they’re 
embroiled in scandal after scandal. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the highest number of reported cases of 
domestic violence. And there’s a growing suicide crisis in our 
North that’s robbing young people of their lives and 
communities of hope. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, can the Premier explain why, with all these 
important issues facing the people of Saskatchewan, how it is 
that cobbling together some so-called new definition of 
privatization is a priority for the Sask Party? He’s broken his 
word. People know his real motivation. Why won’t he do the 
right thing and finally scrap Bill 40 and his sell-off scheme of 
our Crown corporations? 
 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
correct the Leader of the Opposition’s preamble. The preamble 
is just full of incorrect information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we took office in 2007, members opposite 
presided over the worst job creation record in the country. We 
now have, even through a time of low commodity prices, we 
now have the second-best job creation record in the entire 
Dominion of Canada: 60,000 more jobs today in the province of 
Saskatchewan than when members opposite had formed the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talked about taxes in his preamble. Even after 
the changes in this budget, we will have lower income taxes, 
lower overall taxes, Mr. Speaker, in terms of income and sales 
tax for families at every single income level, than we did under 
members opposite. Even after this time of some deficit 
financing to get through low commodity prices, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll have 15 per cent less operating debt. We inherited a $6 
billion big orange operating credit card from members opposite, 
and we’ve taken the opportunity over these last years to reduce 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member also indicated education funding. 
Even in terms of the challenge of this budget, overall operating 
funding for education is up significantly over the rate of 
inflation. It’s not down. It’s up. The same is true for health care 
funding, Mr. Speaker. These have all been the dividends of 
growth in this province, part of the record of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and the budget that the member referenced is 
about continuing that economic strength, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill 40 in particular is going to allow us to see Crowns 
strengthen, with new partners perhaps, with job creation in the 
city of Regina and around the province. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
looking forward to what those Crown corporations are going to 
do within Saskatchewan and right across the country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, plain and simple, why 
doesn’t the Premier of Saskatchewan have the decency or the 
backbone to let Saskatchewan people vote on his Crown sell-off 
scheme? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because it’s not a sell-off. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of that Premier is 
absolutely shameful. Yesterday the Sask Party admitted they 
cooked up this definition by cutting and pasting lines from a 
composite document from the World Bank and then adding 
some more sections to the bottom. Mr. Speaker, on the first 
page of that very document, it says that it’s not intended to be a 
model law. Mr. Speaker, I’m not even joking about this. 
 
Yesterday the minister said he was ready and excited for that 

committee, but when we asked for clarity from him, he had 
none to give. Mr. Speaker, will he admit the goals of this 
legislation are still ill defined, that far too little preparation was 
put into its drafting, and will he withdraw it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What’s ill 
defined, Mr. Speaker, is the word “privatize.” Mr. Speaker, 
when this legislation was tabled by the government when they 
were on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, they had every 
opportunity to define it, Mr. Speaker. And I think they owe an 
explanation to the people of Saskatchewan. I think they owe an 
explanation to the people of Saskatchewan why they didn’t do 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act simply clarifies that word, Mr. Speaker. Legislation 
without clarity is useless legislation, Mr. Speaker, and so we’re 
simply seeking clarity with respect to the particular word that’s 
used in that legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we mentioned in committee yesterday, I believe that the 
statement that was made, it was we used that document, the 
World Bank document, as a guideline to draft that definition. 
No one from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, has ever 
offered a definition for the word “privatize” when they were in 
government nor in opposition. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, 
they stand in the House every day, they stand in the House 
every day, Mr. Speaker, and they talk about what kind of 
opportunities, expanding partnerships for the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, but never have they stood and 
defined the word. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, if this is how they draft all of 
their legislation, it’s no wonder they’re hurting Saskatchewan 
people so badly. 
 
There has never been a fire in this building. There may be one 
someday, but it’s impossible to predict when and where one 
will start. Still, engineers and professionals considered 
hypotheticals. They considered hypothetical strategies for 
keeping people safe, and consequences. After the analysis, they 
developed signs and emergency lights throughout this building 
that would help us escape a fire. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted that they have not even 
looked into protecting the rights of Saskatchewan people, the 
shareholders of our Crowns, if 49 per cent of one is sold. Any 
legislator worth their salt would consider and evaluate the 
consequences of the laws they are considering before proposing 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister stand there and defend such 
reckless drafting of law? How can he be so arrogant about his 
failure to protect Saskatchewan people from having their 
Crowns go up in flames? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I find that question to be 
absolutely remarkable. They talk about reckless drafting of 
legislation. Perhaps they should look in the mirror and ask 
themselves why they were reckless when they drafted the 
legislation in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I explained in committee last night, Mr. 
Speaker, any potential . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I explained in committee last night, any one, any particular 
transaction, any particular offer, any particular expression of 
interest can take any one of hundreds and hundreds of different 
forms, Mr. Speaker. It would be impossible to do an analysis on 
every possible scenario that may come up with respect to any 
particular offer or any particular expression of interest, Mr. 
Speaker. That will be done, Mr. Speaker, if and when any kind 
of a transaction comes forward that a Crown corporation wishes 
to consider. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look at things like return on investment. 
We’ll look at things like jobs. We’ll look at things about 
expanding the Crowns, expanding the return to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, protecting the Crown corporation for the benefit 
of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
people of Saskatchewan can expect. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, they didn’t do their homework 
on Bill 40, so we wondered about their scheme to scrap and sell 
off STC. So we sent an FOI [freedom of information] for all 
communications STC had with the Ministry of Health, Social 
Services, Agriculture, and the Economy to judge the impacts of 
selling off STC. But in the last year there have been no emails 
between STC and any of these ministries, not even since they 
announced they were selling off STC. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have no plan. So how can they scrap and sell 
off STC if they haven’t even looked into what the true costs 
will be for Saskatchewan residents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member opposite for that question, Mr. Speaker. We do 
actually, on this side of the House we actually talk to one 
another. We don’t need to just email, just so you’re aware of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty easy to look at the numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, and determine what is happening at STC. Just in the 
last year alone, just in the last year alone, Mr. Speaker, there 
was 18 fewer rides. Mr. Speaker, it’s down 35 per cent rides 
since 2012, Mr. Speaker. That subsidy, that subsidy, Mr. 

Speaker, has gone from $25 all the way up to $94, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s just ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should remind the member opposite that when 
they were in power they looked at actually closing routes, and 
they looked at . . . The minister at the time, the minister at the 
time, Mr. Speaker, when the subsidy was only $5.52 said they 
were unsustainable, and yet at $94 they’re saying it is 
sustainable. But when they were looking at it, Mr. Speaker, it 
was unsustainable at $5, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a cute answer to hear that 
you speak amongst yourselves, but it would be better to have 
you speak to the people who’ll actually be affected by these 
cuts. There hasn’t been a minute given to considering the 
consequences. 
 
Through that same freedom of information request we 
discovered that — and this will come as no surprise — 
eliminating STC hurts the province’s most vulnerable people. 
Seventy-two per cent of all STC riders had a household income 
of less than $45,000 a year. Thirty-eight per cent of those riders 
had a household income of less than $20,000 a year. Last night 
the Minister of Social Services confirmed that the increase in 
budget for Social Services social assistance does not mean 
people are getting more money; in fact, many will be getting 
less. No more money, but life is going to be far more costly. 
 
The Minister for STC has suggested that riders will just have to 
figure it out. Well I think he needs to figure out that many 
people have no other options. This sell-off hurts those in the 
greatest need, compounding the damage from other cuts. How 
can the minister plow ahead with shutting down STC without 
considering the effects on the people of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. This is not a sell-off, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
wind-down of STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know it’s funny how, Mr. Speaker, how . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having difficulties hearing the minister. I 
would ask all members to please be respectful and listen to the 
response. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s funny how they were shutting down routes at $5.52, you 
know, per ride, Mr. Speaker. And they didn’t seem to do all that 
analysis on how it affected those people on the routes that they 
did close, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other avenues that people are taking and 
will use. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been numerous people 
announce in the media, Mr. Speaker, that they are considering 
taking on routes and applying to the Highway Traffic Board to 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

replace some routes, Mr. Speaker. And so maybe that’s how 
those people will get to their appointments, Mr. Speaker. So 
anyway, those routes . . . 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I should take this note to remind, from April 
13th, Mr. Speaker, when I was asked a question by the House 
Leader on the staff at STC, they were not given the opportunity 
to be updated, Mr. Speaker, that they were promised by the 
13th. Well they should know that at 8:15 a.m. on the 13th of 
April that all the staff were notified with communication, Mr. 
Speaker, as to whereabouts the next process was going, Mr. 
Speaker. Just to clarify it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, semantics. Wind-down or 
sell-off, it still has the same negative effect on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three out of every four seniors using STC are low 
income. If the Sask Party had done their homework, they would 
know who they were hurting with their short-sighted sell-off 
scheme. STC documents show seniors’ ridership is the highest 
it’s been in five years; 76 per cent are women and 74 per cent 
are low income. STC was being used more and more each year 
by seniors to get to medical appointments, to access services 
unavailable in rural communities. Often STC was, is, the only 
option for public transportation. And now we see this cut will 
hit low-income and vulnerable seniors the hardest. How can this 
minister justify ripping away such a vital support from seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, just last year alone we’re 
down 18,000 rides on STC, Mr. Speaker. And so no doubt, Mr. 
Speaker, that those numbers would show as rising, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re down 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker, since 2012. That subsidy 
of $94 — $94, Mr. Speaker — per ride is just unsustainable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should remind them of this quote from the Hon. 
Eldon Lautermilch who was the minister of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. And I quote, “The 
problem being the amount of money that that corporation [STC] 
has been losing in the recent past has been what we believe to 
be not sustainable.” Mr. Speaker, not sustainable, and that is at 
$5.52 per ride, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Supports for Seniors 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has stood in this 
House time and time again declaring the Sask Party’s support 
for seniors, but the Sask Party’s attacks speak louder than those 
words. This budget had nothing new for seniors except fee 
hikes for long-term care and a broken campaign promise to 
provide seniors with some tax relief. 
 

Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism chronicled the ways this 
budget hurts and leaves seniors behind. Mr. Speaker, seniors 
with fixed incomes are not protected from the long-term care 
fee increases or cuts to chiropractic, hearing, or podiatry 
services. Hiking PST [provincial sales tax] on insurance 
premiums and basic goods is even harder to manage for seniors 
with low and fixed incomes. How can the minister justify these 
massive cuts to programs and supports that are so vital to the 
health and well-being of our seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we had some difficult 
decisions to make in this budget. The member opposite has 
covered a wide range of different programs. I’ll try and focus on 
the key ones that I believe she mentioned. The long-term care 
fee increases, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to remember that only 
4 per cent of long-term care residents, the very highest 
income . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, only 4 per cent of those 
residents will see the maximum increase. Approximately 50 per 
cent, the lower income ones that the member opposite was 
referring to, will see no increase at all, Mr. Speaker. And the 
ones that do, on average it’s going to be about $44 a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to recognize that we continue 
to subsidize long-term care fees, Mr. Speaker, by the tune of 
about 83 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it a priority. 
We’re going to continue to make it a priority. And the whole 
premise of the question about not caring about seniors, Mr. 
Speaker, simply is wrong. For example, our government tripled 
the seniors’ income plan since 2007, Mr. Speaker, something 
the NDP never did. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016, a 
bilingual bill without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive considerations in Committee of the 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

Whole on Bill 40 and that the bill now be read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister to . . . may 
proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 40 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question?  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Guess that’s predictable. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a day that should not have come before this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, the House Leader can heckle all he 
wants and chirp from his seat. Other members can do what they 
want. But this is a last-minute appeal for some decency to the 
people of Saskatchewan, for some common sense to prevail, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s an incredible betrayal that we see from this Sask Party and 
from that Premier as it relates to Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, the 
sell-off scheme of the Sask Party. There’s an opportunity here 
today. This is a government that’s time and time again failed to 
do the right thing, to scrap this legislation that attacks our 
Crown corporations. But there’s a chance that members 
opposite in the coming proceeding minutes here could decide to 
do that. 
 
And short of that, there’s a chance for members opposite — for 
backbenchers or for cabinet ministers that I suspect have some 
other feelings about this piece of legislation — to do the right 
thing. There’s not much that a bunch of them do over there, Mr. 
Speaker, and if there’s one thing that they can do in this term 
for their constituents and that being to stand up for our Crown 
corporations and the future of our Crown corporations, that’d be 
a worthy . . . This is an incredible betrayal of Saskatchewan 
people by this Premier and by the Sask Party. And this bill is 
about one thing; it’s about full and total control of our Crown 
corporations and the risk of them being handed off and 
privatized to private interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our team has been rallying with Saskatchewan people, reaching 
out, travelling the entire province. And I commend the 
thousands upon thousands of people in communities across the 
province — and some that have joined us here today — for 
doing the right thing amidst incredible, challenging odds, 
standing up and fighting back, Mr. Speaker. And people all 
across our province are feeling deceived and for good reason. 
This is a Premier that has not kept his word. 
 
And you know, we have a Sask Party in this point in time, 
cash-strapped as they are, looking for a quick buck, taking away 

something that gives all of our province strength for today and 
for future generations and the next generation, Mr. Speaker. 
Our Crowns are job-creating, money-making innovators. 
They’re world-class companies proudly built by and for 
generations of Saskatchewan people. They provide thousands 
and thousands of good mortgage-paying jobs, local jobs here in 
Saskatchewan that are all placed at risk, and they have a huge 
economic impact. The hundreds of companies all across 
Saskatchewan, the thousands of indirect jobs related to the 
supply chains, Mr. Speaker, all being placed at risk. 
 
Also being placed at risk are the costs and the rates of course 
and aim, through our Crowns, just to keep rates affordable for 
Saskatchewan people. The consequence of privatization, time 
and time again, is massive increases for Saskatchewan people. 
And we’re putting at risk and threatening the very service that 
Saskatchewan people count on. We have a rural, remote, a vast 
province, Mr. Speaker, and our Crowns are essential to 
connecting Saskatchewan people and communities to the 
services they need to count on, Mr. Speaker, and this 
government’s taking that all away in one fell swoop with 
legislation like this. 
 
You know, this bill as I’ve said is a betrayal to Saskatchewan 
people, and its intent is clear. We hear all sorts of nonsense 
from those on the other side about why they’re defining 
so-called privatization, Mr. Speaker. Privatization is 
privatization is privatization. There hasn’t been a stitch of 
analysis done on this legislation. 
 
And to be honest, the weak defence of this government has 
been absolutely torn apart by our critics in committee, as well 
by the people of Saskatchewan in communities all across our 
province. They haven’t even done a basic assessment of 
economic impacts, Mr. Speaker, something pretty essential 
when you look at the power of our Crown corporations in being 
an equalizer and a balancer within the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
[14:45] 
 
You know, we had our committee members, our critics, put 
hour after hour after hour in committee, pushing this 
government for answers. They pushed for officials from our 
Crown corporations to come before committee. And if you can 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party didn’t even have the 
decency to allow those officials to come before committee to 
answer very basic questions to the people of Saskatchewan for 
whom are the shareholders of these Crown corporations. They 
blocked that. 
 
This is nothing short of irresponsible. It’s short-sighted. And 
there’s impacts, real impacts, as I say: the loss of jobs, the 
economic hit, the rates, the costs that will be borne through 
Saskatchewan people, the service that all people in our province 
need to count on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But also because of this reckless definition, crafted up on 
napkins with some right wingers over there, Mr. Speaker, and 
then pretending somehow that this is all defined through the 
World Bank, Mr. Speaker . . . It just doesn’t hold water. In fact 
as you go through committee, it was found that this definition, I 
think that it was the Justice minister here yesterday said that, 
“It’s actually not a definition, but the World Bank just said that 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2017 

this is a list of possible approaches.” 
 
You know this definition has never been applied to an 
interpretation Act anywhere else in our country, in Canada, or 
even in the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. So for that minister 
and for this Premier to pretend somehow that this is right and 
common is . . . well if I call it again what I could, Mr. Speaker, 
it might put me in a compromising position once again on this 
floor. 
 
This bill, by way of opening up the privatization of our Crown 
corporations, as soon as they go beyond 10 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re then sending dollars to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. So 
you have a government that’s of course selling out 
Saskatchewan people by way of jobs, rates, and service, by way 
of our economy. But they’re also sending millions and millions 
of dollars to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, through taxation, through 
federal taxation that would apply then to our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. But they’re also sending the millions 
and the dividends and the benefits to Bay Street and to Wall 
Street and to private investors, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
Saskatchewan people, the shareholders of our Crown 
corporations. 
 
And you know, we know that this government’s pretty tight 
with the wealthy and the well connected, Mr. Speaker, around 
the world and certainly in Saskatchewan. That seems to be who 
pulls this government’s strings, Mr. Speaker. But when we look 
at the reality for Saskatchewan people, this is one company — 
these Crown corporations, all of these companies — that 
Saskatchewan people own a share in. It is absolutely wrong for 
one government at one time to come in and to take that from all 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, to take that from young 
kids in Ile-a-la-Crosse or in Riversdale or in the heart of Moose 
Jaw or anywhere across this province, Mr. Speaker. This is one 
thing we all own. It’s about equity. It’s about equality. It’s 
about fairness. And it’s being taken away by this government. 
 
And again, time and time again, if this was the plan — as we 
see it was — from the Sask Party, there’s a thing about being 
straight with Saskatchewan people. And all across rural 
Saskatchewan and in other parts of the province, from many 
people who tell me that they voted for the Sask Party, they’re 
feeling deceived, Mr. Speaker, because they believed the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, and they believed their Sask Party 
candidates and Sask Party MLAs when they said our Crowns 
are not for sale. When they took that pledge to Saskatchewan 
people and looked Saskatchewan people in their eyes and said 
our Crowns are not for sale, they believed them. They took 
them at their word. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We 
should be able to do that in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Sask Party, this Premier, all of those ministers opposite 
have broken their word, and they’re betraying Saskatchewan 
people. They’re selling out the interests of the very people of 
this province. They have no mandate, no mandate. 
 
So if this plan, as deficit and damaging as it is, if this is the plan 
of the Sask Party, then have the decency and the backbone to 
take it to Saskatchewan people. And I issue a challenge to 
members opposite: if they want to prepare towards the next 
election, if this is the old school, right wing approach that they 
want to take to Saskatchewan people that sells out the very 

interests of this province, that sells out the future interests of 
many across this province, then take it to them. And if they 
think somehow that they need to act before that, Mr. Speaker, 
then have the integrity, have the backbone, have the decency to 
take it to Saskatchewan people and know that Saskatchewan 
New Democrats, along with Saskatchewan people, will rise up, 
fight back every step of the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people don’t want this bill. Eighty per cent of 
Saskatchewan people think it’s nonsense and believe it’s 
short-sighted and wrong, Mr. Speaker. You know, we’ve been 
out rallying in communities all across Saskatchewan, in rural 
communities, and in smaller communities and our cities. We’ve 
had teams out door knocking on this very issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I found it telling even last week . . . Of course we’ve 
been active all over the province on this, but I was out for the 
second time in the Finance minister’s riding last week, during 
the Easter break from this Assembly, with a team of MLAs, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I went door to door, Mr. Speaker, I did not find 
a single person, not a single person who would not sign the 
petition to stop the Sask Party sell-off of our Crown 
corporations. You know, Mr. Speaker, I looked long and hard, 
long and hard, up and down the streets of Uplands in the 
Finance minister’s riding, and I couldn’t find a single person 
who wouldn’t sign the petition, Mr. Speaker. What I found were 
people who were upset, who were feeling deceived, who were 
feeling betrayed, and who know very well that this government 
has worn out their welcome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan people know that when our Crowns 
are gone, they’re gone. That’s why they’re rising up. That’s 
why they’re fighting back. To all the people that work in our 
Crown corporations, for generations, for all the builders of our 
Crowns corporations, I say thank you. I say don’t give up hope. 
Your work is important. It’s valued. This is one battle. 
 
I hope that in the minutes proceeding here that we see some 
decency by members opposite and that members will vote their 
conscience and vote against this legislation. I hope the Premier 
will finally have a revelation that causes him to let common 
sense and decency prevail and to pull this bill, Mr. Speaker. But 
short of that, know to Saskatchewan people, those that built 
these corporations, those that depend on them, those that work 
in them, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan New Democrats will 
be vigilant and fight every step of the way. 
 
You know, this bill opens up a wide opportunity for this 
government that’s cash-strapped and not being straight with 
people on front after front and that are showing their real 
colours to really push forward privatization. That being said, we 
can’t give up the fight. 
 
My hope is that this vote doesn’t come to a head right now. If it 
does come to a head right now, I hope there’s some decency 
from members opposite because I can tell you that there’s 
people in Canora, Preeceville that are watching today. There’s 
members in Indian Head-Milestone that are watching. There’s 
people in Moosomin that are watching here right now. There’s 
members in Estevan. I can go row by row by row, seat by seat 
by seat, and Saskatchewan people corner to corner in this 
province see this as for what it is — a betrayal that sells out the 
future for the next generation, Mr. Speaker. 



April 26, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

This bill’s reckless, short-sighted. Of course this government 
wasn’t straight, and they have no mandate. And really all that 
appears now is that we have a government that’s scrambling, 
trying to, you know, basically cover up for actually years of 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, bad deals signed, Mr. 
Speaker, projects that have gone off the rails. But it’s not 
Saskatchewan people who should be paying the price. 
 
And I hear, you know, the member from Moose Jaw, who we 
hear nothing from in this Assembly because he fails to stand up 
for members in Moose Jaw day after day, start to yip from his 
seat here right now, Mr. Speaker. I challenge him to have some 
backbone and decency here today and vote down that 
legislation. Because I stood, I stood along with members here 
and hundreds of people in Moose Jaw in front of his office, Mr. 
Speaker, as they came out to speak to their MLA, but of course 
that member was nowhere to be found, Mr. Speaker, 
missing . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members on both sides of this 
Assembly . . . Order. The member from Saskatoon Centre 
would please come to order when I’m on my feet. That would 
be much appreciated. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Saskatchewan people will make sure 
and we will make sure, along with Saskatchewan people and 
communities, that if this government wants to continue to 
proceed with this damaging sell-off, we will make sure that 
SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy — the list goes on — are here 
one heck of a lot longer than that Sask Party government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I make one last appeal to all members in this House: this bill 
should be scrapped. They have no mandate. They’ve broken 
their word, and they’ve broken trust with Saskatchewan people. 
And it sells out people in this province. It hurts our economy. It 
threatens jobs. It hikes rates and costs for people all across the 
province. It threatens services, and it forfeits hundreds of 
millions of dollars a year that are utilized for education and 
health care and services across our province. 
 
This is a government that never ran on this. They ran actually 
with a promise not to be doing this right now. The right thing to 
do would be to let some common sense and some decency 
prevail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll I guess see how things proceed. I hope this 
bill is finally pulled and finally scrapped. But let it be recorded, 
Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan New Democrats, if this bill is 
brought forward for a vote right now, will be standing with all 
of Saskatchewan and the thousands that we’ve met with, the 
thousands that depend on our Crown corporations, to vote 
against this damaging sell-off of our Crown corporations. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the third 
reading of Bill No. 40. Those in favour of the motion say yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the yes has it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:56 until 14:59.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading of Bill 40. All those in favour of the motion please 
stand. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Ross 
Weekes Brkich Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 48; those 
opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this very 
busy day I wanted to wish you personally a happy birthday and 
thank you for presiding, and I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:02.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2305 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2305 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2305 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2305 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2306 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2306 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2306 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2306 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2306 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2307 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2307 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2307 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2307 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2307 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2308 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2308 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2308 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2308 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2309 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2309 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2309 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2310 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Wheelchair for a Day 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2310 
 Holocaust Memorial Event 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2310 
 Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2310 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2311 
 Battlefords North Stars Win Canalta Cup 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2311 
 Talk With Our Kids About Money Day 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2311 
 Combatting Ovarian Cancer 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2312 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2312 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2312 
 Crown Corporations and Intent of Bill 40 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2313 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2313 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2314 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2314 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2315 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2315 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2315 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2315 
 Supports for Seniors 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


