






















































Hansard: October 31, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2709 
 October 31, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, we will 
resume with the debate on the address in reply to the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t 
expecting applause like that because actually when I’d just quit 
talking there, just when we got shut down at 5 o’clock, 
everybody said that was the best speech I’d ever made. They 
thought I was done. So anyway, Mr. Speaker, now I’m back up 
again. 
 
I would like to start, Mr. Speaker, of course as in tradition, by 
thanking a lot of the people who work around me and work 
with me and basically do the majority of the work. First off I 
would like thank to my constituency assistants, Cindy Warner 
and Shelley Meyer. They do fantastic work back in our office, 
keep me on track, and today they were very busy handing out 
chocolate bars. We had a lot of Halloweeners there today. And I 
had 140-some chocolate bars — and I always get the full-size 
chocolate bars — and they basically they ran out. So that was a 
good day for the Halloweeners in Carrot River. So I want to 
really thank them. 
 
And of course I want to thank my wife and my children for 
supporting me all these . . . I guess it’s getting to be quite a few 
years. Now it’s not near as many years as the member from 
Cannington because actually the topsoil has gained a couple of 
inches since he got in. But I’ve been in here for quite a while, 
so it’s a great place to be. And I was talking to, when I talked to 
the new member from Saskatoon Fairview, I think she’ll find it 
a very rewarding time here, although I will hope that her time’s 
going to be rather short. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the other thing, the other person I want to 
really thank is our Premier. You know, our Premier has been 
there, he was in there when I first was elected in 2007, and I 
certainly give him a lot of credit for all the things he has done 
for this province. He has put Saskatchewan on the map, not just 
in Canada, not just in North America, but basically throughout 
the whole world. 
 
Saskatchewan has become a place . . . It used to be when you 

went down to the States and you said you were from 
Saskatchewan, nobody had a clue where you were even talking 
about or whether you were even speaking the English language. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you can go down to the States, you can go 
to Ontario, you can go down to Nova Scotia and everybody 
knows about Saskatchewan. I guess that kind of shows that we 
have the most popular premier in all of Canada. 
 
He’s done a great job. I certainly give him a lot of credit. I 
never realized until I was actually in here how hard the job of 
the Premier and the cabinet ministers are. That is a tough job. 
And I know there’s former cabinet ministers on the other side 
too, and I think everybody will tell you that is a tough job. And 
contrary to what people think, I don’t think the pay really 
covers it for the job that these people do day in and day out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to get on to the Speech from the Throne, 
and of course I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne 
and won’t be supporting the amendment, much to the 
disappointment of the members across the way, but that’s one 
of those things. 
 
You know, this is a very, very ambitious Speech from the 
Throne. It covered a lot of things on moving this province 
forward. Really what we’ve been trying to do now for the past 
10 years is to try and move the province forward. 
 
We don’t want to go back to the days of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party], you know, when we were losing people in 
droves. Every time that kids were graduating, they were moving 
to other provinces to get a job. Of course, you know, mainly 
going to Alberta was one of the main ones where they had a 
Conservative government, but then it turned around. Now we’re 
getting all those people from Alberta moving back now that 
they have an NDP government over in Alberta. And we 
certainly hope to keep this government on track here, keep on 
going and inviting all of those people to come back. 
 
Because you know, when you take a look at it, and I’ve said this 
many a time, the reason I got into politics was because of my 
children. I wanted to see, I wanted to see my children grow up 
and prosper and to be able to live, as most parents do, but to be 
able to live in Saskatchewan, so eventually — and I can say 
this, and I hope the kids are listening — eventually when I 
become a grandparent I don’t have to go that far to see my 
grandkids or they don’t have to go to far to come home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank all the good people of the 
Carrot River Valley who have elected me now for three times 
and put their faith in me to come in here and bring their 
concerns forward. And I just wanted to bring up just a few 
things that have gone on in Carrot River Valley over the years, 
you know, since we have formed government — just a few 
odds and ends, like revenue sharing. 
 
You know, Tisdale’s revenue sharing increased from $304,805 
in 2007 to $690,219 in ’17-18. That’s a 126 per cent increase, 
Mr. Speaker. Nipawin revenue sharing, Nipawin revenue 
sharing went from $414,501 in 2007 to $938,266 in ’17-18, also 
126 per cent. Hudson Bay, the revenue sharing at Hudson Bay 
has increased from $169,209 and then on to $299,214, a 77 per 
cent increase. These are things that have happened in my 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

constituency. 
 
You know, the North East School Division, their operating 
funding . . . I know that the NDP, they like to talk about how we 
keep on cutting education but, you know, their education total 
operating funding now is up to $54.3 million, and the increase 
from the last budget is 14.8 per cent. I don’t really call that a 
cut, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We start looking at some of the other things, and not just in my 
constituency. And we look at all the new schools that have been 
built within the province. And we take a look even in my 
constituency, we have a brand new school in Hudson Bay that 
we just built here a couple years ago. And then the constituency 
next to me, Kelvington-Wadena, there’s a brand new school in 
Porcupine Plain. And Mr. Speaker, I can remember, I can 
remember going to that school with my son when he was 
playing basketball — and this is back in the NDP days — and 
they had five-gallon pails all over the place collecting water 
because that’s how bad the roof was leaking. For the NDP to sit 
there and say that we’re underfunding education, we’ve made 
tremendous strides in education. 
 
You know, advanced education, we built a new campus in 
Nipawin for Cumberland College. And I’m a great believer in 
Cumberland College, and now they’re starting to do 
university-accredited programs. This is very helpful to people. 
They don’t have to move to the city to be able to go to 
university. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d kind of like to talk about health just a 
little bit. And I remember when I was first elected we only had 
four physicians in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. That’s all we had. I 
had people calling my office every single day trying to get a 
family physician. There’s 13 physicians there now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thirteen, and that hospital is growing. 
They’re looking after the people. This government is committed 
to looking after the people. So we’ve done great things on that. 
 
We’ve also done a lot of things on the highways. I could start 
talking about all the highways work that has been done up in 
our constituency, and there’s been a lot. But it’s been all over 
the province, Mr. Speaker, because we picked up a real deficit 
from the previous administration on highways. And the 
members across the way, they can laugh all they want, but they 
didn’t have to drive . . . Well maybe they were driving over the 
highways. I don’t know. But it was really tough. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, some of the other things I want to kind of get 
on to here is we have to keep on moving this province forward. 
Now one of our great things . . . We have a downturn in 
resources right now, which makes it a lot tougher. However I 
wonder what the NDP . . . They just had their convention on the 
weekend here. They have a brand new leader. And this leader 
was asked by The Toronto Star on September the 21st, 2017: 
“Are you in favour of any of the current pipeline proposals?” 
You know what he said? He said, “I have said no to Energy 
East and Kinder Morgan and most recently Keystone XL.” How 
is that going to help our province? Are they going to . . .  
 

You know, we all know that when you go and you get an NDP 
membership, you’re a member of both the federal and the 
provincial party. So are they going to go along with their 
federal cousins? I can just guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that as 
they sit there, and at their convention they said that what they 
wanted, they wanted a made-in-Saskatchewan carbon policy 
which, Mr. Speaker, we all know what that means: that carbon 
policy means carbon tax. Just like their cousins in Alberta, yes 
siree, they’d put on a carbon tax right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I happen to have an invoice that came from a woman out in 
Alberta, had it sent to me, and she actually heats her house with 
coal. Now the coal was $42 a tonne, and the Alberta carbon 
levy, which they haven’t even finished putting the whole thing 
on yet, came to $35.39 a tonne, almost as much as the coal. 
Then to top it all off . . . Well the total price actually came, with 
what she got, was $918.96 for the coal. The carbon levy was 
$774.33, and to top it all off they turned around and charged 
GST [goods and services tax] not just on the coal but on the 
carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this what the NDP really wants to do here in 
Saskatchewan? Do they want us to sit there and not even be 
able to heat our houses in the wintertime? What they want to 
do, what they want to do, they want to throw on a carbon tax. 
And you know what that’s going to do? That’s going to shut 
down our Evraz pipe here right in Regina, one of the best pipe 
manufacturing outfits in all of North America. They’ll shut that 
down because I’ll tell you what, Evraz, if it gets too high, they 
will turn around and they’ll move that pipe down to the States, 
that factory down to the States. They’ll be going down in the 
States. 
 
It’s the same thing as our oil rigs. Our oil rigs are very movable. 
They can move down into North Dakota. The Bakken extends 
into North Dakota. If they put on a carbon tax, which is what 
they want to do . . . That’s basically what they’re saying at their 
convention on the weekend. They want to throw on a carbon 
tax. So they’re going to nail us. So there we go, we lose our 
workers. We don’t have a pipeline anyway if they get in 
because they’re against all pipelines, Mr. Speaker. And so we 
lose those workers. 
 
It also puts our farmers at a disadvantage because we sell grain 
over to . . . China’s one of our big customers. We sell grain into 
China. 
 
Now Australia tried the carbon tax. Guess what? It didn’t work. 
They turned around and took it off. But Australia happens to be 
one of our main competitors on selling grain into China. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, now let’s just use a fictitious number of some 
type, but let’s say we go over there and we want to sell our 
grain for $10 a bushel over to China and Australia goes in there 
and they say, well we’ll sell you our grain for $8. And we say, 
yes, but here it costs us more money because we have a carbon 
tax, because we have to pay a carbon tax in Canada. We’re 
helping the environment. Who do you think the Chinese are 
going to buy from? They’re going to buy it from the cheapest 
grower, Australia, which is one of our main competitors. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that we can talk about 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

here when you talk about the tax reductions. Now another thing 
that was brought up at the NDP convention is they want to have 
a $15 minimum wage. Now, forgetting about the people who 
actually employ these people, I can tell you right now that 
probably if they put in a $15 minimum wage all of a sudden 
what you’re going to do is you’re going to have employers that 
won’t be hiring as many people. 
 
Then the other thing the NDP would do, and this is pretty well a 
given because they did it before, they would have the tax on the 
people, on the lower wage earners. Now we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, that when we took office, anything — and I’m just 
going to use rough figures here — anything above $8,000 you 
had to pay income tax on. Now rounding the figures off again, a 
single person going out there and working, it’s going to be . . . 
It’s about $17,000 before you have to pay any income tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, yes you can raise that. You can raise that 
minimum wage up to whatever you want, but if you’re going to 
turn around and take it back out of their pockets after they get 
the increase, that doesn’t do any good, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 
the NDP way. And they’ve been that way all along. 
 
The way we’ve lowered the income tax, right now a family of 
four in Saskatchewan pays no income tax on the first $50,495. 
That is an amazing feat. That is an amazing feat, Mr. Speaker, 
and this is something that this government has done. We’ve 
made it fairer for all of the people in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I want to go back to health for a second 
because that seems to be one of the big things that they talk 
about all the time. Since we have come into office in 2007, 
we’ve hired 750, 750 more physicians. That kind of leads me 
back to this Nipawin thing when we went from 4 to 13. 
 
The other thing that we’ve done is we’ve hired, what is it, 
3,800?  
 
An Hon. Member: — 3,400. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — 3,400 more nurses within the province. And 
the NDP says, well you’re not doing anything with health care. 
How would we like to go back to what we were when the NDP 
was in power when we had the longest surgical wait times in all 
of Canada, the longest? And they can sit there and they talk 
about how our surgical wait times are increasing. It’s light years 
ahead of when they were sitting on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re on health, we could talk a little bit about 
long-term care also. You know, the NDP shut down . . . They 
sit there and say, well we have to look after our seniors. What 
did they do? They shut down 1,200 beds in this province when 
they were in power. Mr. Speaker, we built 13, 13 new long-term 
care facilities within the province, one in our own constituency 
in Tisdale in the Carrot River Valley constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on about the seniors where, you 
know, they had only a $90 senior income supplement for 16 
years. It’s now $270, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we’re looking after the 
seniors. The same thing as when they used to get a prescription. 
You know, if the prescription cost $150 back when that 
government was sitting over here, they paid $150. Now what do 

they do? Those seniors go in and they pay $35. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 25. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — What’s that? 
 
An Hon. Members: — 25. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Twenty-five? Okay, 25. I’ve been corrected 
on that, been corrected. Not too often I make a mistake, but, Mr. 
Speaker, that . . . But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 
is sitting there chirping away from his seat. He used to be the 
Highways minister when they were going around telling people 
to fill in their own holes on the highways. Now we have a 
minister who actually understands and gets highways done in a 
proper fashion, and doing a great job of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing we can talk about is the financial 
management. You know, there are some things that we had to 
do under financial management, and one thing we didn’t want 
to do is we did not want to shut down the STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company]. But it was financial. It was a tough 
financial decision to do, and we feel sorry for the people that 
were working there, but it was costing the money a lot of 
money.  
 
Also in the convention I see where the NDP, where the NDP 
says they will bring back STC, even though they shut down 
routes when they were on this side of the House. They’re going 
to bring back STC. But I’m curious. It’s kind of like the tree 
book, because I’m curious where they’re going to get the 
money from, Mr. Speaker. They think that, you know, this 
money grows on trees. Like, they did have the tree book. And 
where are they going to get the money from to be able to do that 
when it was a money-losing proposition? Are they going to get 
rid of a bunch more doctors? Are they going to get rid of a 
bunch more teachers? Are they going to get rid of a bunch more 
nurses like they did in the past, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I guess my time has pretty well come up so, Mr. Speaker, I have 
to say again that I strongly support the Speech from the Throne 
and I do not support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to stand and address the Throne Speech and the 
theme in growing stronger and where the province is going. 
 
I have to start off, Mr. Speaker, by acknowledging my 
colleague from Cannington. When he did his presentation, he 
had the Throne Speech and he got to page two in the 28 minutes 
that he spoke, so I thought I’d try and finish it. I think there’s 19 
pages, so it might take me an hour or so, but we’ll try and get 
through it. 
 
I just want to, as all my colleagues before me, Mr. Speaker, we 
all have people that we want to thank, and I too want to do the 
same. We don’t get the opportunity to do it very often, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so I want to acknowledge my family and what 
they have done for me and the support and sacrifice they’ve 
made for me. 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

First and foremost is my wife, Lois, who I had a chat with her 
tonight, and she’s handing out candy back in Assiniboia. Also 
she runs, manages an insurance business. And she’s very busy 
with it, but she’s given me this opportunity to represent Wood 
River constituency and I really appreciate it. 
 
Of course our two kids, we have two kids: a daughter here in 
Regina, Katie and her husband, Darrel. And they’ve blessed us 
with two granddaughters that I have the privilege to see any 
time I want. I was up there at suppertime to get them dressed 
for Halloween, and it was a pretty good treat when you can take 
a five-and-a-half-year-old and a one-and-a-half-year-old and 
take them down the block a little ways. I did steal some of their 
candy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also our son, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is a doctor finishing up 
his special residency in Calgary, and he’s hoping to come back 
into Saskatchewan and practice. I sure hope he does and can 
take advantage of the tax credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
would sure help us out a little bit on the home front. So we’re 
looking forward to that, and that’s what he wants to do. 
 
I think that’s one thing that really speaks well of what this 
government has done for the youth in this province. It’s not so 
much that they don’t want to leave, but they want to come back 
too, a I think that’s a great thing for what we have done. 
 
I also at this time would really like to thank my ministerial staff, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Jason has put a great team together up 
there in my office and they support me and handle it well. With 
Mark and Robyn and Brenda there, they look after all the issues 
that come forth to the ministry, and I really want to take this 
moment to thank them also, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And of course my constituency assistant, Sandy Kuffner, who 
fills in for me. As many know that when you’re in cabinet, you 
don’t get home as much as you would like. And she takes the 
issues on and she addresses them for me and we communicate 
every day. And also we have an assistant there, Wendie Yorga 
who fills in for Sandy when she’s on holidays. So I just want to 
recognize the people that really support me. 
 
And first and above all of course is the constituencies or the 
constituents themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had the 
highest voter turnout in the election, which was great to see. 
And I just want to take this opportunity to thank the constituents 
for supporting me in the previous election and everything that 
we’re doing in Wood River constituency. 
 
I want to try and talk briefly about a few things really that are in 
the Throne Speech that really address what the theme is in 
growing stronger. And one obviously is agriculture and what’s 
happening in this province and how it’s growing. And we’re led 
by a great minister in Agriculture promoting it and moving it 
forward, not only in the country but also globally. And in a 
brief discussion I had with him today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
working out trade agreements and trying to work trade issues 
out with our partners to the south. So he really is to be 
commended. 
 
But the way we’re moving agriculture in what I feel is the right 
direction . . . And being a farmer all my life, I really get a treat 
out of watching the young folks in rural Saskatchewan in the 

farming community and the sector and what they’re doing, how 
they’re embracing technology and the changes that are 
happening, how they’re addressing diversity in growing crops, 
and what they’re doing. 
 
I really want to talk about a couple of young people in my 
constituency. And I’m sure everybody here that has farmers 
could talk about quite a few of them in their constituency. But I 
have a young cousin down in the Coronach area, Craig Eger. 
And him and his wife, Mary-Jane, farm a nice successful 
farming operation there. I was talking to him here a month or 
two ago at harvest time, and he had just marketed a bunch of 
durum down into the United States, received a pretty good price 
for it. And, Mr. Speaker, that just tells you what the 
opportunities that have for the young farmers, with the Wheat 
Board gone, that these young farmers can go and market their 
grain in the States like they want to or anywhere else they want 
to do that. 
 
And also another young gentleman who happens to be the 
president of my constituency, Derek Tallon, who also is a 
young farmer in the Lafleche area, that was doing the same 
thing with chickpeas. And he was actually, he sent me a picture 
a few months ago when he was loading chickpeas on 
Saskatchewan grain cars that were purchased by Great Western 
Rail. And he actually sent the picture and saying thank you very 
much for giving us this opportunity to move grain in the cars. 
And I’ll talk a bit about that in a minute also. 
 
So I think it’s important to recognize where the agriculture 
community has gone and where they’re moving things when 
you look at technologies. And I think that’s why I really do 
want to address the minister here and the leadership that he has 
shown in technology at the universities, and how we’re moving 
and assisting that in funding programs to move technology 
forward because I can just see agriculture becoming even a 
bigger player in the province of Saskatchewan’s economy. I 
think now we’ve surpassed — what? — 20 billion in agriculture 
exports in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s probably higher 
than that already. But it’s good to see that we’re seeing 
agriculture commodities move that way. And I think it also 
gives opportunities to value add, and I think that’s something 
we really should be embracing and looking at, is how we can do 
that. 
 
And that kind of leads me into the shortline segue, if I could, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana made a comment about the dispersal of the railcars, and 
I thought it’s something that really has to be addressed because 
this is a good news story for rural Saskatchewan, for farmers 
and for shortlines to do business and to operate. 
 
And I’m going to give a good example on why it is. I was 
talking about a week or two ago with the president of Great 
Western Rail. They purchased 150 of the cars, and they’ve been 
very busy moving grain off of those. And they said, what we do 
like now is when we have orders for producer cars, we have the 
cars to be able to supply them. And they actually had a 
company down in the Shaunavon area that called them up and 
said, jeez, if we could get 25 cars we’ve got an immediate order 
here for some wheat that we could pay a premium on and 
support the farmers in this area to move it. And the Great 
Western Rail manager said, well it just so happens we’ve got 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

lots of cars here; we can have them down to you tomorrow. 
 
Guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That deal was made and the 
farmers were paid a premium on their wheat. The railway got to 
haul 25 cars of Saskatchewan grain, and I think that’s 
important. That has to be recognized, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
these cars are used by Saskatchewan farmers to move 
Saskatchewan grain to markets all over North America. And I 
think that’s an important thing to recognize, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Of course I would be remiss if I didn’t talk about transportation 
and the highway system and what’s going on and what we’ve 
done in the province of Saskatchewan that I think really has to 
be recognized as true leadership in improving our infrastructure 
in rural Saskatchewan to grow the economy and to assist in the 
growth that’s happening. 
 
We all know there’s major projects going on around Regina 
right now with the Regina bypass. And I had the privilege 
yesterday — I know it was a little breezy out there — of being 
on top of the overpass when we opened up what we call stage 1 
on the east side of the province. And I would be remiss if I 
wouldn’t say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we were up on the 
overpass and it didn’t matter what direction we looked. If we 
looked east, all I saw was commercial development out towards 
Emerald Park, when I see Redhead with new buildings and 
South Country Equipment with new buildings and other 
manufacturing moving out there. SeedMaster is out there. It’s 
good to see, you know, commercial development, what’s going 
on. 
 
[19:30] 
 
And then you turn around and I looked west towards the city of 
Regina, and I see a massive new Costco going up just on the 
east side of Regina. You see all the residential development. 
You see all the commercial development, and guess what I also 
saw, Mr. Deputy Speaker: just on the outskirts on the east side 
of Regina: a brand new school. And I think that just shows that 
the growth that’s happening around this province, but obviously 
around the capital region and what’s happening here in Regina, 
in the Regina area. So I think it’s nice to see that. 
 
I know even, you know, where I live in Harbour Landing now, 
another new school opened up. And I remember when they 
started that development in Harbour Landing — in about, oh I 
think it was ’06 or ’07, somewhere in there — they didn’t know 
when it would be built out. Built out in half the time of what 
they thought it would be. 
 
But I do want to talk about highway infrastructure and what we 
have done over the . . . And I think we have to talk about what 
we have done because I think it’s an amazing story. When you 
look at over $7.4 billion invested in the province of 
Saskatchewan’s highways in the previous 10 years, I mean 
that’s a phenomenal increase in investment in what’s going on. 
And in just over the past two years, we’re well over $2 billion 
invested in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to list some of 
the projects that we have done if I can. You look at the 
Saskatoon South Circle bridge and what the province has 

invested in that, just about $300 million; the St. Louis bridge, 
$60 million; the Highway 11 twinning, $62 million; the Pinkie 
Road overpass, $43 million; the Lewvan-Highway 1 overpass, 
$29 million; the Estevan truck bypass, $45 million; the 
Highway 7 and Highway 10 passing lanes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
$26 million; Highway 16 twinning, $45 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are projects that we’ve already 
accomplished. And the ones that we have on the go right now 
obviously are the overpasses at Martensville and Warman. 
These are great projects for those two fastest-growing 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Pinkie Road, we’re doing more work there, another 43 
million, and great to see that. And I mean, we look at what’s 
happening at the Regina bypass and the work that’s being done 
there. I just had a tour of that just last week, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is phenomenal what that is going to accomplish 
when it is all said and done, to get traffic flowing not only into 
the city for commuters coming to work, to get around the city, 
and also to get right around the city and head north to 
Saskatoon, but also to establish and to grow the commercial 
side and the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. And we’ll see 
great opportunities coming there. So I think we have lots of 
opportunities in what we've seen. 
 
I do want to talk about a priority we have made at the Ministry 
of Highways, if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is in light 
of passing lanes and what we’re planning on doing and what 
our plan is on that. 
 
We’re seeing increased traffic in some of our major corridors in 
the province of Saskatchewan. In fact my understanding is 
today we opened up the passing lanes on No. 5 west of 
Humboldt, and that’s great news. But also we’re looking at the 
corridor from Regina down to Estevan, 6 and 39. It’s a very 
busy, very busy segue of highway in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’re seeing massive growth in truck traffic 
happening on that segment, so we’re undergoing the planning 
studies on where those passing lanes would be. Also to finish 
No. 5 from Humboldt into Saskatoon, so we’re looking at that 
segment. No. 7 from Rosetown to the Alberta border is also part 
of that process. 
 
No. 4 north of North Battleford, we’re seeing increased oil 
traffic coming into North Battleford. We’re seeing the forestry 
industry growing in that sector and also the ag sector. I think 
there’s three terminals north of North Battleford that see very 
significant agriculture commodities moving in. And also from 
Melville up to Canora, that stretch of No. 10 and No. 9 highway 
is also going to see obviously some increased traffic. As I 
know, the Minister of Agriculture is very well . . . two big 
expansion projects happening up there in the Melville-Yorkton 
area that we’re very proud of, and I think that’s the kinds of 
things we want to see. 
 
I know in my part of the world, down in west of Assiniboia in 
the Kincaid area, there’s a huge fertilizer chemical plant coming 
into there. You look up in the Wadena area, two big terminals 
going in there with Bunge and, I think, Viterra. And G3 is 
building over in the Melville area. So we’re just seeing all kinds 
of growth in the agriculture sector that just gives great 
opportunity for the people and the farmers in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

You know, we’re excited about the overpasses opening up. 
We’re glad, you know, with the Balgonie overpass opening up, 
and we had great meetings with ministry staff, with my deputy 
minister and officials there and meeting with the town council 
and talking about their concerns. Obviously they had concerns 
about emergency access. We are delivering an emergency 
access to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It will be on the east side 
of the town, close to the school. We’re going to address their 
issues on traffic flow going west out of the city with traffic 
lights being installed and a double turning lane on to the 
overpass. So we’re doing the right things and we’re listening to 
the communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we are trying to do 
and work with them to make it work for them. 
 
Coming from a small town, I know the importance of highway 
access to these communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to, if I get the opportunity here, to talk about the P3 
[public-private partnership] model and how well it is working. I 
have to say when you look at the Regina bypass and that P3 
project, when I can stand and we can say that it was delivered 
on time and on budget . . . In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a 
day early. 
 
We had an interesting meeting with the Regina Bypass Partners 
yesterday at a luncheon. And we talked about the whole issue of 
maintenance, and what we’re going to get in 30 years. And I 
think that’s one thing that the opposition really should take note 
of is that in 30 years we are going to get a highway that is going 
to be in like-new condition, not one that’s going to be 
deteriorated that we’re going to have to fix up. That is all part 
of the contract and that’s all factored in. 
 
As with the North Battleford hospital, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
knew there . . . They recognized and found an insulation issue, 
and what it was was insulation was shrinking in the walls. They 
found that; they’re correcting it. They had to remove the outer 
skin. They’ve replaced the insulation, and they’re putting it all 
back together at no cost to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think that has to be recognized. 
 
It also has to be noted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if this hospital 
doesn’t open on time in the date that was in the contract, there 
is a penalty that the partner has to pay and we will hold them to 
that. They are working diligently to meet all obligations, and we 
hope that they will achieve that for all concerned so that we can 
move into it and they don’t have to . . . we don’t have to hit 
them with a penalty. 
 
And you look at the P3 in the schools. We had an issue in one 
of the schools here in Regina where they had a waterline break. 
Mr. Speaker, the private partner moved in and they moved the 
daycare kids to another daycare. They had everything looked 
after at no cost to the parents and no cost to the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I think it’s a great model that we should be 
looking at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the P3 model 
and how we can fund things out like that. 
 
I do also want to talk if I can, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I have to 
talk about partnerships and what we’re doing in the Ministry of 
Highways with partnerships and working with our municipal 
partners out in Saskatchewan. We have a good relationship with 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

with what we call the MREP [municipal roads for the economy 
program] program where we work with them in keeping the 
traffic off our TMS [thin membrane surface] highways and give 
primary weight to the industry on the municipal system. And 
we partner and we compensate them for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I think that’s a good working relationship and it’s 
agreeable amongst all parties, both the municipality and the 
ministry, and we work collaboratively that way. 
 
And also with SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] on the urban highway connector program, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a good program that has worked for cities 
building truck routes around, for smaller communities to get 
highways fixed that are running through their communities. 
And we look at those things, I think, and those are good 
partnerships. 
 
I also want to talk if I can, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a partnership 
with municipalities where we’re actually working 
collaboratively with them on highways that run through their 
municipalities that probably don’t see the traffic numbers that, 
you know, that our busiest highways do, and where they rate on 
our priority screen. I’m hoping that here in the next few weeks, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I can announce a very first 
partnership between the Ministry of Highways and a rural 
municipality, on a highway where we have partnered where 
they are going to collaborate with us and were going to work 
with us, where they’ll do the maintenance on a highway and 
look after it for us, and we will compensate them to look after 
it. So those are the kinds of arrangements that we’re trying to 
work out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we think they are very good 
arrangements. 
 
And I think, you know, I really wanted to focus on that, on the 
highway issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s lots in the Throne 
Speech. I think I only got to about page 4, so somebody’s going 
to have to carry on later. 
 
But I do want to, in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to 
say a few words about our Premier if I may, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I had the pleasure of meeting him, obviously, years 
ago when he was elected into opposition. But I have to tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very first public appearance that the 
Premier made after the election was at the SARM convention 
the next day. We invited him to come and speak as 
premier-elect. I didn’t know the formality and introduced him 
as the Premier, and when he come up on the stage and I 
introduced the Premier of Saskatchewan, he shook my hand and 
he said, that sounds kind of funny. But it’s amazing what he has 
done over the last 10 years as Leader of the Sask Party for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I have to talk about it. In my previous life 
when I was on SARM, we travelled; we travelled all across the 
country. I was Chair of the rural forum, and we would sit with 
all our colleagues from across the country and we’d talk about 
what’s going on in the province, in each other’s province, and 
things that we could collaborate and maybe get ideas from. 
 
And the one thing that we were the envy of the country, really 
was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was when this province took a very 
strong commitment on revenue sharing and the importance of it. 
We were the only jurisdiction in Canada that had dedicated 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

funding for municipalities, and that was a great thing. And a lot 
of municipal organizations across Canada had spoke to me 
about that and said, how did you get that? And I said it was just 
really in discussion with the government and recognizing what 
our issues were that they came to the table with this. And when 
you look at the revenue sharing formula, and I know my 
colleague from Carrot River talked about it, when you look at 
the increase in funding that we’ve seen over the last 10 years for 
municipalities, it’s significant. I think in my municipality, 
where I still have farm land, I think our revenue sharing has 
gone up well over 100 per cent just in the last decade. So that’s 
great news to hear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I also, you know, everybody was very envious of our 
Premier and the way, you know, the way he spoke and the way 
he stood up for Saskatchewan and the things that he did, but I 
mean he really did. He led this province to growth levels that 
we have never seen before in history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
of course he would always say that it’s a team effort. And I 
agree it is a team effort, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but every team 
needs a captain. And, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t ask for a better 
captain than the Premier we have today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier has led this government and led this 
province with integrity, honesty, and humbleness. That 
exemplifies his character and that has made him very respected, 
not only in this province but across this country. It’s been an 
honour for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to serve with him in 
cabinet. And I just want to thank him for giving me this 
opportunity and this great honour to serve with him in cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment brought 
forward by the opposition, and I will be supporting the motion 
as made by the member from Estevan, seconded by the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
and respond to the Speech from the Throne. Before I start off of 
course I want to give a little credit to the good people back 
home, my constituency assistant, Devin Bernatchez. I also have 
a couple other people who do some work for me as outreach 
and translating. And I just want to acknowledge the good work 
they do and how they come across and do casework in my 
office. 
 
You know, Devin makes the job easy. He’s the type of person, 
he’s very willing to do whatever he needs to do to help people. 
And he’ll work with whoever, departments or whatever 
ministry to deal with situations, and sometimes they’re pretty 
serious crisis that many of the northern people are dealing that 
live in the Cumberland constituency. And I want to thank Devin 
for his dedication and commitment to the office and the role he 
does. You know, he serves very well. 
 
I also want to thank my family, my wife, my kids, and my 
grandkids, you know, as we all do. I’ve got 17 of them, so they 
keep me pretty busy and occupied. I can say that. 
 
[19:45] 
 
But having said that, you know, I was listening to different 

members, you know, talk about their response to the Throne 
Speech. And I think about what I’ve been hearing all summer as 
we’ve door knocked — and I’ve been to many communities, 
not only in the Cumberland constituency but in many of the 
constituencies — doing outreach and trying to find out, getting 
petitions signed and finding out what are the issues and how are 
people happy, and what are the challenges. And some people 
will say, yes things are all right in some areas. But I’ll get into 
the challenge that many people are facing shortly. 
 
But before I do I just want to . . . I know the Premier and, you 
know, some of his colleagues on that side of the House are, you 
know, leaving and have left and so I just want to say to the 
Premier I know, you know, as he leaves I wish him well on his 
retirement. Some will say different things. He may be looking 
at this to try to change the way I think Saskatchewan people 
looked at him and at his government over this last budget. And 
they can talk about all the terrible things, and I understand that. 
We go back and forth on comments. Members opposite will say 
how terrible it was under certain governments. And that’s fine. 
 
But at the end of the day — and I’ve said this — there’s many 
people in our province that are struggling and, you know, I 
think of some of the seniors out there that are struggling. And 
when you talk to them, their power bills, you know, government 
wants to brag about, oh we don’t raise taxes, you know, taxes, 
taxes . . . And it’s good to pat yourselves on the back and I 
know you like doing that. But at the end of the day you have no 
idea the impact. And you know who voted for a budget that put 
such strain on many people. The most vulnerable, you took 
away things. And I want to talk a little bit about that. 
 
And to say that frustration that I’ve heard from people and 
they’re desperate to make ends meet, to whether they put food 
on the table. They pay their rent. They buy their medications. 
There are many hardships and struggles. And then you see a 
government who adds more and more and more taxes, tax 
burdens to residents who are already taxed enough. So what 
does the government do? Instead of saying, oh we’re lowering 
taxes. It’s the best. Yes, you’re giving credits and you’re giving 
those that probably don’t need it more of a benefit than those 
that are most vulnerable. 
 
And when I think about some of those residents and young 
families that I talk to, their power bills. The rate of some of the 
power bills up north — I’ve seen some of the seniors’ — it’s 
unbelievable. We’re not talking about a few hundred dollars. 
They don’t have, you know . . . They maybe heat their home 
with electricity because that’s all they have. They don’t have 
natural gas. Maybe some of them, they’re older. 
 
So if you see the cost of living for them going up . . . People are 
struggling. Time and time again you see the frustration and the 
calls we get in to the office with saying, they’re cutting off the 
power. They’re shutting down this; they’re cutting off that, 
because I can’t afford it. I just don’t know how to do it 
anymore. And you see frustration with paying everything. The 
rents go up. Utility bills go up. 
 
Yet you hear the government saying that the province is getting 
better and it’s stronger. It’s stronger for some. You know, some 
are doing quite well but . . . You know, I think some of their 
friends are doing quite well, and some of those supporters that 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

they do. They take care of them pretty well. But there are a lot 
of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are truly struggling trying 
to provide for their families. 
 
And then I think about, you know, the medical services of our 
province. And I think about mental health. And, you know, this 
government, there’s nothing in this Throne Speech . . . I thought 
it was supposed to be about a vision about where they’re going 
to be going maybe with the finances next budget, and they’re 
preparing to talk about how proud that, you know, this 
document is going to take them . . . But I don’t see much in here 
for northern people. I don’t see much in here for indigenous 
people. It’s pretty lacking. And that’s their vision. 
 
You know, at the end of the day you think about this. And I 
know there’ll be challenges here. I was hoping, you know, we 
talked about . . . Some mentioned the Sixties Scoop, the 
apology. And I know we’ve been raising questions, and some of 
my colleagues who have spoke before me have talked about 
some of the numbers and the stats. And I think at the end of the 
day, the government cherry-picks what they want. And they 
will say, well we cherry-picked . . . But I think one of my 
colleagues has come out with some numbers that are pretty 
factual with percentages and actually did a great job of 
presenting that, and I want to thank her for that. 
 
But having said that, these are troubling times for many people 
in our province. And sometimes this government . . . And every 
one of the Sask Party members, you voted for the budget, but I 
didn’t hear any of you, I didn’t see any of you standing saying, 
no, this is wrong to put the burden on Saskatchewan people. 
You all supported it. You said it was another best budget. Well 
you know what? Some of you believe that. 
 
And then you come back and you have . . . You’re reversing 
under pressure — and I’m glad — because of the rallies and 
people saying enough’s enough. This is wrong, what you’re 
doing. You’re going after the most vulnerable. When we look at 
. . . You’re going after the most vulnerable. When you’re going 
after, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . The most vulnerable individuals 
were cut. The cuts you made. And I heard people saying 
heartless cuts. The rallies. The most vulnerable are struggling to 
make ends meet and that’s what you chose to cut. 
 
And then you reversed because there was pressure put on you. 
And I guess maybe the Premier and his government don’t want 
to be, as he leaves and I said, he leaves, he doesn’t want that 
budget to be what we’ll send him out on and people will say, 
this is what they’ll remember him for. 
 
So they’re reversing some of the stuff. Well why didn’t you 
guys listen to the people when they said to you . . . And you all 
voted on this budget. Getting rid of STC, the programs that you 
guys cut for families, the most vulnerable for funerals, people 
are saying . . . I heard people back home even that support your 
government say they can’t believe some of the stuff that went 
on here. They just find it ridiculous. So that’s your own 
members that support you, and I know they support you. And to 
have them say that to me out there, how that makes you sit 
there. I bet I know you guys will just laugh it off like you 
always do but remember, and I’ve said this to you guys before, 
the backbenchers — stand up. 
 

And then, you know, on top of it, you now have a leadership 
race and it’s amazing to watch some of your members throwing 
the Premier . . . Yes, yes, the members that I have seen 
throwing the Premier and other ministers under the bus, saying 
the terrible things . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What bus? There is no bus. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Oh yes, that’s right, there is no bus. 
Throwing them under the vehicle. You know, let’s be very clear 
here. You can’t have it both ways. You guys, you all vote on a 
budget that impacts Saskatchewan greatly. You put PST 
[provincial sales tax] on kids’ clothes. That was something and 
we talk about that. And you talk about this budget and this 
vision you guys have and you have the nerve to call it growing 
stronger? How is that? How is that growing stronger? 
 
Go tell that and try to sell this to people back home, the ones 
that are most vulnerable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Go and try to sell 
that. Let them go and try to sell that to them. I don’t think 
they’ll be doing a very good job of it because the people have 
figured it out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They know that the 
members on that side voted for the budget that hit the most 
vulnerable out there and now they’re reversing it. 
 
And then you have different members out there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, different individual members that are running for 
leadership. They’re all coming out saying well, if I’m . . . But 
they voted. They voted for the budget that did all those cuts, 
that impacted the most . . . And then they have the nerve and the 
gall to say, oh but if I’m the premier, I would reverse that; I 
would change it. Well where were you? You were at the cabinet 
table, some of you that are running. 
 
So when I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just find it very 
frustrating and I mean many people find it frustrating. You 
can’t have your cake and eat it too. You just can’t. The people 
are seeing, and you’re going to pay a price one day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That government will pay a price. The members of 
that party will pay a price to the people. The good people of this 
province know. 
 
You know, you think about some of the challenges. And I want 
to give credit out to some of the leadership out there. I think 
about Chief Tammy Cook-Searson. I think about Montreal Lake 
Cree Nation. I went to the official opening of Camp Hope. It is 
a place where families, the kids can go to deal with some of the 
issues that are facing them, whether it’s families or addictions, 
mental health. They bring in the services to them. They have to 
do something. They have to do something because of the 
suicides, because of the challenges with mental health and 
addictions that so many young people, so many young people 
are faced. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are doing a job for the 
family, for the kids, trying to bring them back. So I went to that 
opening. 
 
But I also say, I know La Ronge Indian Band. They’re working 
hard to get a wellness centre for La Ronge and area, not only to 
serve First Nations. They’ll also take in Métis, non-status. 
They’re going to work with other community members, 
non-Aboriginal as well. They’re going to be open to work with 
everyone, and I give them credit for that. 
 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

The government, this government has an opportunity. The 
Premier has an opportunity if he would like to. And I would 
suggest this to him: reach out to La Ronge Indian Band. Reach 
out to those bands and those communities that are trying to 
come up with ways to help their community so we don’t have 
as many suicides. It’s a crisis in our community, in the 
province. But in the North, I have been to too many funerals. I 
have sent too many condolences to those families, and to watch 
them suffer, and been with friends who have lost loved ones 
because of suicide. Kids that should have never have ended 
their life. Can you just imagine losing hope, losing hope? 
 
And we have a government that has so much. You know, I 
think about the money that they have spent on many areas, 
many areas, you know, that it was a priority, that they say is a 
priority. But to my feeling and to the way I feel, the people and 
the leaders that I’ve heard back home advocating for their 
community and the families that are advocating for their loved 
ones to get the mental health, the addictions, this government 
has failed, has failed miserably. And honestly you should be 
ashamed of yourself for failing to deal with the mental health 
and addictions and the crises that are going on. 
 
And I think about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The child advocate 
has made it very clear. He’s now come out and saying this 
government is not doing enough to deal with the crisis, and it 
needs to do that. So the government could, if the Premier and 
the government decide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they want to 
reach out, I’ve given them an opportunity to reach out to La 
Ronge Indian Band. They’ve got money from the federal 
government to do the planning. They’ve got the land; they’ve 
got a plan; they’re moving in a very productive way. The 
government, this province could do the right thing and reach out 
to northern Saskatchewan and I’m hoping they will. 
 
Like I’ve said before, there was no talk about some of the crisis 
that we’re dealing with in the North but it’s not just . . . I think 
of the rural areas and thinking about the challenges that are 
business wise. And I think about whether it’s rural or not. 
 
STC provided such a great service. And I know this government 
made their decision and that’s the sad reality. They can sit there 
and say, well what you got to do? You guys form government, 
you’re going to bring it back? But we have a commitment from 
our side to talk and consult, and we will. We’ll work with the 
leaders; we’ll work with our farmers; we’ll work with the 
people out there in the industry, the business, to find out. Our 
seniors, what do they need? What can we do? How do we get 
this so that they have a public service that’s called a 
transportation company, however that looks? That’s that 
commitment. 
 
We also see that this government has made some serious 
challenges when it comes to education, the cuts to education. 
And they want to spin it the way they want to spin it. You can’t 
spin the stuff that they have. You cannot spin it when you’re 
seeing classrooms and you’re hearing from parents. And kids 
that are most vulnerable are the ones that are feeling it when it 
comes to, you know, resources in the classroom to support kids 
with disabilities. 
 
So there are many challenges and the government’s, you know, 
yes it’s great when oil is high and everything’s good and there’s 

lots of money. And this government had record revenue, record 
revenue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They had years of record 
revenue. What did they save? Well you know, when you think 
about it, the Regina bypass, and we talk about that. It started out 
at 400 million; it’s now over $200 billion. You know, it started 
at 400 million, it’s now over $2 billion, close to 2 billion, 
maybe over. I’m not sure of the numbers but let’s talk about 
those challenges and what people are saying. 
 
You talk about the GTH land deal. They had money for that, 
money for that, to subsidize that, but less money to help STC or 
other areas. And then you see, everywhere you see where there 
are Crown corporations that do provide a great service, you see 
the increase, you know, that this government is putting on 
residents. Yes, and I’ve talked about that a little bit about, you 
know, they say oh, it’s all good, you know, the taxes are down. 
But at the end of the day, everywhere that they can get 
Saskatchewan residents, they find a way to tax them. It’s 
unbelievable. 
 
[20:00] 
 
You know what? I got a bill in the mail, and I posted it on 
Facebook because I just found it just unbelievable. They wanted 
me to pay. I pay for my private insurance as well for my family 
to make sure, you know, we’re covered. We’ve got private 
insurance. I do that to help out, you know, and I do my part to 
make sure we’re covered. To get PST, and the only province in 
all of Canada to get PST on my own private health insurance 
that I pay for, that I pay for for my family to cover, you found 
ways to even go after that. 
 
Life insurance, house insurance. I mean we’ve talked about it. 
It’s unbelievable. I have people saying, is this government for 
real? Like you hear it in the coffee shops. They’re mad when 
they get their bill and they’re looking at it. So I look at life 
insurance, I look at . . . Everywhere you look, they’re just trying 
to get more and more money from Saskatchewan. 
 
And I mean many are vulnerable and can’t afford it. But this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just keeps adding it on, 
adding it on at the end but says it’s cutting taxes. Well good 
luck. See how that works. 
 
When we look at property tax, and we’ve had a few meetings 
up north, and I know some of the communities are seeing . . . 
And a few of my colleagues have talked about that, about the 
property tax going up. Like we’re talking about 250 per cent in 
property taxes. You know, it’s unbelievable. And they might 
say, well they want to blame this, but they knew months in 
advance. They could have adjusted. They could have helped out 
the communities. 
 
Like I think about La Ronge and some of them in Air Ronge, 
some of the business people. So when you see business people 
saying, this doesn’t even make sense . . . Like so many are 
appealing their notice of assessments. They’re going through 
that process because they’re mad, they’re angry. They’re very 
upset. How can you get away with this, they’re saying. And 
some of them, they vote for the Sask Party. They vote for the 
current government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They vote for them 
but some of them are not happy, let me tell you, have made it 
very clear they’re not happy. 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

So having said all that, we have a vision that’s supposed to help 
so many. When I think about our trappers and I think about the 
most vulnerable out there, whether housing, education, there are 
so many places where this government could have done a better 
job over the years to look after . . . [inaudible] . . . Now, tough 
times and they say, we can’t; everyone’s going to feel, you’re 
all going to feel the crunch. Well you know, it’s just amazing to 
watch. And how they switch and say they’ll . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they voted for this budget, and now they’re reversing 
so many things. 
 
And I’m glad that the people are rallying all over, whether it’s 
in the cafeteria here like yesterday. We had protesters saying it 
looks like a good place to eat. They were here. They made the 
StarPhoenix today, or the Leader-Post. I just think it’s people 
like that that are coming out, and all the petitions that are being 
signed and people that are saying a message to this government. 
And like I said, as the government leaves and the Premier does 
his retirement and on his farewell, I think he’ll be remembered 
for some of these challenges that he’s made as his government. 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will pay a price. 
 
And you know, and again I’m lastly going to . . . Just about 
done. You know, at the end of the day, at the end of the day 
we’ll just see how many of these members . . . And I mean they 
mock and laugh and they say they can raise taxes 10 times — 
I’ve heard them say that, heckle from there — the people will 
still vote for us; they’ll never vote for the NDP. We’ll see what 
will happen. We’ll see what will happen, how many of those 
members back there will be elected back in. We’ll see, and how 
many are jumping the ship and leaving. We’re waiting to see 
how many leave. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of the day there are many 
people in this province that are not happy and that are suffering 
because of the government’s handling of the budget, of the 
government’s mismanaged scandals and waste that this 
government had. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then it’s time. I 
know. I will not be supporting this budget . . . Throne Speech, 
but I will be supporting the amendment. So I thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — I appreciate that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
from this far away I’m surprised that you did recognize me, but 
thank you for that. When I was over in that corner I got skipped 
over a few times, but it’s good to see you in the chair, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And again I’m happy to enter into this reply to the Throne 
Speech. And I believe I’ll be supporting the Throne Speech and 
not the amendment, but we can wait till the end just to be sure 
at the end of the remarks, but we’ll see. We’ll keep it open at 
this point. 
 
But as is customary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got a number of 
people to recognize that have supported me over the past year 
and I’d like to do that now . . . [inaudible] . . . First, thank you 
to my spouse, Lisa, for your unwavering support. I certainly 
couldn’t do it without you. This is my first Throne Speech with 
Lisa working out of the building, and so there’s a very good 

chance that I’ll run amok. Actually, a pretty good chance. 
 
But, Mom and Dan, thanks for coming to the Throne Speech. 
I’m sure my mom is watching this, so it’s always great to have 
you in this building, and we welcome you at any time because 
after all this is your legislature. And again, sorry for the ticket 
mix-up; that’s on me. 
 
I’d like to thank my constituency assistant, Kristy Shaw, and 
thanks for keeping the office together. And she’s been with me 
now for three years. I think it’s three years. And then she went 
on maternity leave and there was a steady stream of CAs 
[constituency assistant] that filled in. There was four in a row in 
that one-year period, so either they left because of, I don’t 
know, me. There was other options but it could certainly have 
been me. But she’s got a wonderful baby now named Kodi. I 
tried to suggest Doc, but that didn’t quite fly. He’s a year and a 
half old right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m also proud of her recent journey. She started at First 
Nations University and she’s taking Indigenous Social Work. 
It’s her first semester, and as an alumni of First Nations 
University myself, I’m particularly proud of her choice. 
Apparently, in 1993 when I graduated I had a pretty sweet 
’stache, so please go find it and mock me with all your will 
because I deserve it. 
 
To the constituents of Regina Coronation Park, thank you. It’s 
my pleasure for serving on your behalf for the last six years. 
Coronation Park is a very diverse constituency. It is truly a 
reflection of the new Saskatchewan, from seniors at Eden Care 
Communities, Regina Lutheran Home, William Booth operated 
by the Salvation Army. It is true: seniors have built this 
province and they deserve our appreciation and respect. And I 
am grateful for the care that they receive in their homes in 
Coronation Park. 
 
Coronation Park is also diverse in education with O’Neill and 
Thom Collegiate, Dr. Hanna, St. Peter, Imperial School, Gladys 
McDonald, Coronation Park to Mother Teresa Middle School 
and Regina Huda School. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the citizens, permanent residents and 
refugees, they all have a story. Some inspiring, some heroic, 
some tragic, but all with a common theme: hope for a better 
life, hope for their children. Last week I met and celebrated the 
graduation of 20 people from the INVOLVE [integrating 
newcomers with volunteer opportunities to add leadership 
values through education] program operated by the Regina 
Open Door Society, how it’s integrating newcomers through 
volunteer experiences and networking. It’s a fantastic program. 
I was happy to be at their graduation for the last four years. 
 
I asked them to share their stories with me. Again, all had a 
similar theme but with an added piece: they all want to work. 
They all want to contribute to their new home. 
 
Their English studies are progressing. We talked about 
settlement, and how does one truly settle in a new country? You 
have to be able to communicate. English study is at the top of 
the list of newcomers. And English isn’t an easy language to 
learn. It’s certainly problematic. I have difficulty at the best of 
times. But it’s a little more difficult for adults than it is for 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

children. 
 
They’re well aware, either their second winter or first, I mean 
they know full well what’s coming up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Some of them are on their second winter. Some this is their 
first, and definitely winter is coming. And I’d hate to channel 
Game of Thrones, but winter is coming. 
 
The country of origin for the newcomers was amazing: China, 
Myanmar, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Nigeria, Congo, Eritrea, 
Ukraine, Japan, and the South Sudan. Amazing stories of 
resilience. A great reminder of what we, when we are born here, 
take for granted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Throne Speech there is a passage 
that reflects gratitude, and I’d like to acknowledge a 
Thanksgiving column in the Leader-Post by Ron Petrie: 
 

Let it be known that I am grateful. 
 
Grateful to be where I am, for starters. 
 
As a younger man, brash and full of swagger, I considered 
my calling to be Vancouver, Montreal, even New York. 
Only now do I appreciate that what I actually fancied was 
merely the ideal of my farmboy self destined for the big 
city . . . 
 
Where I am is Saskatchewan. Thank goodness. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the spirit of our newcomers. This is 
what they were envisioning. I was at the airport welcoming the 
first Syrians arriving from refugee camps almost two years ago 
— December, cold, snow. Through translators they explained 
how happy they were to be here, grateful and hopeful. This was 
for some their first snow, their first real cold. 
 
I came with a box of Rider toques and mittens. I explained that 
they needed toques and mittens, but also that this was their new 
team to cheer for. Football to them was soccer, so I tried to 
explain it through rugby. I left it there because they’d figure it 
out later because I knew they would. But they were thankful for 
the toque and thankful for the fact that they did find a new 
team. 
 
I’m grateful for how different cultures and associations have 
opened their doors to welcome you to ceremony and 
celebration. I’m honoured to attend and learn. 
 
One of the things that I’ve been confronted with as I go to some 
of these organizations and meeting some newcomers, last week 
they said, where are your soldiers? Why are you alone? In our 
country, we would never be able to get close to a politician. It’s 
such an interesting perspective from them, and just grateful 
people for being here. But their perspective is fascinating, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I said, well we travel without soldiers and 
without anybody making sure that we’re okay. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think that is something to be grateful for, that 
we can go around and be with our citizens and serve. I’m 
absolutely grateful for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why am I using the perspective of 
newcomers as a response to the Throne Speech? Because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they want to see themselves reflected and 
they’re starting to. And those two years since meeting them at 
the airport, we were together again at a business and newcomer 
networking session. Their English was better. Some are 
working but they were still grateful. We talked about 
volunteering. It’s something Canadians do, but particularly it’s 
something Saskatchewan does. Newcomers get it. They told me 
last week they figured it out. We give back because that’s what 
community is, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they said. I asked them, 
they also said in their countries you expect to get paid when you 
volunteer. And I went, well here it’s slightly different. They 
said, okay in our country your time is spent working and then 
you keep working. You’ll help some people, but that’s just 
helping. That’s not volunteering, but we get it. 
 
I asked them what it is to be a Canadian. And they thought for a 
second and they went, you welcome everyone; you appreciate 
diversity. And we’re experiencing that now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they’re experiencing that. I asked them again, what’s 
culture? I was teaching, I taught sociology at SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], at 
the university. Culture is certainly a piece of sociology. So 
what’s culture? What’s Canadian culture? Again they answered 
again through the multicultural lens of diversity. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Then I really wanted to challenge them and I said, what’s 
Canadian cuisine? What would we have as food? And I’m not 
talking about Scottish cuisine, which is based on a dare. Come 
on, I dare you to eat that. But as I said, it’s all food. It’s food 
from every single country, and I would harken to say that’s true. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invited a significant number of 
immigrants, newcomers, and friends to the Throne Speech. It 
was their first for most of them. I’d like to thank my colleagues 
for helping me with the invites. You’re very generous, and that 
allowed me to invite an awful lot of people that normally would 
never have gotten here. 
 
I want to say their first names. So they included Nish and 
Poonam and Aniket and Nidhi and Purvi and Geeta from the 
India Canada Association; Abdi from Prairie Somali 
Association; Faisal, Mohammed, Sajjad, and Mohammed from 
the Islamic Association of Saskatchewan; Amy from the 
Philippines and the Rotary; Kim from Street Culture. And of 
course Principal Nistor and the grade 12 class that sat in the 
west gallery from the Huda School, I’m very proud that they 
came. It is a grade 12 graduation class, and they had some great 
questions and they were certainly a smart and very committed 
bunch. So looking forward to going to the classroom and 
getting beat up, cause I will, because I’m going to get beat up. 
And it was absolutely great to have them here. 
 
So, Deputy Speaker, there are a few other things included in the 
Throne Speech that I’d like to reference. Saskatchewan’s rate of 
organ donations is low compared to the rest of Canada and 
many other countries. I was on the committee to review the 
province’s current organ donation approach, recommend ways 
to increase the rate of donations. So the program will be led by 
donor physicians who provide education and support to fellow 
health care providers and champion organ donations across the 
province. We’re going to expand the pool of donors by allowing 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

for donation after cardiocirculatory death and a mandatory 
referral program. We continue to explore the option of moving 
to a presumed consent model of organ donation. It was great to 
have an open dialogue with individuals and stakeholders. It’s a 
promising start. I’m hopeful lives will be saved. So please, 
participate. It’s a great, great opportunity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve taken steps to reduce impaired 
driving and we, as a province, need to do better. We’re urging 
municipalities to allow ride-sharing services to operate within 
their jurisdictions. Looking forward to the models that they 
come up with. We’re also introducing legislation enabling SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to offer affordable 
insurance to drivers working for ride-sourcing companies like 
Uber and Lyft.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve not used either of these services 
before, but I’m certainly interested in trying them. They help to 
lower the instances of drinking and driving that I think will be 
worth the exploration. Of interest, the members opposite had a 
convention this past weekend and had a resolution against it. 
But oh well, as per usual, because the sky is falling with a new 
idea and we fear and reject it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had another opportunity to engage in open 
dialogue. I was on the committee looking at crime — rural 
crime, urban crime. The community was very interested and 
they certainly showed up and they gave us an awful lot to think 
about. And a lot of them feel isolated. And just wanted to hear 
what they had to say, and they certainly weren’t shy. 
 
We went to 10 locations and we had 12 consultations. We went 
to Regina twice, to Saskatoon, went to Estevan, Swift Current, 
Meadow Lake, Yorkton, The Battlefords twice, P.A. [Prince 
Albert], La Ronge, and La Loche. We had dozens of 
presentations from groups, and I certainly applaud the efforts of 
my colleagues that were with . . . We all went together and we 
explored the province and certainly listened and heard from a 
number of people, and I value that. And I value the input from 
my colleagues because I thought they did a really good job . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . There was an awful lot of driving 
but some did better than others, but thanks. But I was happy to 
. . . And the highways were pretty darn good too. 
 
I was happy to serve on the committee after about 25 years, 25 
years you’ve got a career working with young people in 
frequent conflict with the law. So I know a lot about young 
offenders. I know a lot about addiction. I know a lot about 
mental health, about sociology of crime, justice studies at the 
university. Thought I heard it all. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Cattlemen’s Association came in 
and they talked about cattle rustling, and I had no idea how that 
was going to be accomplished. So I’m looking at the 
Cattlemen’s Association and my head’s going back, I’m 
thinking about Rawhide days and old western movies, and 
we’ve got horses and we’re rustling cattle. Yes, that wasn’t 
even close. That’s not it; no. It was semis and loading docks 
and it was pretty mechanized now. And I went, oh, that’s how 
they do it; none of this taking them across pastures to pastures. 
They go, no. Okay, and then changing the brand, they go, no, 
that’s not it; it’s semis. I went, okay, I guess I’ve got a long way 
to go before I’m the next Ag minister. But I listened, and it was 

fascinating. It was amazing, amazing stories. I don’t know . . . 
Where am I at here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, no it’s 
Ag minister. It’s okay. 
 
One last piece in terms of the sharing of intimate images, and I 
mean it’s despicable, the shameful practice in bullying. And 
young people are taking their own lives and they’re hurting 
themselves. They are absolutely hurting, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
very tough crime to police. The reverse onus that we’ve talked 
about in the Throne Speech is going to be helpful. So we’re 
seeking redress through small claims court, and it’s a step 
forward; it’s a big step forward. And I’m hoping through our 
legislation that we’re going to help young people that are 
suffering through cyberbullying and sexting and all the rest of 
the pieces. Intimate partner violence, interpersonal violence, 
these are all issues that affect all of us as a society. I’m proud of 
our government for taking a stand. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was with the Deputy Premier. We were 
flipping pancakes at Man Up Against Violence at the University 
of Regina, another great organization that has taken a stand 
against interpersonal and domestic violence. And proud of our 
efforts, proud of their efforts, and yes, looking forward to next 
steps. But we’ve got a lot to learn. We’ve got more to do. And 
men? Men, we can do better. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’m going to wrap it up. 
But I alluded earlier that I might not, wasn’t sure exactly where 
I’m going to go, but I won’t be supporting the amendment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I’ll be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to 
stand in my place and provide my comments and my support 
for the Throne Speech from last week. I think it’s been said here 
before, but I think we all should be very thankful and know how 
blessed we are to be able to stand here and do the work that 
we’re doing. And I know that I am very thankful for many 
things in my life, but I’d like to bring to light a few of them. 
 
I’m thankful for our Premier and the leadership that he has 
provided to us over these last 10 years. He has provided it with 
integrity, dignity, humility, and has really set the bar high for 
anyone who wants to follow in his footsteps. I only got to serve 
with him for just a little bit over a year, but I’m very thankful 
and blessed that I was able to do that. Not many people have 
been able to do that, and for that I’m really thankful. And I 
think our province should be thankful for the good governance 
and the proud and strong leadership that he gave us. 
 
I have a few other people that I need to thank, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as everyone else has done the same. I think I need to 
start with my partner, DonnaLyn. I think it would be very hard 
to do this job every single day without the support that we have, 
all of us have at home while we’re here in this place doing the 
work for our constituents. 
 
To put this in perspective, Mr. Speaker, we’re here from 
Sunday to Thursday for 17 weeks of the year. And now that 
doesn’t seem like very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we seem 
to be here at the busiest time of the year, and that’s the busiest 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

time for school and activities and life in general, Mr. Speaker. I 
have three young daughters, 13, 12, and 10. Now they each play 
soccer, and of course because they’re all different ages they 
play on all different teams, and they’re very competitive. They 
practise at least once a week, every week, and they have at least 
two games each week as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in those short 17 weeks when we’re down 
here in Regina, that’s over 100 events, and that doesn’t count 
the tournaments that they’re in. And some of those tournaments 
fall on the weekend and so I’m able to be there and watch them, 
but more often than not all those games and practices happen 
from Monday to Thursday. DonnaLyn gets them to each and 
every one of those practices and games, never late. Maybe 
sometimes they’re hungry, but they’re at every practice, game, 
and tournament. And for the most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re there without any help from me at all. She does this 
while holding a full-time job. She does her charity work and she 
sits on various different boards as well. So you can see, Mr. 
Speaker, I am blessed to be able to do this job, and I owe her a 
debt of gratitude, so thank you, DonnaLyn. 
 
Now my kids sometimes get the short end of the stick. That’s 
what happens when you’re the son and daughters of a public 
servant. Many days and nights I’m not around to celebrate their 
successes, but I hope they all know that I’m very proud of them 
and I love them. Now my son Connor works at Canadian Tire. 
He’s been there for three years. He’s now a supervisor in the 
service department. He does a good job, and he’s very proud of 
the work that he does. The biggest issue they have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at the store, is being able to hire qualified, available, 
and service-oriented staff. They’re busy growing a robust shop 
and are struggling to ensure that their ranks are always full. 
 
Now that’s a problem, but it’s a good problem to have. I know 
that back in the day when I got out of school — no, it wasn’t 
that long ago — there was usually 20 applicants for every single 
job. Now Connor’s team will survive and they’ll succeed 
regardless of those challenges. They have a good team and good 
leadership, and like I said earlier, it’s a good problem to have. 
The alternative has been seen before, and we know how that 
turned out. 
 
My parents were both teachers and I was blessed to be able to 
stay in Saskatchewan once I graduated from high school, and 
continue my schooling. They made many sacrifices, Mr. 
Speaker, as parents do, to ensure my siblings and I were able to 
stay here, get educated here, and make the choice of a career. 
Unfortunately all three of my siblings had to move away as 
there was no opportunity here, and that’s too bad. I have to say 
thank you to my mom. These past five years as I sought public 
office have been tough on her. We aren’t used to being in the 
limelight, either good or bad. She was always humble and 
preferred to work in the background. Mom has been a tireless 
volunteer at church, and most recently on my campaigns. So 
Mom, thank you. 
 
Saskatchewan almost single-handedly built Calgary. Our 
greatest exports were our kids. The standard graduation present, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan, was luggage because our 
parents knew we would head out to greener pastures. I hated 
that time in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I personally had 
already graduated from SIAST and had to work a full-time job 

and a part-time job just to make ends meet. I didn’t really enjoy 
it very much, Mr. Speaker, but I love Saskatchewan and I 
wanted to stay right here. 
 
[20:30] 
 
I also have to thank Madelaine Fast. My constituency assistant 
is a godsend. I have to give her a big shout-out. She looks after 
everything in the office, makes sure all the correspondence gets 
followed up on and that she provides great customer service. 
She has a heart of gold and treats every single constituent like 
family. She does a fantastic job of ensuring that our constituents 
are heard, and we act on all their concerns. 
 
Maddy also has another job. She makes sure that I get to where 
I need to go, when I need to get there. After attending about 400 
events since I was elected in April of 2016, that can be a big 
challenge. But every day I get to each and every one looking as 
good as she can make me. And that’s quite a feat, let me tell 
you. It’s a test. So thank you very much, Maddy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is filled with good news, and 
it is no surprise that I will be supporting it and not supporting 
the amendment moved by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Saskatchewan plan for growth focuses on international 
engagement, innovation, fiscal responsibility, and investments 
in infrastructure, education, and training. 
 
Today Saskatchewan’s operating debt is $1 billion lower than it 
was in 2007. We have grown by more than 160,000 people in 
the last 10 years. We’ve recruited more than 750 more doctors 
and 3,400 more nurses of every designation. Thirteen long-term 
care facilities have opened. We have a new hospital in Moose 
Jaw, a new hospital being built in North Battleford, and a new 
hospital being built right in Saskatoon University. 
Saskatchewan has gone from having the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada to having among the shortest wait times today. 
 
Why is this important information, Mr. Speaker? Well I can tell 
you why it’s important to my family. My mom just received a 
new hip. Earlier this year she was placed on the waiting list. 
She was in tremendous pain and her life had become severely 
restricted. She had plans to go with our church to Spain and 
Portugal. She wanted to cross off a trip to Fatima off her bucket 
list. In late May, she received a call that her surgery was going 
to happen the first week of June. She got that new hip, did her 
physiotherapy, and in late September went on that trip. And she 
visited Fatima. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that outcome wouldn’t have been possible under 
the NDP. She would have languished on the waiting list for 
over a year while sitting in pain, waiting for her turn to come 
up. The investments we made to ensure that the waiting list was 
reduced had real consequences for my family, and I’m grateful 
and thankful for that. 
 
The Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital of Saskatchewan is on 
time and on budget. I can’t say enough about what that means 
to my family, our constituency, our city, and our province. Our 
government and our Premier made a commitment in 2009 of 
$200 million, after the project had languished under the NDP 
from 1992. The NDP just didn’t think it was an important 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

investment for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
However just two years after our first mandate, we took action. 
Our investment now is almost $236 million. We’re finally 
getting a new children’s hospital because the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve it. Construction is 70 per cent complete, 
and within two years, we’ll have a world-class facility right 
here in Saskatchewan that will provide excellent care for moms 
and kids alike. 
 
Now why is this investment important, Mr. Speaker? I can tell 
you how it would have affected my family and how it will 
affect my family. My niece was born with some huge health 
challenges. In fact, it was touch and go as to whether she was 
even going to make it. But she’s a fighter, and while she 
continues to have challenges, has grown into a playful, happy 
young girl. When she was younger, my brother and his family 
had to take extensive time off work to care for her. Now this 
included many trips to specialists out of our province. I just 
think of all the stress they caused him and his wife, not to 
mention our extended family. 
 
It would have made that experience much easier if they had 
been able to get care for Anna right here at home. The stress 
and expense of travelling to another province is overwhelming, 
not only for Anna but for our whole family. The new children’s 
hospital will help hundreds of families like mine by keeping our 
kids close to home, providing best-in-world care, and 
comforting families in their time of need. 
 
So how does the 2017 Throne Speech affect Saskatoon 
University? Well I can tell you lots of ways, Mr. Speaker. I 
always like to tell a story, and this one is very compelling. 
Derek Reimer owns Koncept Sign Group in Saskatoon. Derek 
moved out of Saskatchewan to go to school in 1993, and he 
moved to BC [British Columbia]. He stayed there and bought 
part of an existing business after high school in 1999. The NDP 
were in government in BC, Mr. Speaker. It was tough for small 
business. He was paying staff out of line of credit. 
 
Those of us that have worked in small business and have owned 
small businesses know how gut wrenching it is when payroll is 
coming up, the money isn’t in the bank, and dozens or perhaps 
even three or four people are counting on you to make that 
payroll. It keeps people up at night. It causes them stress. It 
causes stress for the whole family, and it makes people sick. 
That happened to Derek more than once. 
 
When the Liberals were elected in 2001 in BC, their policies 
helped Derek’s sign shop grow quickly. Sales grew 
exponentially from 2001 to 2006. They hired more staff, 
provided great customer service, and became profitable. 
 
Now at the time, Derek’s niece was working with the Premier’s 
marketing committee prior to the 2000 election, and she told 
Derek it looked good this time around. So with a huge leap of 
faith, he sold his shares in his Kelowna business in October 
2006 and moved back to Saskatoon in January 2007. Our 
Premier and the hope the Saskatchewan Party inspired for 
Saskatchewan was the only reason he moved back. He had 
confidence that we knew how business worked, and we would 
set the policies for success for his business. Derek started 
Koncept Sign Group shortly after the Sask Party government 

was elected. He hired three employees and they went to work. 
 
Now fast-forward to 2017, just this last year, Mr. Speaker. 
Koncept Sign Group now has 10 great employees. His business 
is thriving and contributing to the local economy while helping 
all of their customers succeed. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’re so 
busy that one evening last year, last summer, I was waiting for 
some printing that I needed done for a project of mine. They’re 
so busy, Mr. Speaker, that I had to actually go out on site and 
help Derek and his team because they were installing signs for a 
new development in Saskatoon. It was a new development 
called Brighton. You know, I went out and I helped and we got 
the project done, and because of that — in spite of my help 
actually, not because of my help, but in spite of my help, Mr. 
Speaker — I got my project done too. That’s how busy he is. 
That’s how dedicated he was to me. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
the way Saskatchewan works today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, policy matters. It mattered to Derek, it matters to 
business, and it matters to every person in Saskatchewan. And 
let me tell you what else Derek and his team have 
accomplished. There’s rarely a charitable event that I attend that 
Koncept Sign Group is not a part of. Whether it’s golf 
tournaments, charity dinners, or gala evenings, it’s the 
exception when you don’t see Derek and Allison in attendance 
and all the signage provided for free to whatever organization 
they’re supporting. Derek’s also an active member of Vipond, 
whose mandate it is to have a day of fun and good fellowship 
while helping those less fortunate. Through this organization, 
they’ve raised more than $5 million for those with intellectual 
disabilities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the point of my story of Derek and his 
company has three points. One is through our government’s 
policies we have attracted and retained many new businesses. 
Number two is bringing our lost generation back to 
Saskatchewan. Number three is the amount of philanthropy 
these small businesses generate through being good corporate 
citizens and proud members of our community. They give back 
so much to our communities and non-profit organizations that 
their contribution is really invaluable. We have much to be 
thankful for, Mr. Speaker, and we should be thanking people 
like Derek and his team at Koncept Sign Group for coming 
back to our province and investing their money and their time in 
our communities. 
 
His business, co-workers, and staff and our province will 
directly benefit from the announcement in the Throne Speech 
that we will be raising the small business income threshold 
from $500,000 to $600,000, the highest threshold in Canada. 
This will allow small businesses like Koncept Sign Group to 
keep more money in their business, expand, reinvest, and create 
new jobs and opportunities. 
 
What I found interesting, Mr. Speaker, is when the Throne 
Speech was read and the NDP were speaking about this 
initiative, I heard something alarming. The comment was, and I 
quote, “It does not ‘reduce small biz taxes.’ It allows larger 
businesses to take advantage of the small-biz rate.” Really, Mr. 
Speaker? Who thinks like this? Obviously it’s someone from 
the old way of life. We don’t think that way in Saskatchewan 
anymore, Mr. Speaker. I, for one, am sure glad we’ve left those 
days behind. 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

So let’s talk about Saskatoon for a while. This year in 
Saskatoon we’re going to be sharing in revenue of $48,427,797, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s up 161 per cent from 2007-2008. At that 
time, in 2007, it was $17.8 million, Mr. Speaker. As a former 
member of city council in Saskatoon, I can tell you we really 
appreciated the investment in our municipalities. 
 
In February 2009, new on-campus residence of the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] was granted $15 million for that 
project. In November 2009, University of Saskatchewan, 
research roof top renewal, $6.375 million; October 2008, U of S 
Canadian cooperative wildlife health centre, $240,000. Mr. 
Speaker, I could go on and on with that. But let’s talk about 
some other things that are going to be helping Saskatoon and 
Saskatoon university people. 
 
Let’s talk about education, Mr. Speaker. This year 21 new 
schools accommodating more than 11,000 students opened their 
doors for the first time. These schools are located in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Warman, and Martensville and were completed in 
less than two years. Altogether we’ve constructed or renovated 
65 schools during the last decade, including several new 
community schools. 
 
I also wanted to touch on some new curriculum initiatives. A 
pause on curriculum development has been lifted and 
curriculum renewal will continue in a number of subject areas. 
What’s of particular interest to me, Mr. Speaker, is we will also 
begin the development of a computer coding curriculum to help 
prepare students for careers in science, mathematics, 
engineering, and technology. 
 
The reason that is of importance to me is I had a conversation 
with the folks at Sask tech at Innovation Place at the U of S 
campus recently. They’re working with the Ministry of 
Education to develop Saskatchewan into a key tech centre in 
Canada and the world. They did tremendous work and provided 
our government with a discussion paper on how to strengthen 
the tech sector and make it the best-in-world place to develop, 
build, and grow a healthy, prosperous tech community right 
there in Saskatoon. 
 
Part of their strategy is to get computer coding into the school 
curriculum to help prepare students for a career in science, 
mathematics, engineering, and technology. And you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? We listened. We listened and it’s in the 
Throne Speech. I’m excited about the sector and what it will 
mean for the U of S, Innovation Place, and all of the other tech 
companies that are currently housed there. Co.Labs is doing 
fantastic work already, providing incubator space, and 
mentoring for tech startups. Our economy will grow 
exponentially with these strategic investments in our kids and 
our technology. So I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll 
let somebody else take my place. 
 
I won’t be supporting the amendment and I will be supporting 
the motion made by the member from Estevan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a privilege for me to rise to take part in the debate on the 
Throne Speech that was delivered. Before I do, I want to begin 

by thanking a number of people, first of all, the people of the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency for giving me the honour of 
representing them in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
[20:45] 
 
I also want to thank obviously the staff that I get to work with 
in this building, not only, Mr. Speaker, the staff that I work with 
as Minister of Environment, but also obviously there was a 
cabinet shuffle a couple of months ago, and the staff that I had 
the privilege of working with for the past year as Minister of 
Energy and Resources. I want to thank my constituency 
assistant, Marcie Swedburg, who has worked for me since 
2006, but in fact she has worked for the people of the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency for 16 years now working 
for my predecessor. And Marcie does a great job in our 
constituency office. 
 
And I also I want to thank my family. We obviously had an 
opportunity, or I had an opportunity — not obviously because 
you wouldn’t know that — but I had an opportunity over the 
supper break to join with them tonight. For everybody’s 
information, Jack was Gekko boy from PJ Masks for all of you, 
that . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’re quite well aware of that. 
He dressed up as Gekko boy and had a great time. And little 
Ephram was a pumpkin; wasn’t originally going to be a 
pumpkin. He was going to be a fox, except for he’s growing so 
quickly that he outgrew the costume. And so Amanda had to 
find the pumpkin that Jack wore when he was about that age, 
and so Ephram was a little pumpkin this evening. And they’re 
just . . . I could go the next hour and a half, two hours just on 
those two boys, but I won’t do that. But so, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
really blessed with a growing family and really enjoying, really 
enjoying this time with them. And obviously, I do want to thank 
Amanda for all of her support and the great job that she does in 
raising our two boys and just the best mother that these two 
boys could ever have dreamed of having. 
 
I also want to thank Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. This, 
I believe, was most likely the last Throne Speech that she would 
have delivered as the Lieutenant Governor and she, I think, has 
done a superb job in representing Her Majesty as well as the 
people of this province in her duties. And I do want to thank the 
Premier. Members have recognized the fact that this is the last 
Throne Speech that will be delivered under the Premier from 
Swift Current, and so I want to thank him for the roles that he 
has asked me to serve. I’m pleased to have been recycled back 
into the Environment file. 
 
And you know to be honest, Mr. Speaker, I think like a lot of 
people. I certainly am sad that he has decided to step away from 
elected life. You know, I thought he was just starting to get the 
hang of the job, and so . . . But certainly I understand that, you 
know, he’s moving into a new season in his life and wish all the 
best for he and Tami as they finish very well the last couple of 
months serving the people of Swift Current and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to welcome the member from Saskatoon Fairview to the 
Legislative Assembly and congratulate her on her by-election 
victory. It’s always . . . No doubt it’s exciting to enter this 
House by an election. I think it’s a little extra special to do so 
through a by-election where it’s the only game in town. It’s the 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

only election at any given time, so all the spotlight, the focus, is 
on that race. And I think it adds an extra element of excitement 
for all the parties that are involved. 
 
And I do want to — and he was in the Chamber earlier, but I 
know he’s here — I do want to welcome back Ken Krawetz to 
the Legislative Assembly. It is great having Ken, even though 
it’s for a limited amount of time, serving back in now a new 
role as chief of staff to the Premier. 
 
So he has served in a leadership role in our party. He has served 
as a deputy premier of Saskatchewan, and now chief of staff to 
the Premier. He only has one step left to go, that being the 
deputy minister to the Premier, and he will have hit a cycle. So 
he’s getting close to that, but we’ll see. I’m not sure that’s in the 
cards for him. But it’s really great to have Ken back in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’m not going to speak for very long, probably much to the 
relief of all my colleagues, but I do want to touch on just two 
areas in the Throne Speech. First, the section that speaks to the 
environment. Obviously now having that role, I do want to 
touch on what the Throne Speech has laid out, and I then want 
to touch on an area that has a lot to do with, I think, not just our 
province, but the economy of my constituency and the role that 
I previously had. But I think the two do tie together. 
 
So the Throne Speech does lay out the government’s plan to not 
only to continue to oppose a federally imposed carbon tax on 
the people of Saskatchewan. I won’t belabour the point. I think 
it has been spelled out quite clearly by members of this side of 
the House, particularly the Premier, of why carbon tax would be 
a detriment to the economy of this province. And I think it has 
been borne out quite well, the fact that Saskatchewan’s 
economy is an export-intensive economy, largely based on 
exporting goods across the world, across the globe, and the 
importance of ensuring that we are competitive. And, in fact, 
that has been recognized by even the working group on carbon 
pricing mechanisms as a part of the working groups that were 
established by the premiers over the last two years or so, which 
spoke specifically about the issue of carbon leakage. This is 
from the working group on carbon pricing mechanisms, the 
final report, and I quote: 
 

When their competitiveness is affected, Canadian firms 
may face pressure to reduce domestic production, or shift 
production/investment to a country that has not yet priced 
carbon at a comparative level . . . 

 
It later goes on to specifically refer to this as carbon leakage. 
And in fact a national panel . . . To further that thought, a 
national panel of economists had suggested that perhaps the 
federal government or the country should look at subsidizing 
those industries in the country that will face the threat of carbon 
leakage. And in fact a national panel of economists specifically 
pointed out Saskatchewan: 
 

The oil and gas sectors in Alberta and Saskatchewan are 
the biggest factors. There’s no way that they can pass on 
the higher costs to their consumers. As a result, they 
essentially have to eat those costs. 
 

And, later, they went on to talk about how the fact that 

vulnerable industries, while making up only about 5 per cent of 
the economy overall as a country, they are as high as 28 per 
cent of the economies in Alberta and Saskatchewan, and I 
quote: 
 

There’s competitiveness and leakage implications for 
Canada moving ahead of the United States. The bigger the 
carbon price, the more the issue matters. 

 
So it’s very real, and that’s why we believe that not only is a 
carbon tax not the right policy for this country, has been shown 
to not in fact reduce emissions, but it in fact will do harm to the 
economy of Saskatchewan and frankly harm to the Canadian 
economy. And that’s why we are developing a made-in 
Saskatchewan approach. I think that has been largely 
recognized, not by all quarters, but largely recognized as the 
right approach to take, to have our own plan in Saskatchewan 
that will, among other things, see, as we’ve said before, 50 per 
cent renewables by 2030 which is significant. This will be 
doubling the renewable generation within a 15-year time span. 
It will see SaskPower cut their GHGs [greenhouse gas] by 44 
per cent over that time frame. Also what we would put forward 
and have put forward is the fact that Saskatchewan really 
should benefit from what we do well in this province when it 
comes to uranium mining, when it comes to agriculture, and the 
jurisdictions around the world that are benefitting from the 
developments that have been developed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so that will be a part of what we’ll bring forward, to not 
only demonstrate how a made-in-Saskatchewan plan is the right 
plan for Saskatchewan. It takes into account the needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan. It takes into account the intricacies of 
our economy in Saskatchewan, and it takes into account the fact 
that, yes, we do need to be resilient to the ongoing effects of 
climate change. And why I say that, and as a part of that, yes, 
BD3 [Boundary dam 3] is an important part of that. 
 
I had an opportunity in the early days of being in this role to 
speak at a symposium that was hosted in Regina, where there 
were delegates from over a dozen countries around the world 
looking specifically at carbon capture and sequestration 
technology that has been demonstrated here in Saskatchewan. I 
know my colleague from Estevan, as well as Cannington, 
attended that conference, and to hear people from around the 
world acknowledge the need for this, but also recognizing the 
fact that this is first generation technology. And so we need to 
work with and collaborate with organizations around the world 
to understand the science and the technology, but also to work 
together to ensure that the next generation of technology that, 
yes, it improves, that we can bring the cost down, bring the 
price down. And it’s in recognition of the fact that coal is not 
going away around the world. 
 
And in fact I find it interesting, when I was still the Energy 
minister, at our meetings this summer in New Brunswick, the 
Energy and Mines ministers’ meeting, the federal minister 
handed out an energy fact book produced by the Natural 
Resources department in Ottawa and noted the fact that Canada 
produces 61 million tonnes of coal per year and we export 30 
million tonnes of that. Largely half of that is Alberta and half of 
that is British Columbia. So in two jurisdictions that have 
carbon taxes and yet they are exporting coal to places like, well 
24 per cent of coal exports from Alberta and British Columbia 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

go to Japan, 20 per cent go to South Korea, and 16 per cent go 
to China. 
 
And in fact we import, as a country, 6 million tonnes of coal, 
and 76 per cent of that comes from the United States, which 
doesn’t have, as we know, a carbon tax and likely never will 
have a national carbon tax. The other interesting thing about 
this is that half of the coal that we’re importing is for the 
production of steel and half of the coal is for electricity. 
 
Most of the coal that we’re exporting is for steel production, 
particularly coal from British Columbia. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Importing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — No, exporting actually. So we’re 
exporting coal to places like South Korea and China that are 
using it to produce steel products which are then competing 
against steel products that are produced, in the case of pipeline, 
here in Regina at Evraz. 
 
And I can tell you, and I’ve had presentations, the way that steel 
products are produced in China is much different than they’re 
produced in Regina. And in fact most people would not know 
this, but Evraz is one of the largest owners of car wreckers in 
North America. Why? Because they rely heavily on scrap 
metal. And how do you ensure that you have enough scrap 
metal? Well you own wrecking facilities, wreckers, car 
wreckers, all across North America. And so I don’t have the 
number on me here, but I believe it’s about an 80 per cent fewer 
carbon emissions and associated emissions from the way Evraz 
produces steel in Regina, Saskatchewan than compared to how 
steel is produced in China. 
 
And so as a country, we’re sending coal largely from British 
Columbia, that has a carbon tax, to China to produce, in a much 
dirtier way, steel products including pipeline that then competes 
against steel that’s produced using recycled products in Regina. 
Not sure how it makes sense, but that’s the reality today. And 
I’ll come back to that point on another issue. 
 
[21:00] 
 
So we’re going to move forward with a plan that works for 
Saskatchewan, that recognizes our unique needs, that 
recognizes our economy and the importance of ensuring that 
our economy is strong going forward, but also recognizing that 
we have to, yes, do our part. And we are going to demonstrate 
that going forward. 
 
This ties into another area, and I’ve already touched on 
competitiveness when it comes to steel products, but this does 
tie into the section on competitiveness. And I just want to speak 
to that, specifically to really projects that have already, I think, 
gone through the process, and I’ll speak a little bit about the 
process. In some ways, Mr. Speaker, this will just be a bit of a 
venting session, but it will feel good, I hope. 
 
You know, it was really, I would say, frustrating to sit around 
the table in New Brunswick this summer with the Energy and 
Mines ministers from across the country and the federal 
minister. We certainly, as a province, have allies at that table. 
But when you see projects that are being cancelled, such as 

PETRONAS [Petroliam Nasional Berhad], their liquefied rich 
natural gas projects, when you see now subsequent to those 
meetings, when you see now companies, proponents, having 
decided to walk away from pipeline projects in this country and 
to hear the federal minister basically wash the hands of the 
federal government and saying, well, these are business 
decisions that these companies make and to somehow suggest 
that the economics just aren’t right to get a liquefied natural gas 
project, a $36 billion project, built in this country or to get a 
pipeline project built in this country are simply business 
decisions, as if governments don’t, either for the good or for ill, 
influence the decisions that businesses make, was certainly 
profoundly disappointing to hear the federal minister say that. 
 
We need to ensure that we are competitive. And the record of 
projects that are leaving this country, the record of companies 
that are selling their stakes in Canada and deciding to invest 
their dollars elsewhere means that we will continue, in the case 
of oil, for a project as — and this point has been said time and 
time again, but I’m going to continue it — for a project that was 
two-thirds already complete in the ground, for a project that 
would allow for the ability not just to displace imported oil but 
would also allow for the ability for Western Canadian crude to 
get to tidewater, to try to get to that world, to try to achieve the 
world price . . . We are selling oil each and every day out of 
Western Canada at a discount, which doesn’t just mean that the 
companies are selling at a discount because there’s only one 
customer and there’s a glut trying to get that oil to that one 
customer, but it means that we’re all suffering. It means that the 
people of Saskatchewan that own the resource are not receiving 
the full return that they should be because of that. 
 
And for those jurisdictions that are against these types of 
projects, they’re actually costing their provinces money because 
as everybody knows, non-renewable resource revenue is a 
factor in equalization. And so in the case of Saskatchewan, the 
number has been anywhere, depending on the price of oil and 
depending on the differential, it’s anywhere from 40 to $50 
million a year, as high as I think 2 to $300 million at the height 
of oil prices. 
 
And I can tell you it’s much higher in Alberta. Last year I think 
it was closer to $650 million that was left off the table because 
of that differential which then is factored into the formula, 
which then means that places like Quebec — where Montreal is 
located, where the mayor of Montreal resides — is receiving 
less dollars in equalization because of the fact that we’re not 
receiving the full return for those projects. 
 
And I will say it’s disappointing to see and kind of hard to get 
the members opposite on the record in terms of where they are 
at on any given day on a carbon tax. Sometimes they’re in 
favour of a carbon tax and sometimes they’re not really, and 
sometimes they’re in favour of pipelines and not really 
sometimes. 
 
But certainly at their federal level where I think they probably 
take a lot of direction, their new leader, that’s a concern. He 
said, in terms of pipelines, I have said no to Energy East and 
Kinder Morgan and most recently Keystone XL. Niki Ashton, 
who’s a very high profile member, obviously didn’t win the 
leadership, but she certainly was very much against the project, 
the pipeline projects that have been tried to be advanced across 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

this country. 
 
And so that means today we will continue to import a million 
barrels, according to Minister Carr, Jim Carr. We will continue 
to import a million barrels per day in this country. And last year 
62 per cent of that came from United States, where there isn’t a 
carbon tax, and it came to Canada mainly by pipeline; 9 per 
cent of it came from Saudi Arabia, came by tanker up the St. 
Lawrence Seaway and the Bay of Fundy; 9 per cent came from 
Algeria, same way, came by tanker through the Bay of Fundy, 
through the St. Lawrence Seaway; and 8 per cent Nigeria. 
 
And I think it’s just getting to the point of beyond frustration of 
having to prove that whether you’re from Saskatchewan or 
Alberta or you’re working on a drilling rig at Lloydminster or if 
you’re working at a battery site in Cannington or if you’re in 
the Southwest in the Shaunavon play or even, yes, in the oil 
sands in northern Alberta, it’s getting beyond frustrating having 
to prove that you’re a better source for energy, that whether you 
like it or not we need as a country and will need for, I would 
say, my lifetime. Certainly beyond that. I hope it’s a long 
lifetime, but certainly for many decades to come. 
 
Somehow we don’t reach a standard that apparently the United 
States, that they apparently achieve, that Saudi Arabia achieves. 
Like we’re just not as good in Saskatchewan at producing oil in 
an environmentally friendly way, in a way that respects for all 
the issues that we have to continue to work on, but worker 
safety in a socially responsible manner. To the people of 
Montreal, to the mayor of Montreal and to other provinces, we 
just don’t achieve the same standards that Algeria and Saudi 
Arabia and Nigeria, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s getting beyond frustrating, I think, for many of us. I would 
hope all of us in this province that continually have to fight 
against this, while at the same time a million barrels a day are 
going to be imported from those countries. And tomorrow a 
million barrels a day, in a way that it just . . . If we can’t satisfy 
from this province those questions for the mayor of Montreal 
and others, I don’t know how they justify what’s going on each 
and every day in this country. 
 
We have to, I think, recognize in my final minutes the fact that 
this is a big deal when companies are leaving this country. You 
know some will say, well, you know, the Canadian company, 
they’re able to buy out the other half of their operation from the 
foreign entity. And so that’s good for Canada because now they 
own 100 per cent of it. For their shareholders, I hope that turns 
out to be true. But those dollars aren’t staying in this country. 
They’re fleeing; they’re going elsewhere. 
 
And if you want an example . . . and I won’t go into a lot of 
detail but I will challenge members to take me up on this. If you 
want an example of how important for our Canadian economy 
outside dollars are, all you have to do is look at the volume of 
trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange on the Monday before 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, the Monday of Martin Luther 
King, Jr. Day, and the Monday following Martin Luther King, 
Jr. Day in the United States. Because on the Monday of Martin 
Luther King, Jr. Day, it’s a holiday in the United States and so 
traders in the United States have the day off. And so I would 
urge everybody, just to see the importance of outside dollars 
into our economy, just look at the trading volumes of the three 

Mondays that I just mentioned. And you will see — just as one 
indicator, one indicator alone — the importance of those dollars 
into our economy. 
 
Finally, we should all really care about this, our 
competitiveness as a country. And I will be sharing this this 
weekend with my environment colleagues, as I did this summer 
with energy and mines ministers, when I meet in Vancouver 
this weekend. This affects this country. Nearly a million people 
are employed directly and indirectly by the energy industry. 
And we hope that that energy industry in the future will include 
more jobs like the people that create and build and install solar 
panels and wind turbines. You know, hopefully, in the future 
those jobs will grow. But that’s not really where they are, the 
bulk of them are, today. And so we need to be mindful of the 
economy as it is today and as it will be over the coming years. 
 
The fact of the matter, that when you look at last summer to this 
summer, the fact that the world stock indexes were all in 
positive territory except for Canada. So why would that be? 
Well probably because our stock index, the Toronto Stock 
Exchange, the benchmark, is more heavily weighted to the 
energy sector than others. And so that has an effect for 
everybody. 
 
If you’re collecting CPP [Canada Pension Plan], that has an 
effect. Policy, government policy, particularly in this case, 
federal government policy has an impact. It has an impact on 
CPP. It has an impact on the Québec Pension Plan. It has an 
impact on the teachers of Ontario pension plan. It has an effect 
whether you like this issue or not, whether you like this industry 
or not. It has an impact and government policy has an impact. 
 
And in closing, I would just say that we need to be mindful as a 
country, as a trading nation, as a country that relies heavily on 
trading with other nations, with customers. We need to be 
mindful of what are we telling our customers in terms of our 
reliability, our inability to get projects built and approved and 
the changing goalposts. And now we have to factor in this when 
it comes to a pipeline, but we don’t factor that same thing in 
when it comes to building an airplane factory in Quebec or a car 
plant in Ontario. But we now will when it comes to things like 
pipelines. We need to be able to show the rest of the world that 
we can get these projects and move them forward and build 
them, and that we are a reliable country. And I fear that that’s 
not the case. 
 
And so I’ve only been able to touch on two points. I know 
others want to speak but I think the environment and our 
competitiveness, they’re closely tied. And so with that I will 
take my place and I will not be supporting the amendment but I 
will be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand in my place and reply to the Speech from the Throne. I 
was interested when the member from Cannington stood up and 
said it was his 28th, I believe, 27th reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. It wouldn’t be fair to the people of Saskatchewan if I 
had to reply that many times. I think I’ve been in here for about 
18 years. I don’t believe I’ve replied to every Speech from the 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

Throne because sometimes the numbers grew too large on this 
side, which is really quite a nice thing, that allow everyone to 
reply. Some people had to stand back and I was certainly glad 
to do that. 
 
But I have been able to reply to many of them and it’s always 
an interesting seven days, because this debate, when you reply 
to the Speech from the Throne, or when you reply to the budget 
— it’s also quite similar — the conversations can be quite wide 
ranging. There really isn’t any particular script; it’s not like a 
bill or anything like that that you stay fairly close to, so it’s 
quite wide ranging. And when it is wide ranging like that you 
really do get a true feeling of the perspective from this side of 
the House in what’s going on in the province, and the 
perspective from that side of the House, on the opposition side 
of the House, on what’s going on in the province. And it really 
is, you’d swear that the Speech from the Throne was a 
completely different document when you hear the opposition 
speak to when you hear the government speak. But I’m going to 
get into a little bit more on the Speech from the Throne in 
particular as my comments go on. 
 
[21:15] 
 
But I first want to, as many members do, and I think it’s the one 
time annually that we get to stand in our place and talk a little 
bit about who gets us here, who allows us to stay here, who 
supports us while we’re here, and that’s certainly my 
opportunity to talk a little bit about that as well as maybe some 
family issues as well. 
 
First of all I want to, and others have talked about it, but for 
anybody that’s been elected for any length of time, they know 
that the most important part of their political success, really the 
professional side of it, the backbone of any MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] I believe, is their constituency 
assistant and the work that those constituency assistants do 
within those offices. It’s quite amazing. I mean as MLAs we’re 
either in this place or we’re out at meetings or meeting with 
people, but those phone calls that come in on a daily basis — 
and some are pleasant; some aren’t — are handled by those 
constituency assistants. And so Nicole Entner-McCullough, 
I’ve talked about her before. She’s been my constituency 
assistant or CA since I was elected in 2007 on the government 
side. Vonni Widdis had been my constituency assistant up until 
that point. But Nicole does a great job, lives just outside of 
Balgonie, and is raising, with Curtis, two young girls that are 
very active. 
 
But you know, I’ve always thought Nicole has done a very 
good job, but I will say that this particular year, over the last 
number of months . . . Probably she’s done a great job the 
whole time, but even more importantly, as there’s been issues 
certainly around the Balgonie bypass, and I’m going to talk 
about that a little bit later, but you know, we as MLAs, I’ve 
often said we don’t have an on and off switch. You can be out 
at a public event with family and you’re still the MLA for 
Indian Head-Milestone or any constituency and people will 
come up and talk to you. It’s not whether you’ve got time off, 
you know, on the weekend or whatever. You’re still the MLA 
and if that’s when people see you, that’s when they’re going to 
come and talk to you. 
 

Well in this case for Nicole, who is around Balgonie and the 
Balgonie bypass issue is on, people have been talking to her. 
And it’s not like she can leave work at 5 o’clock and not be my 
assistant. She is my assistant regardless, 24 hours a day, 7 days 
a week and people have been, you know, raising their concerns 
to her. So you know, I just appreciate that. It’s not a nine-to-five 
job or a nine-to-four job, depending on the hours that we’ve set 
up in our offices. It really is in some situations, and in some 
matters, a job that they live. 
 
And so I just want to thank Nicole for all the work that she has 
done throughout my time as government, but in particularly 
over the last number of months dealing with the public and 
dealing with the Ministry of Highways, trying to get 
information to the public and trying to relay information to me 
and then on to the ministry. She has done just an unbelievably 
great job. 
 
I also want to talk a little bit about the constituents of Indian 
Head-Milestone. I’ve had the opportunity to represent them for 
18 years, and it’s been a great bunch to represent, even though 
the boundaries change from time to time. And this is the third 
boundary change and I’m missing some of the people that I got 
to be quite close with in the Avonlea-Rouleau area, Wilcox. But 
picked up Pilot Butte and been a great opportunity to learn and 
know some more people round there. Yes, lost the Francis area, 
a great area, but they’ve got a much better MLA serving them 
now than they did for the 18 years previous. 
 
But they have been amazing whether it’s been at parades 
through this past summer, or homecomings. I was down in 
Lang for the homecoming in Lang and just a great response for 
a small community as people come back into the community. 
It’s kind of the old stomping grounds. I played senior hockey 
there for many a year, started when I was 15, can hardly believe 
that. But certainly got to know a lot of people and great support. 
 
People are really, really genuine when they talk about their 
community and their love for their community. And it’s nice to 
hear that, and it’s nice to have their support. It really does mean 
a lot. So the constituents are extra special, I think, and I think 
that we’d all as MLAs say we have the best constituency and 
the best people to represent. I would say that and argue 
vehemently that I think it’s Indian Head-Milestone. But 
anyway, moving on. 
 
The other people of course that support us of course are the 
people in our family and, you know, I would be no different. 
Cindy is still working in the General part-time but certainly has 
been a great support over the last 18 years in public life. We 
have two sons, and it’s no secret that they’ve got quite a public 
life as well. I think Cindy will be very happy, number one, 
when my political career is over, and their sporting careers are 
over because they tend to be played out in front of the camera 
far too often. Mine certainly is a little bit quieter now and she’s 
quite comfortable with that and I think I am too. But the boys 
certainly have gained a fair amount of, well I don’t know about 
notary, but certainly recognition. 
 
Mark of course after his accident last year . . . It was quite a 
significant accident and the outpouring of support from the 
province, from people in this Chamber on both sides, I 
appreciate, from the province and also nationally and 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

internationally. He is just . . . A status report really quickly 
because this is not about him, but he’s doing well. He had a 
myriad of broken bones from his jaw to his ribs to his left arm 
to his pelvic bone; a ruptured spleen and punctured lung. And 
he’s been able to come back from all of that. After a week he 
was out of the hospital, which was quite hard to believe, and 
has been rehabbing in Vancouver and down in the States a little 
bit and is doing well. 
 
He spent some time over in Australia riding this summer. But 
most importantly he was just recently in Switzerland where he 
was actually training for the Olympics again, hitting big jumps 
and landing. And it’s hard to believe it’s been a little over five 
months and is pretty much in game shape. Physically was one 
part of it and the other part was mentally. And being able to 
experience his friends again has been significant for him. 
 
So he’s looking forward to, much to his mother’s chagrin, he’s 
looking to a full competitive season this year. And I think she 
would rather see him not on the shelf the way he was, but 
maybe just stepping back a little bit, but that isn’t going to be 
the case. Not that anybody is probably keeping track like we 
are, but it’s 100 days to the Olympic start as of today, and so 
that’s a big countdown. 
 
Our other son Craig is working fairly closely with CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] and will be doing a lot of 
work in the Olympics for CBC as one of the five hosts for 
bringing it back to Canada, also doing the colour commentating 
for the snowboard events and some other things. So we’re kind 
of centred around the Olympics. So 100 days is hard to believe, 
and it’ll be here before we know it. 
 
Anyway, enough of that. But that is the status report. And I’ve 
said to many people . . . And you know, there are some issues in 
the constituency for sure, but the first question I always get is, 
how is Mark? It’s not, how are the roads or anything else. That 
seems to be the first question I get. So I’ve done my status 
report. 
 
I want to welcome the member from Saskatoon Fairview here 
in this Chamber. It is kind of an intimidating place, I would 
think, the first time. I remember many, many years ago — I 
think I can remember that far back — to ’99. My maiden speech 
was a long time ago. But the time does tend to fly by here even 
though some nights at almost 9:30 at night it tends to drag on a 
little bit. But it does really fly by. And it’s a special place, you 
know, when you sit in this Chamber and think of the people that 
have come before us. And quite frankly there’ll be many, many 
that will come after us. We’re but here for just a short time even 
though some of us have been replying to 27 speeches from the 
throne. But we really are here for a short time, and so it is truly 
a privilege to be here. So congratulations on your election. 
 
And I was thinking of it, as much as we think nothing changes 
in this room, it is ever evolving. It is really quite amazing when 
you think about from even year to year how this place evolves 
from the number of seats on this side to, unfortunately, a couple 
more seats on that side. And who knows what will happen over 
the next two or three years. I would think those seats may come 
back to this side, but we’ll see how that takes place in the next 
two or three years. 
 

I am here to speak regarding . . . on the Throne Speech, and I 
was told that I need to go to a certain time. I’m sure TVs are 
turning off all over the province right now, and I will just warn 
you that if you haven’t turned off now, turn off real soon 
because the member from Athabasca is speaking after me, and I 
would not want anybody to be put through that punishment. I 
have been here for a long time, and I’ve heard his speeches. 
And I will guarantee if we could replay the tape from the speech 
that he gave two years ago, eight years ago, or twelve years ago, 
it’s the same one, Mr. Speaker. I’ll know what he’s going to 
talk about, and so I’ll just warn the viewers right now, turn it 
off. If you’ve heard him before, it’s going to be the same thing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, it really does amaze me how on a 
Speech from the Throne, and I said it in my opening remarks, 
how it can vary greatly from this side of the House, which quite 
frankly has been very positive, not that there aren’t issues in the 
province and not that we haven’t heard concerns after the 
budget, but generally the Speech from the Throne has set the 
direction of government moving forward. And generally across 
the province from what we hear, which is quite a wide range 
from city constituencies to urban constituencies, it really is 
quite positive, unlike when you listen to the members opposite. 
 
Now they all haven’t spoke, but it is so negative. It is so 
actually quite depressing, and now that they’ve recently won 
Saskatoon Fairview and there is a dozen of them, it really has 
become the depressing dozen, not the dirty dozen, the 
depressing dozen because I haven’t heard any of them that have 
really come out and talked very positively about a province that 
has seen growth, unbelievable growth over the last 10 years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it really is amazing because it has been a decade of growth, 
and we are still growing even though we have faced some 
downturn in the commodities. And that will happen from time 
to time, but that doesn’t mean people . . . A downturn in the 
commodities doesn’t mean people have given up on the 
province, unlike with members opposite. They truly have given 
up on the province, where we still think the opportunity for 
growth — economic growth, population growth, wage growth 
— Mr. Speaker, is there in spades. And that’s why we are so 
positive moving forward, and that’s why the Speech from the 
Throne, no doubt, is entitled “Growing Stronger” because 
stronger means . . . growing stronger means that’s what’s going 
to happen into the future, and it’s very evident when you look at 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’m amazed that, you know, the member from Wood River was 
mentioning about he was going to take on page 3 and 4 or 5 and 
6. You could do a 40-minute speech on any one of these pages 
because they are filled with positive aspects of where the 
province will be going into the future. 
 
I’m not going to get too much into the decade of growth, but 
what I do want to talk about is, I know the opposition has said, 
well it’s all looking back. What happens is, is when you start 
talking about 750 new doctors practising in Saskatchewan or 
3,400 nurses, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t looking back. That is 
looking at the service that will be provided into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, of this province. 
 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

It wasn’t very many years ago, and I can tell you I was the 
Health critic, where we had community after community after 
community were seeing their facilities closed, not because 
government wanted to close it, because they had done such a 
poor job in attracting health care professionals. Hospitals were 
closing and, yes, they closed 52 intentionally. That was an 
intentional closure when they closed 52. But there were 
facilities around the province that were cutting back services 
because the opposition at that time, when they were in 
government, were rationing the health care professionals we 
had in the province. 
 
I remember meeting with the ministry staff shortly after and I 
said, we have got a critical doctor shortage here. What can we 
do to increase the number of doctors? And they went away and 
they came back and they said, well we . . . You know, I said, 
can you come up with a couple of ideas? And they came up 
with 10 different ideas and they expected me to pick two of 
them and I couldn’t pick two of them because they were all 
great ideas. So the point of that story was, it isn’t because the 
civil service or the bureaucracy didn’t know what needed to be 
done to attract doctors and make sure that there was a proper 
complement of doctors. It was the political will of the NDP that 
wouldn’t follow through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ideas were there before we were elected as government, 
Mr. Speaker. It took us as a government to follow through on 
these ideas and because of it we see 750 more doctors practising 
in this province. Something as simple as the evaluation on how 
you evaluated doctors. We only took doctors from six different 
countries and they were evaluated through a process in 
Manitoba. We brought that back to Saskatchewan where the 
process is done in province, accepting physicians from around 
the world if they meet the qualifications here. 
 
[21:30] 
 
I want to just tell you this story. Can you imagine, under the 
NDP this is what they would do. They’d bring a doctor in from 
a country, of those six countries. They’d bring a doctor in and 
they’d put him in a community and they had done absolutely no 
evaluation of that physician at all. They could practise in the 
community for six months with absolutely no evaluation. By 
the time they finally got to evaluating whether this person was 
safe to practise medicine in our province, they would finally 
send them to Manitoba to be evaluated. If they didn’t pass the 
exam, this person had been practising for six to seven months. 
They didn’t seem to care too much about the quality. Then they 
would pull him out of the community after they got a whole 
complement of people relying on that physician within that 
community. That’s the system that we had in this province 
years ago. It’s hard to believe when you think about it, that the 
government would’ve actually done that. So regardless, you 
know, it has all changed. 
 
And when we talk about the number of physicians that we’ve 
recruited, the changes that we’ve made, it’s not to say that pat 
ourselves on the back, that thank heavens we did it then. The 
reason those changes were made is so the future is so much 
brighter in the province, so people can get health care in rural, 
not just urban Saskatchewan where most of those members are 
from, and a couple from the North — can’t forget those guys 
because they’re the loudest — you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

for the people within urban Saskatchewan. It’s for all citizens of 
the province to be able to access health care in the community 
of Carrot River or Melfort or wherever we saw, in Fort 
Qu’Appelle, in Indian Head, where we saw doctor shortages, 
Mr. Speaker. So that’s some of the changes that we made on 
that front. 
 
One of the things that I wanted — this is going to take a little 
while — I wanted to talk a little bit about is the organ donation 
piece. And I’ve stood in my place before and talked about this 
and how important this is for all of the citizens of Saskatchewan 
to seriously think about making sure they’ve signed the donor 
card, that they put the sticker on their, number one, on their 
licence and on their health card, so that people understand their 
intent. But it’s not even putting a sticker on or signing a card. 
It’s sitting down with family members and having a chat, so 
that in the time of a crisis where a person has had a terrible 
accident or whatever the situation may be and is facing the fact 
that they will not survive, that their family knows their intent. 
Because there is nothing more stressful, I believe, when the 
medical team come to you and ask the family members about 
organ donation and that conversation hasn’t been had between 
the family. 
 
And so I really, really stress . . . And one of the reasons why I 
just remember years ago, when Cindy was working on the 
organ donor team in Regina here and getting a call late at night, 
and she would go and it would be, you know, sad because 
somebody was passing away. But they called it, for lack of a 
better term — and don’t take this the wrong way — it was 
called a harvest, where they would go in and they would harvest 
the organs, and people would come from all across Canada, and 
those organs then would be transported to save somebody. And 
it was a harvest because it was harvesting the body. 
 
And I thought about it as a farmer many, many times, and you 
know, when I think of harvest of course I only think of we’re 
bringing the crop in; we’re bringing in what we’ve worked for 
all year long. My uncle always said, you know, if you can’t be 
happy in harvest, you’ll never be happy because it’s your 
payday, your one-month payday of the year. 
 
But really, what harvest really is — and I thought about it a lot 
with organ donation — harvest isn’t just bringing in the crop. 
Harvest is bringing in the crop so you can feed the world, so 
that the world can survive off of what we have here in 
Saskatchewan. That’s what harvest is. It’s so that people can 
survive, that they can nourish their body, whether it’s wheat or 
durum or lentils or chickpeas, that they can feed themselves and 
they survive because of our harvest. That’s what organ donation 
is all about. It’s a harvest but it’s so that others can survive from 
this person that has donated their organs. And so I really, really 
would urge people, and like what is being talked about in the 
Speech from the Throne regarding organ donation because I 
think it is so very, very important. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about education, and it’s not normally a 
topic that I speak a lot about, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to talk 
a little bit about education. Because again I don’t know how 
often a government has been able to stand in the House . . . I 
would say it would probably be back in the ’50s and ’60s where 
a government could stand in the House and talk about 40 new 
schools being built, and in one year. Can you imagine? I’m not 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

sure it’s ever happened before in the province. I know there 
were a lot of schools built through the ’60s, some into the ’70s 
because they’re all wearing out right now. But 21 brand new 
schools built and operational in this fiscal year is quite a 
remarkable feat. Haven’t heard anybody on that side talk about 
it. It’s doom and gloom when it comes to education. But the 
capital spend in education has been phenomenal. 
 
You know, I just have to say, I’ve been in here for quite a while 
and there is some words that I just never thought I would ever 
hear the NDP say, and it happened yesterday in question period. 
These words would never be uttered when the NDP were in 
government. And let me just quote from the member from 
Lakeview. She says, “Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker.” Then she 
talks about forcing people to pay more and they are . . . Just my 
eyesight here; I’m just having to push this a little bit further 
away. She’s talking about education. But what you would never 
hear the NDP say is that there’s 4,500 more students in school 
today, growth of 4,500 students. You would never . . . You 
know, for 16 years when the NDP were in government, year 
after year after year, it was decline. Decline, decline, decline. 
And for the first time, the Education critic stood in her place 
and said, an increase of 4,500 people. Mr. Speaker, that is 
words that you would never hear with the NDP, if they were in 
government. 
 
Eighteen joint-use schools that were built in a P3. Now I know 
the members opposite absolutely reject P3 schools. Those 
schools never would have been built under the NDP. It is really 
interesting. I know they have to be conflicted every time they 
go to an opening. It’s one of those, geez, should I go? I kind of 
feel a little awkward. I didn’t support it. You know, I really 
wish it wasn’t funded that way, but yes the school should open. 
I think I should go. Oh, but no maybe I shouldn’t because I 
don’t know about the funding model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, it really is about the kids, about the 
students that are going to that school. It isn’t the funding model. 
Those schools were needed. There is growth within the student 
body across this province and, Mr. Speaker, it is a good thing 
that the Saskatchewan Party would look at other funding 
models, such as P3, to make sure those schools come forward. 
 
A little bit more? Wrap it up? Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk 
just briefly on the infrastructure within this province and the 
investment that we have put into highways. The Minister of 
Highways was up earlier this evening and talked about it. 
Certainly we saw an infrastructure deficit coming out of the 
NDP government, and we’ve been trying to catch up on that. 
And we’ve been doing fairly well, I would say that, the last 
couple years. There’s nothing better for road building than a dry 
summer. And we’ve had a dry one and we’ve certainly made 
some inroads. There was a year or two when it was pretty darn 
wet and it seemed like a lot of our budget was just trying to 
maintain. But the last couple years, we’ve certainly seen some 
real improvements. 
 
But I do want to talk briefly about . . . and again, the Minister of 
Highways mentioned this, but on Friday, had the opportunity to 
do a full tour, almost a full tour, of the Regina bypass, and how 
absolutely fascinating that project is. 
 
And I know the opposition, they need to criticize and they need 

to find fault. And, you know, they work at it very, very hard, to 
find fault. But I would just ask a couple of those members 
opposite, including the highway critic that is just always full of 
pearls of wisdom for government, but I would ask those 
members opposite to take government up on the offer. Come 
with . . . Actually, we don’t need to be part of it. Go with the 
Regina bypass builders; go with the Ministry of Highways. 
We’ll set up a tour for you. Go and have a look at the 
infrastructure that’s being built. Because, you know, they will 
continually go on about a project that was designed 20 years 
ago and won’t look at the design and the project and the 
magnitude of the project that is there right now. It is a 
fascinating project. 
 
We went and looked at a couple of the borrow pits, is where 
they took us first, and how unbelievably huge and deep these 
borrow pits were. You know, I remember the opposition when 
they were in government; they talked about the big dig. Big dig 
was a pretty big thing for the NDP and how proud they were of 
that big dig and they’d use big trucks to haul the big dirt away, 
and how impressed they were with the big dig, Mr. Speaker. 
But you know, the amount of earth that has been moved for this 
project is four big digs. Four big digs, Mr. Speaker. Can you 
imagine how proud they would have been if they were the 
government with four big digs going on at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker? It is an amazing project. And when you look at the 
borrow pits it is really quite fascinating. 
 
When you look at the number of interchanges, there are 12 new 
interchanges on this bypass. Now I know they’ll look at a 
project that was talked about many, many, many years ago 
under their government, where it exited No. 1 Highway on the 
east side of Regina by Tower Road. And at that time, because I 
saw the plans, they would go and they would tie back in before 
Wascana Parkway on the south side of the city. And it just was 
absolutely unfeasible with the growth in traffic. That’s what 
they keep citing, and that took on . . . That project was about 
two or three bypasses. And they keep citing that and comparing 
it to the project that is there today. 
 
Quite frankly, I think the opposition has a responsibility to do 
the research and be honest with the people of the province, 
because they simply are not. They continually mislead the 
public between a project that was developed in the ’90s and 
what is being delivered in 2017. So what I would say to the 
members opposite, come for a tour. We’ll take you on the tour. 
The Minister of Highways will even get you coffee and 
doughnuts, if that’s what it will take to get you on a tour, Mr. 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Muffins. Okay, free 
muffins. 
 
But 12 major interchanges, starting in Balgonie, that’s 
complete. The one in Pilot Butte, the one in White 
City-Emerald Park, the one at Tower Road, there’ll be an 
interchange at Highway 33. There’ll be an interchange at No. 6. 
There’ll be an interchange at No. 1. Going on further north, 
there’ll be an interchange at Dewdney. There’ll be an 
interchange at I think 9th Avenue North, and there’ll be an 
interchange on No. 11. So it’ll be a full bypass around the city. I 
don’t know if that adds up to 12, but it’s going to be close — 12 
new interchanges around the city. There are 33 new bridges that 
are going in. Of course you’ve got to get across the Wascana in 
a couple of places. Thirty-three new bridges that are being 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

constructed. It is the largest infrastructure project this province 
has ever seen. 
 
And you know, I just look forward to the day that . . . I mean, as 
the Minister of Highways mentioned on Monday, the opening 
of the first phase of the bypass which would take us from 
Balgonie to Highway 33, second phase will take us from 33 
Highway over to No. 1 I believe, and the third phase will take 
us from No. 1 to No. 11. Two more years of construction, but I 
certainly look forward to that being complete. 
 
I know right now travelling — and I’ve done it twice now since 
Monday — is going out on Arcola and whipping around. It’s 
still a reduced speed so not like a full whip around as it will be 
at 110, but whipping around over to the east side of the city and 
how much better the traffic flow will be and the safety margin 
will be built up for that. So I’m looking forward to that. 
 
I can imagine, you know, people coming into the city on this 
brand new overpass and going to a brand new Mosaic Stadium. 
I sat in Mosaic Stadium and I thought, wow, is this 
Saskatchewan? And then the other day I was driving on the 
bypass with bridges . . . [inaudible] . . . going here and there, 
and I’m going, wow, is this Saskatchewan? 
 
Because you know, when you hear the members opposite, if we 
could just go back to the ’70s and ’80s, you know. If we could 
just go back to those glory days of Roy Romanow and others, 
Allan Blakeney. That’s where they feel the most comfortable; 
that’s where they feel the best. But you know, Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you that the people of Saskatchewan have moved way 
past where the NDP were and are today. 
 
Are there things that we need to do better as government? 
Absolutely. And for every government that would the case. We 
need to continue to improve as a government, but I’ll guarantee, 
the people of Saskatchewan never want to go back to the NDP 
days. I’ll be supporting the Speech from the Throne and 
rejecting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to stand in support of the amendment, along with my 
colleagues that are in the Assembly. And I too want to take the 
opportunity to welcome our newest colleague and a great, great 
election victory. I think it has sent a solid message to the 
Saskatchewan Party where the numbers just flip-flop, where the 
NDP came in very, very strong, and of course the Saskatchewan 
Party came a distant second, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why did that happen, Mr. Speaker? Because of antics like 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
give you a couple of examples. This was the same guy, when he 
was a minister, got his niece to write a letter saying what a great 
minister of Health he was, because his niece was a nurse. And 
then we found that out. And so people were kind of saying, that 
doesn’t sit very well. And the second thing he said was, well 
when you look at some of the challenges around the debt, he 
doesn’t remember a guy by the name of Grant Devine, Mr. 
Speaker, who broke this province, who broke this province. 

And then the NDP come along with the people of Saskatchewan 
and saved it. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the last time I went to a meeting in his 
constituency, I went to Balgonie. I went to Balgonie and there 
must have been about 300 people in that room, and I looked far 
and wide for the MLA for that area, the former minister of 
Highways. Not to be seen. He didn’t have the courage to go and 
listen to the people of Balgonie. And he’s sitting now in the 
Assembly talking about how bad the NDP . . . And that’s the 
only time they seem to liven up, Mr. Speaker, when it’s time to 
bash the NDP. But in reality, Mr. Speaker, they have no 
answers for Saskatchewan and that’s why the weak approach 
they have — to bash the NDP so nobody’s focusing on them. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, that the people of 
Balgonie are absolutely angry with their MLA. 
 
And don’t forget, Mr. Speaker, this is the same member that 
came along and introduced lean through the whole . . . Sent 
money, valuable health care dollars, valuable health care 
dollars, to where? An American-based consultant. Hundreds of 
millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, wasted on lean by that 
member. And yet he has the gall to talk about what happened 20 
or 30 years ago and forgets, Mr. Speaker, and forgets the guy 
that he used to idolize, Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s not the point that I wish to raise as I rise to my feet 
today. I’m saying to the former minister of Highways, the 
current member from Indian Head-Milestone, and even the 
Minister of Highways, I say to them tonight that at that public 
meeting at Balgonie, they didn’t have the courage to attend that 
meeting. And shame on them. Shame on them, because there 
was a lot of people very angry that night, Mr. Speaker. They 
wanted to talk to this member. They wanted to talk to this 
member and he was nowhere to be seen. And instead, Mr. 
Speaker, we had 250-300 people waiting in the room, wanting 
answers. 
 
And what did Balgonie want? They wanted representation, Mr. 
Speaker. They wanted one simple thing that was promised to 
them in 2016, and that is a right-in and right-out access to their 
community. And this MLA, this MLA could not deliver for the 
people of Balgonie. And I say, shame on him for doing that 
disservice to the great people of Balgonie, because they needed 
his support and they never got it, and he turned his back on 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Balgonie is not going to go away. We’re 
going to stand up in our place every day and we’re going to 
remind that member in the Saskatchewan Party government of 
their disservice to the community of Balgonie. So as the traffic 
is flying by Balgonie now, because they can’t access this 
community, because why? Because a foreign company said so. 
The Minister of Highways is not standing up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. He’s letting the company from France dictate 
whether Balgonie can access this main road or not. This 
government’s not in charge, Mr. Speaker. They’re not in charge 
at all. It’s a company from France that is making the decisions, 
and all we have is ministers and MLAs that are no-shows at 
very critical meetings. And the people of Balgonie deserve to 
have them there, and they didn’t show. And they didn’t show. 
 
So for a member that introduced lean, for a member that 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

orchestrated a letter saying he’s a great minister, from a 
member that as minister hired somebody who worked for 
SaskPower only to simply . . . [inaudible] . . . that individual 
who later became an MLA and our minister of Finance . . . And, 
Mr. Speaker, the pay at the SaskPower office was a phenomenal 
six-figure amount. But, Mr. Speaker, he forgets all that. He 
forgets all that. And I say to him today that the people of 
Saskatchewan will not forget, and the people of Balgonie will 
not forget the fact that they have deserted them, and he has 
turned their back on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why a Throne Speech is so important to respect the 
people that sent you here. And I can tell them tonight that the 
people of Balgonie, they had promised the people of Balgonie 
as late as the fall of 2016, to the mayor of Balgonie, that they 
would have the right-in and right-out into that community. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they betrayed the confidence that the mayor said 
that the people of Highways promised them that right-in and 
right-out. 
 
You talk to the mayor. You talk to the mayor. Highways 
promised them. Highways promised them. And call the mayor 
and you talk to him, and he’s the one that indicated that at that 
Balgonie meeting, he was promised in 2016, 2016 that you’d 
have a right-in, a right-out access. And this MLA and this 
government couldn’t deliver. You couldn’t deliver, and you 
turned your back on them. And you didn’t even have the 
decency to show up at that meeting. So don’t be giving us 
advice on how to run the province, Mr. Speaker, when you have 
failed in your own backyard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, so you throw in the lean, you throw in 
hiring their friends at a great six-figure price, you get . . . 
orchestrated a letter, you’re not supporting at Balgonie in a very 
important issue. And instead what he did, Mr. Speaker, what he 
did is you told the people, the business people in Balgonie, oh 
okay, we cut off the access to your community with all this 
traffic, but we’ll tell you what. We’ll let you rent some signs 
along the road and we’ll give you a special deal for those signs. 
We’ll give you a great deal on the rates for those signs so 
people know your business is there and they can drive down the 
road and turn and follow . . . There’s what the local people call 
the snake. So you can go back, back into Balgonie and visit the 
community of Balgonie.  
 
Well Balgonie said, Mr. Speaker, that that member and the 
Minister of Highways didn’t have the courage to come to that 
public meeting. And we went and we heard the anger and we 
heard . . . The point is that they were betrayed, and they’re very 
angry, and they’re not going to go away. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways is starting to chirp 
from his seat. This is the same minister the member was talking 
about, about the challenges with the pipeline. The Minister of 
Highways when he served as SARM president, they had the 
greatest agricultural transportation problem in the history of 
Saskatchewan, the transportation crisis, Mr. Speaker, under 
Stephen Harper and under our current Premier.  
 
And what did the member from SARM do, the president of 
SARM? He sat on his hands. He didn’t say a word, Mr. 
Speaker. That member didn’t say a word because his political 
masters told him, you be quiet. Don’t say a word because you’ll 

make us look bad and you’ll make our federal cousins look bad. 
Even though producers were facing the largest agricultural 
transportation crisis, the president of SARM at the time, sat on 
his hands and the Premier patted his forehead and said, you 
don’t say a word. Just sit there and be a good boy. And he 
followed those instructions to a T. 
 
And once again, as is par for the course, Mr. Speaker, when 
Balgonie wanted his attendance to defend Balgonie’s right, 
where was the minister? I don’t know, visiting with someone 
more important I guess. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but I know 
one thing. When we went, when we went, there was no Minister 
of Highways and there was no MLA there. And the people were 
quite angry, and they’re not going to go away. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was amused, I was amused by the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone when he said, oh it’s going to be 
the same speech, is what he indicated as well. But hold it, I’ve 
got some new information. I’ve got some new information, 
information that they hid for a number of months, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why the word “courage” doesn’t come to mind 
before the last election when I think about the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
I’ll give them an update. Let’s see. The debt is projected to be 
23 billion by 2020. Well that’s new information we didn’t know 
before, Mr. Speaker, because it was all hidden. Oh, also the sale 
of the Crowns; well nobody knew about that, Mr. Speaker. So, 
so far STC has been shut down. Liquor stores have been sold 
off, and Investment Saskatchewan’s gone, and so is Information 
Services Corporation, compliments of that member. Well the 
people of Saskatchewan didn’t know that before the last 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh, how about the GTH land sales? How about the GTH land 
scandals? Well the people of Saskatchewan didn’t know that. 
That’s a new development, Mr. Speaker. And the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone doesn’t talk about the cuts to people and 
services, Mr. Speaker. That’s new. Or how about Bill 40? That 
was a new plan they had to sell off the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Or 
better yet, how about this? The billion dollars in tax increase 
from those tax-and-spend conservatives over there, Mr. Speaker 
— a billion dollars. Well the people of Saskatchewan didn’t 
know that before. 
 
How about the power bills going up, Mr. Speaker? The people 
of Saskatchewan didn’t know that before the last election. How 
about, Mr. Speaker, the high unemployment rates that are 
particularly being suffered by women in our province at this 
stage, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan didn’t know 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s talk about the P3 deals, Mr. Speaker, where we’re sending 
millions of dollars out of province, millions of dollars out of 
province this year. The last couple years, Mr. Speaker, I think 
we’re sending out $500 million, $500 million this year alone, 
which accounts to about 70 per cent of the Highways budget, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s going to where? Not going to Coronach. Not 
going to Southey. Not going to Indian Head-Milestone. Not 
going to northern Saskatchewan. It’s going to France. It’s going 
to France. And what does the Minister of Highways do? He 
doesn’t show up for meetings and he sits on his hands again, 
Mr. Speaker. 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

Now let’s talk about the carbon capture tax, Mr. Speaker, where 
they put in this carbon sequestration plan and now everybody in 
the province are paying much more in taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
through their power bill. 
 
Now let’s also talk about the biggest disturbance, I think, to the 
agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker, is a good, solid, water 
management plan. You look at Quill Lakes. There’s a lot of 
problems in Quill Lakes. You know why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because this Saskatchewan Party refused to recognize that we 
have a water management crisis like you had an agricultural 
transportation crisis. You just don’t figure it out. You just don’t 
get it. 
 
So when a member talks about the importance of pipelines and 
oil and gas, absolutely they’re important to our economy. 
They’re vital to our economy. But so is fair taxation. So is fair 
taxation. Being $23 billion in the hole, that’s not good for our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And a billion dollars in an increase in 
taxes, is that good for our economy? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the people that the people of 
Saskatchewan trusted, and that trust is dropping steady each and 
every day, Mr. Speaker. And this is the point that I think is also 
quite clear to the people of Saskatchewan, that they needed to 
know what was going on with their province. And the entire 
Sask Party caucus, including that member from Indian 
Head-Milestone and the member from Saskatoon University or 
the member from Watrous, they all knew. They all knew what 
was going on. And like the Minister of Highways, they sat on 
their hands and they’re very quiet. And the ones that knew but 
didn’t say anything, probably because they didn’t know, Mr. 
Speaker. They were kept out of the loop. 
 
But there is a lot of things that were hidden from the people of 
Saskatchewan prior to the last election. And as soon as some of 
that information came available, you see the by-elections in 
Saskatoon where people turned around and said, well enough of 
that. 
 
And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that come 2020, they’re going to 
say enough of that for the Saskatchewan Party because of antics 
like this and the fact that they didn’t have the courage to show 
up in some key communities like Balgonie. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that people are starting 
to see what the Saskatchewan Party is made of. They had been 
peeling this onion off bit by bit, layer by layer, to try and get to 
the core. Now what happens when you begin to peel off that 
protective cover of an onion? Well it begins to wilt. And some 
of those guys decided to head out of Dodge, Mr. Speaker. Some 
went on their own. Others were kind of forced out. And I don’t 
think we’ve seen the last of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a tired, old government that ran out of gas. It ran out of 
energy. It ran out of leadership. And more important, Mr. 
Speaker, they ran out of cash. They ran out of cash. And this is 
the reason why we’re $23 billion . . . And the Minister of 
Finance is chirping from her seat. Perhaps the Minister of 
Finance, perhaps the Minister of Finance, the current one, 
wouldn’t be the Minister of Finance had they had confidence in 
the other minister of Finance that replaced another minister of 
Finance. And I don’t know. Between the last two or three years 

I think we’ve had five Finance ministers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Like obviously the Saskatchewan Party didn’t have confidence, 
didn’t have confidence in the previous Finance minister because 
every single one of them showed non-confidence in him. They 
showed non-confidence in his budget and they kept on trying to 
change all kinds of aspects of the budget. And yet this is the 
reason why, this is the reason why they cannot govern anymore 
because they don’t have the discipline and the teamsmanship to 
make things happen on a solid basis for years and days to come, 
Mr. Speaker. We have seen evidence of that. And that’s why on 
this side of the Assembly we say to them, you’re a tired, old 
government and you have got to go. You have got to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest thing that, if you look at some of the 
points that are being raised, some of the points that are being 
raised, and particularly the minister of SERM [Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management] talks about the oil 
and gas sector. On this side of the Assembly there’s no question 
that oil and gas and the development of oil and gas are vitally 
important to our economy. The NDP understand that fully, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s one of the reasons, one of the reasons why 
the royalty structure we put in place prior to 2007, the 
Saskatchewan Party won’t touch it. They will not touch it 
because that is what’s bringing investment into Saskatchewan 
because the NDP showed them how to attract investment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is the reason why, when their outgoing Premier says 
we’re going to follow the direction of Premier Calvert’s lead, 
and that’ll attract investment, Mr. Speaker. So this is the point I 
would raise, is that the party across will forever be followers. 
They will be forever followers and all they’re going to do is 
revisit history, try and rewrite history to their perspective. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan are getting tired of this 
government, that when they get down in the dumps, about the 
only thing that brings them up is when they start badmouthing 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker. All of a sudden they seem to pick up the 
spirit. They seem to liven up the moment comes down to calling 
down the NDP. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want a mature, forward-looking 
government. They want the government to come along with 
ideas. What they don’t want to see happen is that tired, same 
approach as evidenced by the member from Cannington a 
couple of nights ago. It’s the same old, same old, same old 
argument, Mr. Speaker. What is wrong? What is wrong, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
We’re becoming a world leader in water management where we 
have proper distribution, where we provide science-based 
decision making around the conservation of water, where we 
look at storage, Mr. Speaker, so we don’t have the problems of 
drought in one area and too much water in another area. Can 
we, as a province, figure that out, Mr. Speaker? Can the green 
energy opportunity, developing green energy, can it 
complement our robust oil and gas sector? Absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker. We can make those balances. Can we diversify the 
agricultural economy by adding energy development, carbon 
sink banks, and a transportation strategy? And a good example 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

of that is to make sure the Port of Churchill stays active and a 
place to which our landlocked province and the producers can 
deliver their grain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one of the things that I think is also important, Mr. 
Speaker, is our very poorly managed transportation system in 
agriculture will cost this community and this province jobs. 
And the member, the former member, the president of SARM 
who is now the Minister of Highways, when that crisis hit, he 
sat on his hands. And I will never forget that, Mr. Speaker. He 
sat on his hands because he was told by the governing 
Conservatives in Ottawa and the governing Saskatchewan 
Party, you don’t say a word because you’ll make us feel bad. 
 
And I often wonder, Mr. Speaker, what if we would have had 
an NDP government provincially? What would have happened 
then? Well, Mr. Speaker, there would have been a lot of talk 
coming from him. But because of this, their politically 
expedient message given to him, that he simply sat back, sat on 
his hands, and didn’t say a peep to help producers. And that’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, when he gets up and says things about rural 
Saskatchewan, we on this side of the House simply smile and 
say, you had your opportunity. You didn’t deliver. You had 
your opportunity and you didn’t deliver, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members, the member 
from Saskatoon University and several other members, as they 
stood up here and they professed their great, visionary plan 
called Bill 40 . . . They all stood up. They all stood up, Mr. 
Speaker. They all stood up and they were talking about Bill 40. 
I remember this. Speeches by all of them. They were talking 
about Bill 40. A year later, oh, Bill 40 is not good now because 
we’ve got to change that. But what was all that speech, what 
were all those speeches about? For the messages you were told, 
like the current Minister of Highways, to follow the script, 
don’t deviate, don’t think independently, and don’t ever stray 
from your message box. That’s what you were told, and you 
followed your instructions to a T. A year later say, well we’re 
going to make that 360-degree turn here. 
 
So don’t blink. Don’t blink. Don’t blink. Don’t say anything. 
Just continue following your script. Continue following your 
script. And, Mr. Speaker, they have continued following their 
script. So the point is, were you guys committed to Bill 40 or 
were you not? Answer the question. The member from Wood 
River, were you committed to Bill 40 a year ago, and now 
you’re not? No answer again, Mr. Speaker. Sitting on his hands. 
 
So the question I would ask all of them, all of the things that 
you hid from the people of Saskatchewan, and I can list them 
off again if they want, all the things they hid from the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was it worth it to achieve their 
third term? At the end of the day, this province is laden down 
with debt. This province has . . . They have squandered the 
future through P3 deals. They have spent $2 billion on a Regina 
bypass that can’t even accommodate combines, Mr. Speaker. It 
can’t even accommodate agricultural machines, Mr. Speaker. 
And the list goes on, all the mistakes that they have made. 
 
And I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: this Saskatchewan 
Party government is running out of gas. They’re running out of 
ideas. They refuse to go back to their communities and meet the 
people. And most important of all, they’re running out of cash. 

And once that begins to happen, you’re going to see them 
scurrying away, scurrying away to the private sector after they 
put this province in debt. And I say, shame on them because the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to pay for years and years 
and years and years. And does that deter and hurt the economy 
of Saskatchewan? You’re darn right it hurts the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Does a poorly planned transportation system for agricultural 
products hurt the province of Saskatchewan’s economy? You’re 
darn right it hurts the province of Saskatchewan. So I don’t 
need no lessons from any one of you, how important oil and gas 
or agriculture or mining is to the province. We know all these 
sectors are important. But you have been doing a great 
disservice, a great disservice to not only the producers but to the 
people of Saskatchewan right across the board. And I say, 
shame on you. I say, shame on you. 
 
And we haven’t seen yet, Mr. Speaker, the true debt left behind 
this government. So as they haul their tired, old government out 
of power, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared. If given the duty by the 
people of Saskatchewan to clean up another Tory mess, we will 
clean up another Tory mess. 
 
And we’re telling the people of Saskatchewan, it’s time. It’s 
time to tell them that their time is done and we need a fresh, 
new start, Mr. Speaker. We need a fresh, new team, and we 
certainly need a fresh, new leader. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
going to get into details as to what I think, what I think about 
their current leadership. And we’re going to have our fun 
branding every one of their current leadership candidates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point this out. No matter who the leader is on this side, 
Mr. Speaker, they all voted for those budgets. They all voted to 
sell off STC. They all voted for Bill 40. They all voted to not do 
certain things in certain sectors, Mr. Speaker. They all stood in 
their place, one by one, and they voted. So no matter who the 
next leader is, they are the Saskatchewan . . . This is their debt; 
this is their problem; and this is their shortcomings. 
 
So no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker. We know it on this 
side. We know it on this side that that’s a tired, old government. 
They’re fresh out of ideas and, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for them 
to go. We need new energy, new vision, new plan, and a new 
team. 
 
Before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I say to them, I say to 
them that the people of Saskatchewan are disappointed in what 
you have done. You know it, and we know it. And I say, shame 
on you guys. You continue following your lines and hope that 
they forgive you. But I think that there’s too many hurt feelings 
out there, and there’s too much anger, too much anger. 
 
So you continue taking your potshots at the NDP, make your 
little statements here and there, but sooner or later the strength 
of governing and the responsibility of governing must be 
realized by yourselves. And if you don’t do it, we’re in deeper, 
we’re in deeper trouble than I first thought, Mr. Speaker. And I 
sense we’re going down that direction. And most members are 
smiling and giggling away over there. And these are serious 
challenges for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and 
I tell all the people throughout Saskatchewanland that there is a 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

better option, that there is a better plan, and that there is a better 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before I take my place, before I take my place I want to 
recognize two impressive individuals that have worked in this 
building for a long time, Mr. Speaker. And I want to take a few 
minutes just to recognize two great guys that work in the video 
and audio booth here in the Assembly, and it’s Kerry Bond and 
Ihor Sywanyk. Now Ihor and Kerry have been working in this 
building and in the control booth here for the audio-visual 
service of this Assembly for 35 years. So Kerry told me he 
started when he was 10 and Ihor started when he was 11. 
 
So these guys have been working for 35 years, and I want to 
take a moment to recognize that kind of dedication to not only 
to the Assembly but to politicians such as myself, and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I think it’s a remarkable achievement. 
They are professional, dedicated staff that do wondrous things, 
not just only in the Assembly but as they take their skill set to 
produce or to cover live events throughout the province. You 
can see the quality and the professionalism that they have 
displayed, and these are remarkable people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that they also are able to adjust 
cameras, so I’ve asked them many times, if you can put the 
wrinkle-free camera on my picture, I would very much 
appreciate it. And these guys are such great guys, they’ve done 
it a few times to make some of us look younger. 
 
But I’ll close on this point, Mr. Speaker, I’ll close on this point. 
Any point and any challenge and any debate from any members 
of the Saskatchewan Party on the future of Saskatchewan, I will 
stand in my place and tell you, you can’t just lambaste the NDP 
as the only option for governing. You must come up with some 
solid ideas, solid solutions, and a visionary plan for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And unless and until you do, then you’ll be 
continuing to decline in your support because we’re going to 
work very hard as a party to reclaim the opportunity to govern. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that Throne Speech just simply indicates that 
there’s no plan, no new ideas, and that this government is in 
deficit in many more ways than one. 
 
So I’ll stand in my place to oppose the Throne Speech, and I 
will definitely be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thought two 
weeks ago it was windy. You know, I’ve been running through 
my mind when I’m listening to the member talk about 
economics. I’m thinking we have the member from Athabasca 
telling us one thing, and we have moonys giving us a AAA 
rating, and I’ve got to decide which one I should believe. I 
would suggest moonys. 
 
But I’m very pleased to stand today and enter the Throne 
Speech debate. I want to talk today about quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people. I think that’s what we talk about when 
we’re, you know, when we hear how was your summer? That’s 
what we think about, is the quality of life. 
 
Before I do that, I’d like to do some of the traditional thank 
yous, some that we don’t get an opportunity to do. There’s 

hardly enough words to describe the thankfulness I have for the 
people, the great people of the Melfort constituency. It’s a 
constituency that is the very heartbeat of our province. From 
Leroy to Quill Lake, James Smith to Ratner, these people gave 
me an opportunity to represent them in this grand old building. 
They made me feel welcome during my many visits to their 
communities, and they’ve become friends. I always have been 
shown respect when I go into those communities, and I hope 
that I have shown them the same respect. 
 
As any MLA will tell you, there are a few necessary 
requirements of this occupation. One is probably thick skin. 
Another one is a very supportive spouse, and I thank my 
beautiful wife, April. And you must have a great staff back at 
the office, and for that, my gratitude goes to Peggy Gordon and 
Debbie Perkins. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Now the Melfort constituency is blessed with some of the finest 
farm land in Saskatchewan, and therefore by extension some of 
the finest farm land in the world. And there are no better 
stewards of that farm land than the farmers of the Melfort 
constituency, and I congratulate them wholeheartedly on 
another successful harvest. 
 
And manufacturing is huge in my constituency. And I want to 
just run through a list of names, and I want people to listen to 
the list of names. We have Bourgault Industries, and we have 
Bourgault Tillage Tools. We have DryAir. We have Doepker 
Industries. We have Schulte Industries; Michel’s Industries; 
FPS, Failure Prevention Services. We have M&K Welding. We 
have Dwayne Enterprises. And there’s many others. 
 
But when you think about those names, that’s world class that 
we’ve got. But every one of those companies started right here 
in Saskatchewan. In Bourgault’s case, Bourgault Industries’ 
case, it started with Frank Bourgault and moved down to his 
sons, now Gerry Bourgault. It started in a workshop out back 
and has grown to over 900 people worldwide. That’s the way 
we do things in Saskatchewan when we’re given the 
opportunity to do that. 
 
And how was my summer? My summer was a great summer, 
and thanks for asking. I had a great summer. I visited my 
daughter Kelli, and her husband, Howard, and I attended the 
graduation of two of my grandchildren in the same ceremony. I 
also visited with two other grandchildren when I was there, 
Autumn and Tempestt. Got to visit one of the kids we lost to 
Alberta a few years ago, when we had the former government 
here, my son Brenden and his wife, Carly, in Edmonton. 
Spending time with my stepdaughter and her husband, Brandi 
and Zach, and their two really neat kids. And then my other 
stepson Riley and his spouse, Felisha, had three children, and 
they decided to have one more, and the twins were born last 
month. Best-laid plans. 
 
That’s probably more than you wanted to know, but that’s what 
summer’s about. Summer’s about friends and families and just 
quality of life. 
 
And we want to do things like keeping our families close. And 
that’s something that I think most of us have a resentment for 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2017 

from 11 years ago — and beyond for 16 years before that — is 
that we lost our kids. Our children, and therefore our 
grandchildren, and people close to us were leaving this 
province, and most of us had no idea why because we 
understood that we have a great work ethic. We have, I just 
listed some of the inventors, the people who moved this 
province along. And yet we were losing our children. 
 
And that’s why it’s important where we support the graduate 
retention program that nearly 70,000 students have taken 
advantage of, the Saskatchewan Advantage program of $500 a 
year for up to four years or $2,000. You know, that’s keeping 
our kids here. That’s what we need. That’s how we grow the 
province and that’s quality of life for people in this province. 
 
But they have to have jobs. And over the past decade and 
continuing with the innovations in this Throne Speech we have 
created the second-best job creation record in the country: 
64,000 new jobs in this province. Now we look at our 
neighbours and they can brag, because this year they created 
48,000 new jobs in Alberta under an NDP government; 41,800 
of them were hired by the government themselves. Who pays 
for that? The other 6,200? Who pays for that? And what 
happens to your economy? I know who pays for it, a $10.3 
billion deficit pays for it. 
 
We encourage business in this province. We have the most 
competitive business tax in Canada now and we have just raised 
the threshold from to 5 to $600,000. That’s compared to the 
government before that thought that they could grow this 
province because they would hire people. It doesn’t work that 
way. 
 
We have a future for the community. 
 
Well, just before we leave jobs, let’s talk about wages. You 
know, we hear that again last weekend, the $15 minimum wage. 
When we had a higher minimum wage, we had either the lowest 
or the second-lowest, depending on the month, average wage in 
Canada. Yet we had the highest minimum wage. Now we have 
a modest minimum wage and we have the second-highest 
average wage in Canada. Because we can grow a business here. 
You can survive through these tough years and grow on. 
 
Our 10-year wages, the average has gone up 36 per cent in 
Saskatchewan, 36 per cent. That’s more than 20 points higher 
than the average in Canada. That’s growing. That’s important to 
you, quality of life, when you have a job and you’re getting 
paid for it. 
 
And I want to talk about the future of our communities. 
Because our communities 20 years ago, well 10 years ago, were 
suffering. Remember the old saying — and I hate this line, that 
line — will the last one out please turn off the lights. That was 
the concept of the former government to do that. And they talk 
about revisionist history, but somewhere, somehow, something, 
prove us wrong on this. Pull a number that shows that you were 
aggressive and progressive in building this province, because 
they’re not there. There’s no numbers there. 
 
And I remember, I remember when I ran for mayor of my 
community, mayor of Melfort. They talked about, people 
should come to Melfort — and this was in 2006, right at the end 

of the former government — people should come to Melfort 
because it’s cheap to live in and because it’s a good place to 
live. And I got up at the end of that debate and I said, you 
know, I’m tired of hearing that. I’m tired of hearing that it’s 
cheap to live here. The reason it’s cheap to live here is because 
there’s not a lineup of people who want to do it. They don’t 
want to buy your house because they’re not coming. 
 
What we have to do is create an environment, which has 
happened, that makes people want to come to our province. A 
hundred and sixty-four thousand people in the last decade 
wanted to come to our province. Now people are lining up to 
buy property in Saskatchewan. Yes, the values are high. How is 
that wrong? 
 
Security. We have security. We have an issue with rural 
security in Saskatchewan, and it’s one that is being addressed in 
this Throne Speech where we’re introducing a protection and 
response team, a PRT, of 120 police officers, 49 commercial 
vehicle enforcement officers — and they all have expanded 
powers — and 98 conservation officers to get the response time 
down in rural Saskatchewan. So when that person makes a call, 
there’s somebody on the way and there’s somebody that will be 
there so they can sleep easier that night. That’s quality of life. 
That’s quality of life. 
 
And then we talk about health and we . . . continuing to build on 
the 750 doctors. Are we done yet? No we’re not. We’re adding 
more doctors. We’ve added 3,400 new nurses of all 
designations. We have the new Jim Pattison Children’s 
Hospital, new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, and 
the new Moose Jaw hospital. They’re investments in the future 
of this province. 
 
And I want to talk, just for a minute, about camping. I went 
camping this summer. It was probably not overly successful 
because I forgot the wind flap on the tent, but it was somewhat 
successful. But that’s quality of life. You know, I think back to 
when my daughter was 13 years old and she wasn’t a huge fan 
of camping and so she says to me, Dad, why do you work so 
hard all year long just so you can live poor for two weeks? And 
you know, I thought, she’s missing the point of camping. And I 
laugh about that every time I hear that they’re back from 
camping for the weekend. 
 
But you know, I talked earlier about having a thick skin, and I 
think most of us had to have that thick skin this spring because 
we had an austerity budget. We made some tax increases. And 
the member from Athabasca talked about the tax increases, and 
in fact the tax increases — and we wanted to avoid these — but 
the tax increases were almost enough to bring us back to the 
level of 2007 under those people. Almost that much. 
 
But I want to talk about STC because that’s a very important 
part of the thing and that’s what people are talking about. So 
you know, we have in . . . I believe it was ’76, but a long time 
ago we had a high of 885,000 people ride STC. This year we 
would’ve had under 200,000 people, less than 23 per cent of 
that. 
 
And I want to talk about the need, about that cut, where we had 
4,500 people that we supported in medical trips from the North 
to come into medical appointments in Regina, Saskatoon, 



October 31, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

Prince Albert — 4,500. Out of those, 44, 44 people took the 
bus. Ninety-nine per cent of the people found some other way 
to get to their medical appointment — chose, chose some other 
way to get to their medical appointment and didn’t go on STC. 
 
And the figure I like to think about is $46,575 a day. That was 
the estimated loss of STC. So let’s work with that number for a 
second. One RN, one registered nurse, every two days would 
have to go. Two teachers every three days would have to go. 
Three continuing care aids every two days would have to go. 
 
Now as far back as 1996, the NDP were talked about stopping 
the bleeding on STC and closing it. And what did they do? 
They fired 400 teachers. They fired 475 nurses. They fired 173 
doctors, and they closed 176 schools, 52 hospitals, and that was 
their choice, not ours. We made our choice. We’re keeping 
those doctors. We’re keeping those nurses. In fact we’re 
increasing those. And they stand and talk about . . . 
 
And I do want to talk briefly about our Premier, that to me 
growing is about attitude. When you’re in business, when 
you’re in a club, when you’re doing anything, it’s about 
attitude. I look at my friend from Yorkton, that it’s about 
attitude, that, you know, making us believe, letting us loose, 
that we could do what we have done in the last 10 years. And to 
that I credit the Premier very much. I think that he has allowed 
Saskatchewan to break loose, to release itself, and to grow. 
 
You know, yes it’s not all government policy. It is definitely 
not. It’s the people of Saskatchewan being told not that 
Saskatchewan will never grow, but being told we will grow. 
We’ll grow 100,000 people. 
 
And I want to mention that I’m supporting the motion, this 
Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 10:30, this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2709 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2711 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2715 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2718 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2720 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2723 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2726 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2731 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2735 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 




