






















































Hansard: May 15, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 88A  MONDAY, MAY 15, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2519 
 May 15, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
colleagues. It’s an honour to be able to introduce some 
distinguished guests from Indonesia that are seated in your 
gallery. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit worried. Our trade 
relationship with Indonesia is very important, and I don’t want 
my pronunciation of names to hinder that relationship in any 
way. 
 
Seated in your gallery is Mr. Hadi Sapto Pambrastoro. He is the 
consul general of the Republic of Indonesia in Toronto. And 
he’s accompanied today by two officials: one is Ms. Nancy 
Kusbayanti, consul for economic affairs; as well as Ms. Ganis 
Garnisa, vice-consul for economic affairs at the consulate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the delegation, the consul general and officials, 
arrived last night and they have a busy agenda over the next 
number of days. He’s already met with officials of the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, officials from the 
Ministry of Agriculture and, I believe, the Minister of the 
Economy and, I believe, the Minister of Agriculture as well. 
And I look forward to meeting with the consul general and the 
consuls a little bit later on today as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can inform members of the House that tomorrow 
the delegation will visit the International CCS [carbon capture 
and storage] Knowledge Centre. They have meetings planned 
there with SaskPower. 
 
Indonesia is going to continue to deploy coal as part of the 
generating capacity for that fast-growing economy. So they 
have an interest in clean coal technology, and we’re very much 
looking forward to discussing that particular file as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members on both sides of the House will 
know that we have a dynamic and growing trade relationship 
with Indonesia. Our province is the leader among all Canadian 
provinces in terms of exports to that country. Thirty-eight per 
cent of all Canadian exports to Indonesia come from the 
province of Saskatchewan and, frankly, there’s tremendous 
potential for further growth. 
 
Members should know that since 2007, Saskatchewan’s exports 
to Indonesia have grown by 64 per cent or $548 million, Mr. 

Speaker. That includes potash and wheat and wood pulp and 
canary seed, among other exports to that country. 
 
We are very grateful for the relationship we have with 
Indonesia. And a few years ago, I think I became the first 
Premier to go to Indonesia on a trade mission, and we’ve had of 
course STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] 
follow up with that mission. They were there prior to that 
mission. They’ve been cultivating a strong relationship. We 
want it to be mutually beneficial though, Mr. Speaker, and so 
we always look for ways to explore opportunities for exchanges 
that benefit Indonesians, even as we are looking for 
opportunities to expand our own exports to that part of the 
world. 
 
That part of the world is very important to the province of 
Saskatchewan. The so-called ASEAN [Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations] region has been a focus of ours in our 
engagement piece, and Indonesia is one of the leading countries 
in the ASEAN. And so, Mr. Speaker, let me just say through 
you and to you to all members of the House, we’re very grateful 
to the people of Indonesia for the relationship that we have, and 
we want to welcome the consul general and officials from the 
consulate here today, Mr. Speaker. And we look forward to 
fruitful and continuing excellent relations with Indonesia. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Requesting 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome this very 
important delegation from Indonesia to the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly here today. I’d like to welcome Mr. Hadi 
Sapto Pambrastoro, consul general of Indonesia in Toronto. 
Sorry with the pronunciation there. Ms. Nancy Kusbayanti, 
consul for economic affairs; and Ms. Ganis Garnisa, 
vice-consul for economic affairs, we do welcome you to the 
Assembly here today. Thank you to the Premier for the 
thoughtful remarks as it relates to the dynamic and growing and 
important relationship with Indonesia and Saskatchewan. 
 
Our relationship is strengthened with your presence here in the 
Assembly and your time here in Saskatchewan working with 
the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. We wish you 
well with your many meetings. Certainly our agricultural 
products, our forestry products are something very important to 
us and something we’re very appreciative of the relationship 
and our ability to share with you. We’re proud of that 
relationship through potash to enhancing food security and a 
greater productivity throughout Indonesia. Certainly we have 
other aspects in common when it comes to mining in Indonesia 
and Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So we wish you well with your delegation. We have important 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

work around agricultural research as well that I believe we can 
continue to improve and grow with this, through this 
relationship. So on behalf of a grateful opposition and a grateful 
province, I ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 
very important delegation from Indonesia here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m still on my feet, it’s my honour to 
introduce some very special guests seated in your gallery here 
today, a couple that have made the trek in from the Southeast, 
from Creelman, Saskatchewan, just a couple of miles north of 
Creelman, Saskatchewan. Someone who’s, I guess, been a 
producer for many, many years in this province, as a family, 
and it’s my honour to welcome John and Pat Horner to their 
Assembly. 
 
As I say, they’ve had a mixed farm for many years, a grain 
operation, but also a cattle operation. And Pat as well is a 
psychiatric nurse, is what her life’s service to her province has 
been. She grew up in Weyburn, but she was the director of care 
in Stoughton for many, many years. So it’s a pleasure to see 
these good friends to their Assembly here today, to have their 
presence here today. 
 
But the reason they’re here today is they brought their nephew 
who’s visiting Canada from New Zealand along with his wife, 
his partner. And so we welcome from New Zealand, Eric 
Goddard, and as well his wife, Ella Hardy. They’re making 
their way across Canada. They’ve visited Ottawa. They’ve 
visited Montreal. They’re making their way to BC [British 
Columbia]. I think they’re going to do some paddling and 
camping out there. But they’re very engaged in politics as well 
and very active in different capacities with both New Zealand 
but also the Australian Labor Party. And it was a pleasure to sit 
down with them here today. 
 
So it’s my honour to welcome these guests to their Assembly 
and to welcome John and Pat Horner to their Assembly. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment to introduce a few 
honoured and very special guests seated in your gallery this 
afternoon. They are victims services volunteers, and they’re 
among some of the most dedicated and compassionate and all 
around inspiring people that we have in this province. They are 
the people Saskatchewan turns to in times of crisis.  
 
And today our honoured guests, Mr. Speaker, are celebrating 
some milestones: 15 and 20 years doing what they do. In the 
past we’ve gone to these volunteers during Victims Week, but 
this year, Mr. Speaker, because Victims Week happens after the 
spring sitting wraps up, we’d like to do it a little bit earlier. So 
they’re here a little earlier, and we feel it important to publicly 
acknowledge their dedication to the province. 
 
With us today, and maybe I can get everybody to wave when I 
mention their names, the 15-year recipients: Joyce Warriner, 
from Punnichy — there she is — Vicki Coxford, Marla 
Hartman, and Bev Kinshella from Saskatoon; and our 20-year 
recipient, Mr. Speaker, Kathy Button from Carrot River. 

As I do every year, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of having 
lunch and meeting them earlier today to express my 
appreciation and the appreciation of the Government of 
Saskatchewan for their very, very, very good work, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’d ask all members joining me today in welcoming 
this truly exceptional group of people to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming these folks to their 
legislative gallery. These volunteers through victims services 
have done a substantial amount of volunteer work for the 
province for quite a few number of years. As we all know, 
volunteers are the backbone of our community, and the work 
you do helping victims through the criminal justice process is 
invaluable and desperately needed. So thank you for all that you 
do. 
 
Please take a moment — I know volunteers sometimes have a 
hard time actually acknowledging the work that they do and 
taking a step back and taking a break from the hard work — so 
please take this opportunity to allow us to thank you, allow your 
community to thank you. And I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
to introduce in your gallery four attendees that we met with 
earlier today from the Saskatchewan Association of Nurse 
Practitioners. With us today are Jill Bouchard, past president; 
Melissa Carignan, president; Frankie, Francoise Verville, 
president-elect; and Debbie Bathgate, treasurer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and I met with them earlier 
to discuss a lot of the good work that nurse practitioners have 
done in our province, and even some ways that they can help us 
even further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that in 2007, we only had 111. Now we have 110 per 
cent increase, mainly due to our increase of 20 seats or doubling 
the seats for nurse practitioners in the province. Now we have 
200 of them practising throughout Saskatchewan. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming the leadership from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Nurse Practitioners here today. I 
look forward to your reception at 5 o’clock. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to sit down with some of the other 
members of the association just to learn a little bit more about 
the work of nurse practitioners, the good work that they do in 
the province, the importance of training more nurse 
practitioners, but also the importance of ensuring we have spots 
for nurse practitioners in which to work, Mr. Speaker. So I look 
forward to hearing their message again here a little bit later 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

today. And I want to thank them for all the work that they do in 
helping members understand the role that nurse practitioners 
can play in primary health care here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these folks as well to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
couple of individuals in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. The first 
one is my aunt, Kathleen Draves. She comes from the 
Kindersley constituency. She’s been a member of that 
constituency for a number of years and is making her first visit 
to the legislature today. So we went on a little tour earlier and 
saw what this place has to offer. Mr. Speaker, she has the 
distinction of owning the only — that we know of — award 
from her father’s school for catching or collecting the most 
gopher tails in 1918. It was presented by the Government of 
Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker. So that’s, you know, quite 
amazing. 
 
She’s held a number of positions within the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, within the Royal Bank as well. But her most 
important job was as we were kids to make sure that my uncle 
Hank’s snuff cans were filled with water and frozen so that we 
would have enough hockey pucks for when we came out during 
the winter months. 
 
And accompanying her, Mr. Speaker, is someone familiar with 
this place but I haven’t had the opportunity to introduce her yet, 
is my mom, Joan Olauson. You know, what do you say about 
your mom other than she’s been my biggest supporter. She’s 
been a rock. She is a tireless volunteer. She raised all four of us 
kids and kept us mostly out of trouble. And she’s now raising 
nine grandchildren as well. 
 
She’s also, as the Deputy Premier likes to remind me, his 
favourite Olauson. So, you know, that being said, I’d ask all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce a number of special guests seated in your gallery, a 
contingent of part of a larger delegation from the Southeast 
Regional Library. And we’re just very pleased that you could be 
here today. Maybe as I introduce you, each of you could give a 
wave. 
 
We have with us today Tawney Johnson, and Tawney is the 
branch librarian for Lampman Public Library. We also have 
Rebecca Eddy, and Rebecca is the adult program coordinator 
with the Estevan Public Library branch. We also have Ruth 
Barker, and Ruth is the personnel manager for the Southeast 
Regional Library. And also with us today is Kate-Lee Nolin, 
and Kate-Lee is the library director for the Southeast Regional 
Library. She assumed that role on April 1st of this year, so you 

can imagine she’s had an interesting first little bit of her job. 
 
But just thank each of them for the work that they do. I know 
that they’re here as part of a larger delegation. I believe it’s a 
staff workshop that they’re in visiting their Legislative 
Assembly for. 
 
And also in the building although not in the gallery is Mr. 
James Richards, and he is the regional branch manager. And I 
would like to thank them for visiting us today but also for the 
very important work that you do in your communities. And I 
would invite all members to join with me in welcoming each of 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member opposite in welcoming these people to their legislature 
today. Mr. Speaker, over the years, we always thought of 
librarians as people that worked in rooms with dusty books, and 
they weren’t heard of or weren’t appreciated very much. Well 
over the last week, we’ve developed a new appreciation for 
librarians. So on behalf of all members, we want to tell them 
how much we appreciate them and how glad we are today that 
they’re here and wish them all the best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, to all members in the House, I’d like to introduce a special 
guest in the west gallery: Ian Wilgus, if you could give us a 
wave. Ian is here in Regina for three months as part of the 
Explorer program with Knox-Metropolitan United Church to 
check out to what it’s . . . you know, the whole thing about 
being a minister and that. But he has an interest in politics. He 
recently watched question period in Ottawa, so he’s going to be 
comparing the two. So I’d ask all members to give Ian a warm 
welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As long-serving members know, it’s rare that we have 
a school group from the Meadow Lake constituency, but today 
we are privileged to have one. 
 
The Northwood Christian School from Leoville, Saskatchewan 
have made the trip down to Regina — 12 grade 7, 8, and 9 
students sitting in the west gallery, accompanied by their 
teacher, Mr. Brendan Loewen, and his spouse, Karilee Loewen; 
and parent chaperones Keith and Deana Unruh, Roger and Jenn 
Friesen, Marv and Gwen Isaac, Ardel and Lenora Boese. And 
we very much look forward to getting together after question 
period, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce an individual seated in your gallery. I’m 
speaking of Dr. David Carl Goranson. Give us wave there; very 
good. Dr. Goranson is the grandson of a former member of this 
Assembly by the name of Joe Phelps, Mr. Speaker. 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

And such is the legacy of Joe Phelps that I think it was just the 
other week that the Premier was referencing certain parts of that 
legacy as a minister. Minister Joe Phelps was part of the first 
Douglas government, ’44-48, and certainly was first elected in 
’38, served to ’44 as a member of the 10-member CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] opposition caucus, 
and then on into the Douglas government, was defeated in ’48, 
went on to head up the Saskatchewan Farmers Union for many 
years, Mr. Speaker. And also during that period was the founder 
of the Western Development Museum and certainly played a 
highly energetic . . . One of the things that you always hear 
about Joe Phelps is that the guy’s work ethic was second to 
none, and certainly was running like his pants were on fire, I 
think, all the time. 
 
But there’s a book coming out, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the life 
of Fiery Joe that’s put out by the University of Regina Press 
that’s being launched tomorrow night at Innovation Place. And 
then there’ll be a launch, I believe, the night after, up in 
Saskatoon. And I think the speaker for tomorrow night’s event 
is the former premier Lorne Calvert and for Saskatoon, it’s 
former Premier Roy Romanow. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I think signal to the amount of work 
and the way that one person can impact a province and can pack 
a lot into four short years of government, Mr. Speaker . . . More 
details on that, I’d invite folks to read, but it ranges from rural 
electrification to advancing the cause of indigenous rights and 
many points in between. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Dr. David Carl Goranson to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health in introducing nurse 
practitioner Debbie Bathgate, who is seated in your gallery. 
Debbie practises in Borden and I’d like to . . . Join me in 
welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to 
introduce the family of Damien Kurek, who is a Sask Party 
government caucus researcher. His family members in 
attendance today are mother Jodi Kurek, sister Tianna, brother 
Kadin, and they are visiting Damien and his family from 
Consort, Alberta. So please welcome them to our Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Estevan, 
Bienfait, Oxbow, Midale, Macoun, Benson, and Stoughton. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel; and that STC helps 
to drive the economy with the parcel services that serve farms 
and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plan to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
This is supported by leaders and thousands and thousands of 
signatures. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, just a couple of weeks ago in 
committee, we had a discussion about this cut and the minister 
told me at that point in time that this wasn’t a service offered 
throughout the province, in just a few areas. So instead of 
enhancing this important service, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has chosen to cut it. 
 
The petitioners point out that in this budget, the Sask Party 
eliminated all funding for spiritual care services within 
Saskatchewan health care facilities. They point out that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province in Canada to not fund 
this support for patients, residents, and their families seeking 
wellness. They point out that the Sask Party didn’t talk about 
this at all in last year’s election. They hid their plan to scrap 
funding for spiritual care, just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
They point out the value of spiritual care, that it responds to the 
spiritual and emotional needs of patients and residents and 
provides a compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. 
 
They point out, the petitioners point out that spiritual care 
supports families, patients, and residents in making difficult 
decisions, and that spiritual care can provide support for all 
families, patients, and residents in obtaining comfort and 
support, regardless of their faith or belief, Mr. Speaker. 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today that I’m submitting is signed by 
citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition under the 
direction and order of the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
in her request for anyone in the Assembly to help her in her 
fight for a second bridge for Prince Albert. So this petition deals 
with the city of bridge, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Ask that the Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, 
hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people 
calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan and 
then quickly commence the construction of a second bridge 
for Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as we do day after day, week after week, month after 
month in this Assembly and year after year, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
very proud to present another page to the thousands of people 
that have signed our petition asking for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. And the people that have signed this petition 
today are primarily from Regina and Prince Albert, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that the citizens of Saskatchewan 
believe in an economy powered by transparency, accountability, 
security, and equity; and that all women should be paid 
equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of economic 
growth and their economic empowerment benefits us all. 
 
And we know the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of the Assembly, and that Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 

within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Vanscoy and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
provide a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Due to a cut in funding, Prince Albert mobile 
crisis unit has had to close its door during daytime hours, 
resulting in a loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime 
closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on the Prince 
Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies 
who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide the 
counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals across the province have signed these 
petitions, but this particular petition was signed by residents of 
Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of a sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those who’ve signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: to the fact that Saskatchewan has 
the second-highest rate of child sexual abuse in Canada; that 
childhood sexual abuse has lasting impacts throughout the 
child’s lifetime, and these effects include mental health impacts 
such as PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], depression, 
anxiety, panic attacks, and low self-esteem. Impacts also 
include decreased school attendance and achievement and 
decreased productivity throughout the lifespan. Physical health 
impacts include conversion disorder and reproductive system 
damage. Victims of sexual child abuse are four times more 
likely to commit suicide. 
 
Currently there’s no comprehensive elementary or secondary 
curriculum regarding the prevention and reporting of sexual 
child abuse in Saskatchewan and, as a province, it’s our shared 
responsibility to protect children and youth, to educate them, as 
every child has the right to be protected and to be safe. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 
[14:00] 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law; and 
that such legislation would ensure that a comprehensive 
health education program be developed and implemented 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

in grades pre-K through 12, along with training for school 
staff on the prevention of sexual abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition reside around 
the province. The pages that I present today are signed by 
residents of Regina and Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction, Mr. 
Speaker, of having the highest rate of domestic violence by 
intimate partners amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three 
Canadian workers have been impacted by domestic violence, 
and for many of the survivors the violence will follow them to 
their workplace. Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to 
the direct and indirect impacts of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has already enacted legislation and 
Ontario is on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job 
security for victims of domestic violence. We’ve tabled a 
private member’s bill a few weeks ago now, Mr. Speaker, 
calling for these measures to be implemented in Saskatchewan, 
and we do hope that the government takes that private 
member’s bill and passes it. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today 
come from Saskatoon and Warman. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to restore funding to post-secondary 
institutions. In the last few years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 
precipitous drop in the number of lower income students 
accessing higher education. This bodes ill for our future and is 
only made worse by significant cuts to colleges and 
universities, with decreases in funding that are resulting in 
higher tuition and job losses and decreases in available 
programming. Mr. Speaker, alongside cuts to student aids, this 
only makes it more difficult for students from families in need 
to access higher education. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
The individuals signing the petition today are from Regina. I do 
so submit. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Remembering John Bury 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in the House today to 
recognize a pioneer of medicare who, sadly, is no longer with 
us. Dr. John Bury was born in England in 1924. He attended the 
London Hospital Medical College and practised as a physician 
in England until June of 1963 when he came to Saskatoon to 
join the revolutionary patient-owned community clinic as a 
family physician during the medicare crisis. 
 
During his time with the community clinic, John was closely 
involved in the development of its unique care model and in 
shaping the future of our health care system as a whole. John 
assisted in the design of the prescription drug formulary, which 
reduced the cost of prescription drugs and helped in the 
formation of the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 
 
He and his wife, Betsy, have also been leaders in social 
movements, including the peace movement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Bury passed away on December 22nd last 
year at the age of 92. Over the years, I was lucky enough to 
learn from John and his persistently brilliant health policy 
analysis and his good humour. He will truly be missed in our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
recognizing John and Betsy Bury and remembering John’s 
dedication to the health of all people. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in the 
Assembly today to acknowledge Sexual Assault Awareness 
Week. This is an important issue that we all need to help bring 
awareness to. Any one incident of sexual assault is one too 
many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been investing in supports for 
those who have been victimized, including funding for a 
24-hour crisis telephone line, crisis counselling, and support for 
medical, legal, and social services appointments. Those 
programs total $1.2 million provided to seven programs. 
Additionally there is $440,000 funding for four police positions 
that specialize in investigating child exploitation and $770,000 
to fund seven positions that are part of the provincial ICE 
[Internet child exploitation] team. 
 
Our government has also directed a review of the domestic 
violence death investigative process. The interim report was just 
released in May and the final report will be released in the fall, 
and our government is looking closely at this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue that everyone needs to 
bring awareness to. And it is especially important to me with 
the recent opening of the NEOSS [North East Outreach and 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

Support Services] domestic violence shelter in Melfort. I would 
ask that all members join me in acknowledging Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Women of Distinction Gala Awards 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, May 
11th, I was pleased to attend the Regina YWCA’s [Young 
Women's Christian Association] annual Women of Distinction 
Gala awards ceremony at the Conexus Centre of the Arts along 
with my colleague, the member for Douglas Park, and the 
member opposite for Regina University. 
 
The Women of Distinction Awards program is part of the 
YWCA’s commitment to support women in realizing their full 
potential. It recognizes South Saskatchewan women whose 
outstanding contributions to their field of endeavour make a 
difference in their communities and across the globe. In 
addition, the gala awards dinner also raises funds in support of 
the invaluable YWCA programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year the YWCA recognizes women in 12 
award categories. This year’s winners included the Women of 
the White Pony Lodge with the Circle of Friends Award; Laura 
Budd with the Community Leadership and Enhancement 
Award; Cassandra Opikokew Wajuntah with the Cultural 
Heritage Award; Bev McBeth with the Education and 
Mentorship Award; Katrina Rogina with the Entrepreneurship 
and Innovation Award; Teresa Florizone with the Leadership 
and Management Award; Sandy Baumgartner with the Science, 
Technology and Environment Award; Bonnie Chapman with 
the Arts Award; Sarah Garden with the Wellness, Recreation 
and Healthy Living Award; and Jellyn Ayudan with the Young 
Woman of Distinction Award. And the Lifetime Achievement 
Award winner was Barb Byers, a tireless labour leader and 
activist for our province and our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join with me today 
in congratulating this year’s Women of Distinction winners, and 
in thanking the YWCA for their commitment to women in our 
province and for all that they provide. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Pats Lose Series to Seattle 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that I am wearing a Seattle 
Thunderbirds jersey today. Unfortunately the Regina Pats lost 
to the Thunderbirds in overtime of game six last night, and I 
lost a bet to the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, whose 
nephew, Turner Ottenbreit, plays defence with the Seattle 
Thunderbirds. 
 
The Pats went into Sunday’s game with a renewed energy to 
fight for their chance to take the series to seven games. Regina 
started the night with a power play goal by Sam Steel. Seattle 
quickly retaliated, tying the score early on in the second period. 
With just 8 minutes and 10 seconds remaining in the third, Jeff 

de Wit scored, giving the Pats a 2-1 lead. Austin Wagner 
followed that goal up on a breakaway, making it 3-1 with just 
over six minutes left to play.  
 
Fans in Regina thought we were well on our way to a game 
seven, but Seattle was not going down without a fight. They 
responded with two quick goals before the end of regulation to 
tie the game 3-3. In overtime, Alexander True grabbed his own 
rebound and fired the puck past goalie Tyler Brown. This gave 
Seattle the game and the series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to applaud the Regina Pats, the Queen 
City ownership group, and their fans on a great season. I’d also 
like to congratulate the Thunderbirds on their win and wish 
them and their six Saskatchewan-born players all the best at the 
Memorial Cup. Congratulations, Seattle. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Constituent Awarded for Dedication to 
Groundwater and Well Industry 

 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
highlight my constituent John Soloninko, who was recognized 
and given an award for appreciation from the Saskatchewan 
Ground Water Association for his many years of hard work and 
dedication to the groundwater and well industry here in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Soloninko is a long-time constituent of mine 
and is widely known in his community for his humble spirit and 
hard work. John was born in Kamsack, Saskatchewan and 
began his career doing seismic in Alberta. During the 1960s, 
John worked for the Saskatchewan Research Council, travelling 
and drilling for underground water formations. 
 
This is when John was introduced to Elk Point Drilling. He 
joined the company in the fall of 1962 and was promoted to 
manager 10 years later. Operating for over 60 years and 
originally from Alberta, Elk Point Drilling is a family-run 
company and is known for its good faith and reliable drilling 
source, serving the people of Saskatchewan well for many 
decades. 
 
Since the ’70s, John has served on the Saskatchewan Ground 
Water Association board, making him very deserving of this 
recognition. Mr. Speaker, John and his wife, Barb, reside just 
outside of North Battleford in the Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 
congratulating John Soloninko on this recognition and thank 
him for his service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Winner of Leadership and Management Award 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On May the 
11th, the YWCA of Regina held their annual Women of 
Distinction Awards. This night recognizes and celebrates 
women’s achievements, who have greatly contributed to the 
health and future of their communities as well as inspire others 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

along their journey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I would like to highlight the winner of the 
Leadership and Management Award, Teresa Florizone. Teresa 
currently serves as the chief financial officer and vice-president 
of SaskBuilds. She is consistent in her projects, having an 
unbroken track record of on-budget and on-schedule finishes, 
which is rare for Canada’s public sector and muchly appreciated 
by this government. Thanks to her efforts, millions of dollars 
have been saved and freed up as Teresa continues to work to 
find new innovations to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
Public servants are more aligned, efficient, and better equipped 
for future projects thanks to Teresa’s leadership. 
 
Where her contributions to her profession are immense, her 
community service is no less, as she often donates vegetables 
from her 2-acre garden to hungry families in need. She is a 
leader in her field, a mentor to all women working within this 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Teresa Florizone on winning the Leadership and Management 
Award at the 2017 Women of Distinction Awards. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Proposed Elimination to Local Voice Service Subsidy 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday, 
SaskTel released a statement announcing its opposition to the 
CRTC’s [Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission] proposed plan to phase out the local voice service 
subsidy. The local service subsidy is designed to keep wireline 
voice service affordable in high-cost serving areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the phase-out will impact roughly 100,000 
Saskatchewan households that rely on the local voice subsidy 
for affordable telephone service. Impacted residents living on 
the family farm, in small towns, villages, First Nations, and 
Saskatchewan’s North may see an increase of telephone service 
costs between 110 and $320 per year, starting next year. 
 
Contrary to the CRTC’s stated desire to hear more from and 
work for the benefit of regular Canadians, the CRTC plans to 
end the subsidy without talking to the people that it claims to 
speak for. If not stopped, the CRTC’s elimination of the phone 
service subsidy will be costly for Saskatchewan people. We are 
encouraging Saskatchewan residents to submit comments to the 
CRTC to stop the elimination of the local voice service subsidy. 
Feedback to the CRTC decision, called notice 2017-92, can be 
provided on the website, www.crtc.gc.ca, or a direct link to the 
feedback page can be found on the home page of SaskTel’s 
website. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we encourage everyone impacted to take a few 
moments to voice their concern and opposition to CRTC’s 
phasing out this subsidy. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Security of Personal Email Account 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for the Sask Party’s GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] I guess so-called negotiations that 
led to nuns, other landowners, and taxpayers being ripped off, 
two Sask Party supporters making off with $11 million, and 300 
acres of land being handed to CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail, for 
any part of that scandal did the Premier use his private server? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it could well be the case 
because I have used that private account, as all members of this 
Assembly have used their private accounts for — and 
sometimes party accounts — for government business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that the Leader of the 
Opposition asked the questions in estimates last week. I hadn’t 
thought much about the whole issue of the email accounts I’m 
using because the one I use is secure. It’s never been breached, 
Mr. Speaker. I can share that with members of the House. It’s 
also password protected so I’m the only one that has access to 
it. 
 
It’s FOI [freedom of information]-able actually, as the members 
opposite know because they were reading from an email that 
they received as a result of a freedom of information request. 
And, Mr. Speaker, also like any communication from members 
of the government to anyone else on government business, it’s 
going to be the product of a transfer to Archives when that is 
appropriate. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it could well be that during that period of 
time I would’ve used a government account or the private 
account, Mr. Speaker. None of that changes the fact that his 
entire preamble was the subject of a review by the Provincial 
Auditor, and the auditor’s report has been tabled. We’ve 
accepted those recommendations. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well this is troubling. And today we 
also heard of an attack on the government’s secure server, and 
that’s because of course it’s publicly reported. How would the 
public ever hear of an attempt or breach of the Premier’s private 
server? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sharing with you now. 
There has never been a breach of that server. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I would share with you that that server in particular has been 
more consistent in its operation than the government server, as I 
have communicated with members on the government side and 
they’ve . . . unable to communicate back, at least on their 
government account, because the government’s system was 
down. Fortunately, mine was not. 
 
I don’t know where the member is going with this. I’m sharing 
with the members of the House that all of these emails that he’s 
referencing are FOI-able. He’s got copies of them. So they’re 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

subject to freedom of information requests by members of the 
House or by the public, per any other communications from the 
Premier or from ministers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also note that members on both sides of the House — 
we know this because we’re in conversation — use accounts 
other than their government account to conduct government 
business. And again, I don’t see a particular problem with that 
so long as it’s secure, so long as things are FOI-able where they 
need to be. And they are. 
 
I would say this though, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
member’s questions last week. As members of this House will 
know, I made a decision last week to simply be more focused 
and send all of my government-related emails on the 
government account. I think all of us in this House — officials 
and elected members — can redouble our efforts to do the same 
thing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So he suggests that there hasn’t been a 
breach. And I guess it’s just trust him at this point, and we don’t 
know about whether or not there’s been an attempt or an attack 
on this. But the question to the Premier: how does he know this, 
and how do we know this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — We know . . . How do we . . . We know this 
because there has not been a breach. Period. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So he says there hasn’t been a breach. 
Has there been attempts to breach that account, that private 
server of the Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware. There may 
well have been, but the security measures at the server meet the 
test and, based on results, I would say exceed the test of a 
government server. Mr. Speaker, in this respect, I’m not aware 
if there’s been any attempts to breach the server or the 
government server. I guess we could provide information . . . I 
could provide that information to the Leader of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. I’m happy to do it. But I could tell him that 
there has never been a breach of that server with respect to my 
email account, which is password protected and accessible only 
by myself. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the Premier’s response about his 
private server is that there may well have been an attempt. In 
the public case, in the public case, that is reported. So how do 
we know? How do the people of Saskatchewan know the 
security of this server? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, his House Leader sometimes 

conducts the government business, the affairs of this legislature, 
using — well he has on at least one occasion — using his NDP 
Party server account. I mean that was legislative business. Can 
he tell me, has the NDP server that his members have used for 
the email account ever been breached? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question is where is this server 
housed? Where is it located? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with members 
of the House that the server is provided by a Regina company 
that’s housed at the Sask Party headquarters. It’s a Sask Party 
domain name that has been my email, this particular email 
account that I’ll use from time to time — by the way, as his 
House Leader has done when he’s been conducting 
correspondence with respect to government business. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So just to clarify here, is the Premier of 
Saskatchewan actually saying that the information, the emails, 
of course of which are of a foreign interest, are commercially 
sensitive, that deal with international matters, is he suggesting 
that . . . And certainly through the expense of significant public 
dollars, is he suggesting he’s been doing that through a party 
server? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yes. That shouldn’t surprise 
very many people. I’ve had exchanges with members of the 
media, who have for years now had that same account, that 
same email address. Let me review again, let me review again 
the situation. The email, the account upon which the email is 
delivered, is secure. The server is secure. It has not been 
breached. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me also share with members that it’s all subject 
to freedom of information requests. And based on what we 
know of attacks, both on the government or perhaps on other 
servers, I would argue that this server is more secure, more 
secure than the server that is used by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I can tell you it’s been more reliable, because 
while the government server has been down not infrequently, 
fortunately this one has not, which is part of the reason why I 
never made a particular change. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, now the member will want to talk breathlessly 
in the subsequent questions about what this might mean in 
terms of government documents. I’m telling members on that 
side of the House, and frankly on all sides of the House, there’s 
never been a breach of these emails. They’re completely 
FOI-able. They will be subject to the same archive rules. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, if he thinks it’s wrong to conduct any 
government business, or if he thinks this is somehow 
inappropriate, government business conducted on a party 
server, he needs to turn around and ask his House Leader why 
he did the same thing. 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Does the Premier not understand that this 
information belongs to Saskatchewan people and not to him 
personally, or to his party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Are you done? You’re not done. Go ahead. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was done. Does the 
Premier of Saskatchewan not understand that this information 
belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, not to him personally 
and certainly not to his party? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I’ve 
said, that’s why I’ve indicated that this information will all be 
handed over to Archives — any government business. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have former NDP ministers that 
still have their own personal government correspondence in 
their basement, Mr. Speaker, that should be over at Archives. 
We could canvass those people if you like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll do no such thing. All of that information 
will be provided to Archives at the appropriate time, I can share 
with members of the House. And also the members on that side 
of the House should know, because they have a copy of one of 
the emails, that it’s accessible in terms of freedom of 
information. 
 
There was a media report out over the weekend that indicated 
that somehow this is depriving some future premier of looking 
at a previous premier’s emails. Mr. Speaker, that was an 
erroneous comment in that story that needs to be corrected. Mr. 
Speaker, upon a change in government, the emails or the 
correspondence of the government, of the premier, are put into 
Archives for 25 years. There’s no referencing back and forth 
between ministers and premiers. 
 
Members opposite will know that. There is an obligation on the 
part of all of us to hand over what is prescribed by the laws of 
the archive provision of the province to the Archives. That is 
. . . My understanding is, at least as of today, that has still not 
happened with former NDP ministers who’ve been out of office 
for now 10 years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier was negotiating and 
involved in discussions of a trade, international trade 
discussions: TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership], NAFTA [North 
American Free Trade Agreement], softwood lumber — all sorts 
of commercial and private interests specific to Saskatchewan 
and companies here in our province, on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
Was the federal government aware that the Premier was using a 
private party server during these negotiations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, members well know on 
both sides of the House that there are a number of accounts that 
we use. Whether it be party, whether it be MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly], whether it be government, whether it be 
caucus, or whether it be private, Mr. Speaker. And I would note 
the member for Nutana, beaking from her seat, who uses her 
private account to communicate to us on government business, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I think we could all do a better job of this, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of using the appropriate address for the 
appropriate subject, but it is challenging, Mr. Speaker. We are 
getting . . . In terms of emailing individuals, the account that 
pops up, that’s the one that we often send it to. 
 
I know I have received . . . In light of this discussion, I 
reviewed some of my emails, Mr. Speaker. And I think as you 
well know, I deal with members of the opposition very 
regularly in a number of roles. We have had . . . I have received, 
I have received communications to my personal account on 
sensitive government matters from a number of the members 
opposite, from a number of the members opposite, from their 
personal account, from their caucus accounts, from their MLA 
accounts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite need to realize 
that this is, on occasion, a challenging thing to pick the 
appropriate account. We could all do better at it, Mr. Speaker. 
But they are ones living in glass houses as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The information has been obtained with 
the expense of the people’s money and it’s supposed to be in 
the interests of Saskatchewan people. He’s been engaged in 
discussions that are of a commercially sensitive nature around 
international trade, the TPP, NAFTA, softwood lumber, 
commercial interests here in our province, who knows what else 
— and it’s all on his private party’s server. 
 
My question goes back to the Premier that I just asked before: 
did he communicate with the federal government to let them 
know that he was using his personal party server to do these 
sensitive negotiations? And how today can he stand in the 
Assembly and defend this practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well we have canvassed the question, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a secure account. This is password 
protected. And I would note and reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that 
these emails have been archived, have been saved, have been 
retained in accordance with the archives Act, are subject to 
freedom of information. 
 
Members opposite should know, Mr. Speaker, that the freedom 
of information and the archives Act define government record 
in such a way that it doesn’t matter where the government 
record originates from, Mr. Speaker, whether that be on a email 
account, whether that be on a government email account, 
whether that be on a piece of notepaper. What matters is the 
content of the government document. 
 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

The fact that the members opposite received a email through 
FOI shows, proves the point, Mr. Speaker, that these documents 
are subject to both the archives Act and the FOI, and we take 
that very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s arrogant 
answers aren’t working with the people they’re hurting. 
Everywhere I go across the province — it doesn’t matter who 
they voted for — the people are upset about the Sask Party’s 
STC sell-off. And they don’t want it cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC will be in court on Thursday and there’s a 
call for a value audit. The Sask Party made promises last 
election; this wasn’t one of them. So to the minister: how does 
giving tax cuts to the rich while scrapping STC keep 
Saskatchewan strong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
of course I’ve said many times in this House already about the 
subsidy, Mr. Speaker, that requires . . . at STC. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
over $17 million per year. That’s 85 to $100 million. 
 
He’s asking, how is that keeping Saskatchewan strong? Mr. 
Speaker, that’s 85 to $100 million, Mr. Speaker, that can be 
used for other services like social services and education, Mr. 
Speaker. That is how this is keeping Saskatchewan strong, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re making the right decisions to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Provision of Housing Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t see a lot of transparency 
from this government, but there’s one thing that is very clear. 
The Sask Party’s response to the tough realities facing 
Saskatchewan people today is one fire sale after another. 
Whether it’s selling off Crown land, selling off Crown 
corporations, selling it off seems to be the Sask Party’s solution 
to everything. 
 
Now we hear they’re looking to sell $100 million worth of 
assets from the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Can the 
minister be clear with us today? Does the Sask Party plan to sell 
off assets from the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As is the case for all of the programs and services 
provided by the Ministry of Social Services, we’re always 
looking for ways to find efficiencies. We are doing that through 
our income assistance redesign. We own a number of housing 

projects throughout the community, the city, the province of 
Regina, so we are looking very carefully at all of those things. 
 
This is one of the largest ministries that we have in our 
government. It comprises three-quarters of all of our expenses, 
and so naturally we are looking at everything that we provide. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it would have been very easy to say 
no, and that sounded a lot like yes. 
 
Sask Housing Corp provides affordable housing to people 
across the province — seniors on fixed incomes, single parents, 
people who have lost their jobs and are trying to make ends 
meet, Mr. Speaker. The government needs to guarantee that 
they won’t make a deal that ensures profits for private 
businesses but hurts Saskatchewan families. When it comes to 
affordable housing units, the people of Saskatchewan know we 
can’t afford the risk of another Sask Party sell-off or dodgy 
wordplay that costs us another essential service. 
 
Can the minister be clear today? Can you commit clearly to no 
scrapping or selling off? Can you tell us what your real plans 
are for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, in 2015 the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation converted 2,700 units from 
the affordable housing program to the social housing program, 
as the affordable housing program was not serving the needs of 
tenants with the lowest income. We are constantly looking at 
our housing portfolio, at the services we provide in Social 
Services, at the services we provide in children and family, at 
the services we provide in disabilities to make sure that we’re 
making efficient use of tax dollars and that we’re getting 
outcomes for the things that we’re providing, Mr. Speaker. We 
will continue to do so. 
 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to housing in this 
province, I will stand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Whoa. Whoa. Let the minister finish her 
response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
housing in the province of Saskatchewan, I will stand on this 
party’s record any single day of the week. Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite has spoken many times in his former life 
about homelessness and poverty, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
government, since we’ve been in government, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve created 634 affordable units for people who are homeless 
and at risk of homelessness. That’s about 70 per year, Mr. 
Speaker. When they were in office — two per year, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not going to take any lessons on housing. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that was definitely not a “no,” but 
one thing is clear: that the Sask Party’s lack of leadership on 
social housing is hurting Saskatchewan’s families, and so are 
the Sask Party’s cuts to our kids’ classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers in the Chinook School Division were sent 
home a memo that begins with: 
 

Due to the extreme impact of the recent funding reduction 
on the Chinook School Division’s budget, the Board of 
Education is prepared to offer a one-time workforce 
reduction incentive to reduce the overall salary expenditure 
of the division. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to outline a $10,000 early retirement 
incentive for all teachers in the division — $10,000 per teacher 
to quit early and leave fewer teachers in the classrooms. How 
can the minister say that these cuts aren’t hurting our children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the $10,000 retirement 
bonus has existed in almost all school divisions and has existed 
for many years. The purpose of that is to allow the divisions to 
plan for the next year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: the changes that we’re 
making to Bill 63 will probably put a limit on that because it’s 
an unnecessary expense, ought not be paid and, Mr. Speaker, is 
something that needs to be carefully considered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, yes, it’s been paid in previous years. It’s 
probably going to be paid in this year. But it’s something that 
I’d rather see that money be spent in the classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, this is not business as usual, and it’s 
not complicated. The Sask Party’s “extreme cuts” are forcing 
school divisions to “. . . reduce the overall salary expenditure of 
the division.” They aren’t doing this because they want to, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re doing this because they’re being forced to by 
the cuts that that minister has made to our kids’ classrooms. 
 
So I’ll ask again, Mr. Speaker: how can the Minister of 
Education stand in his place and claim that his cuts aren’t 
having an impact on our children’s classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we want to do everything 
we can to make sure that all of the money that we pay gets 
focused where it should be — on the students, on the teachers, 
and in the classrooms. And, Mr. Speaker, whether she admits it 
or not, the member opposite is on exactly the same page. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she belonged to a group called RealRenewal and 
part of that was . . . And, Mr. Speaker, it’s still on her web . . . 
still something that she supports. Mr. Speaker, she said, “. . . 

there should be a provincial education ombudsman to turn to 
when boards make decisions that negatively impact our children 
and communities, or when they act without due process and 
transparency.” Mr. Speaker, that’s where the Education critic 
came from. 
 
We’re not doing an education ombudsman, but we are saying to 
the divisions, work hard; save money; put money in the 
classrooms. That’s where the money belongs, and that’s where 
this government is going to see to it that it gets spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had no help from the members opposite. 
We know where Andrew Thomson was before they ended their 
time in government and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue 
to do the right things for the children in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Everything but taking responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker. How can the minister continue to defend his actions? 
It’s completely beyond me. 
 
The Regina Public School Division has cut specialized 
preschool programs because, like Chinook, the cuts to their 
budget had an extreme impact. Now the minister claims he 
wants to stop them. But here’s the thing, Mr. Speaker, the 
school board says: 
 

Our school division is not funded for non-ministry pre-K 
classrooms. Our school division has brought this lack of 
funding and designation to the attention of the Minister of 
Education a number of times over the past five years, but 
no change has occurred. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this has been on their radar for five years, and yet 
the minister has done nothing for five years. Instead of 
complaining, can the minister stop the blame game and provide 
the necessary funding for these preschoolers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is on 
exactly the same page we are and wants to save money and put 
money into the classroom. There still exists, Mr. Speaker, the 
“Draft Carla Beck for leader” web page. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
talk about her leadership aspirations, but the web page is still 
up, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, on that web page, it talks 
about her being a co-founder of a group called RealRenewal, a 
Regina-based advocacy group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn’t make a submission to our task 
force, but RealRenewal did. They called for a review of trustee 
remuneration, less administration, trustee term limits. They also 
suggested savings to be found. We should look at joint busing, 
joint purchasing. They called the divisions top-heavy and that 
there should be fewer superintendents and fewer division office 
staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly where we’re urging the divisions to 
go. We don’t want to direct them to do it. We want the divisions 
to find those savings on their own and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what’s going to happen. 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on 
Bill No. 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
and that this bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 70, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:40 until 14:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 

Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Hart Kirsch Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 48; and those opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on 
Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 and the bill be 
now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
[14:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2017 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 68, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — On division. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on 
Bill No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017. The bill 
and its amendments will be now read a third time. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 
the first time? I recognize the minister. 
 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 69, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:47 until 14:48.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Hart Kirsch Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 



May 15, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays - 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 48; those opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the Government House Leader will 
call for that motion after written questions. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip, I believe 
has something to be converted. 
 

Return No. 96 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — I wish to convert return no. 96 to motions 
for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Return no. 96 converted to a motion for return 
(debatable). 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the 
answers to questions 371 through 381. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has tabled responses to questions 
371 to 381. Order. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the 
answers to questions 382 through 384. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
responses to questions 382 to 384. I now recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:52.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2519 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2519 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2520 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2520 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2520 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2520 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2521 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2522 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2522 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2522 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2522 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2523 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2523 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2523 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2523 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2524 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2524 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering John Bury 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2524 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2524 
 Women of Distinction Gala Awards 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525 
 Regina Pats Lose Series to Seattle 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525 
 Constituent Awarded for Dedication to Groundwater and Well Industry 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525 
 Winner of Leadership and Management Award 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2525 
 Proposed Elimination to Local Voice Service Subsidy 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2526 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Security of Personal Email Account 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2526 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2526 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2528 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2529 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2529 
 Provision of Housing Services 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2529 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2529 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2530 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2530 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2531 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2531 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2531 
 Bill No. 68 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2532 



 

 Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2532 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2532 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 69 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2532 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 Return No. 96 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2533 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2533 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


