






















































Hansard: November 02, 2017


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Kindersley 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2771 
 November 2, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the members of the 
Assembly, it gives me a great privilege to introduce 24 grade 12 
students from the Vibank Regional School in Vibank, 
Saskatchewan. Of course it’s called a regional school because 
it’s brought together a number of communities. I’m sure there 
are some students from Francis and Odessa and Sedley, of 
course from Vibank, and the rural areas surrounding that. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Kelsey Gottfried. I will 
be meeting with them for a picture on the famous stairs in a 
little while as well as then probably answering some of their 
questions. I’ve had the opportunity to go to the school many 
times, not only through grad but a couple of other times. It’s a 
very progressive school. I always enjoy visiting it. So I look 
forward to answering their questions. I’d ask all members to 
welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very proud to stand in my place today to present yet many 
pages of petition on the permanent closure of Main Street 
access of Balgonie to Highway No. 1. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
take the necessary steps and actions and leave the west-in, 
west-out driving access for vehicles into and out of 
Balgonie at the intersection of Highway No. 1 and Main 
Street. 
 
We also respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan put up a locked gate on the apron between 
the eastbound lanes and westbound lanes of Highway No. 
1 and Balgonie’s Main Street intersection. This gate would 
allow emergency services access to the eastbound lanes of 
Highway No. 1 at the Main Street, Balgonie intersection, 
but would not allow the public access to cross the east- and 
westbound lanes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition in 
support of Balgonie’s very solid argument, Mr. Speaker, they 
come from all throughout Saskatchewan. And as I look through 
some of the names of the places, Mr. Speaker, we have Regina. 
We have White City, Mr. Speaker. We have a number of people 
from the rural parts of Balgonie, the area of Balgonie. Mr. 
Speaker, we have people from all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. As I look through the pages and pages of people 

that have signed the petition, it is obviously people from White 
City, people from Balgonie, as I mentioned, and other 
communities that are very, very angry on the recent decision by 
the Sask Party to ignore the concerns and wishes of the people 
of Balgonie. And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Lloydminster, 
Shell Lake, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to end the unfair Sask Party tax hikes for Saskatchewan 
families and businesses. The people who have signed this 
petition want to bring to your attention the following: the Sask 
Party has hiked taxes on Saskatchewan families and businesses 
by $1 billion per year. And at the same time, the Sask Party 
handed over a hundred million dollars in tax breaks to 
corporations and the wealthy and the well connected. 
 
The Sask Party’s new tax on crop insurance is a devastating hit 
on producers, and many small and medium-sized businesses, 
including those in restaurant, tourism, and construction 
industries, will be hit hard by the Sask Party tax hikes. These 
businesses will be forced to pass these rising costs on to their 
customers. And hurting job-creating businesses and producers 
will only cause more damage to the economy and do nothing to 
help the 40,000 Saskatchewan people looking for work. 
 
Here’s the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party to immediately stop their unfair tax hikes on 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today from citizens of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals that signed this petition want to 
draw these points to your attention, Mr. Speaker: that the 
Diefenbaker Bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for the people of Prince 
Albert and this critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition here was signed by individuals from 
the communities of Christopher Lake and Prince Albert. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
presenting a petition calling on the government to restore 
funding to post-secondary institutions. Mr. Speaker, the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to 
bring to your attention the following: that the Sask Party is 
making students and their families pay for Sask Party financial 
mismanagement. They point out that Saskatchewan students 
already pay the second-highest tuition fees in Canada. They 
point out that, you know, certainly at one point this budget cut 
$36.8 million from post-secondary education, that this budget 
cut $6.4 million from technical institutions, that funding for the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships had been cut 
by $8.2 million, Mr. Speaker. And they finally point out that the 
Sask Party broke a 2016 election promise by cancelling their 
first home plan. Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
immediately restore funding to Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary institutions and stop the damaging cuts to 
our students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, St-Denis, 
and Big River. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed the petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: to the fact that the Sask Party has 
cut at least $674 in government funding for every student across 

this province; that the Sask Party hiked education property tax 
by $67 million while at the same time cutting $54 million from 
the classroom over this school year; and to the fact that the Sask 
Party cuts mean that students will lose much needed supports in 
the classroom, including funding for busing for kindergartners 
and programs to help children with special needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
these senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who’ve signed this petition that I’m 
presenting today reside in Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Project Red Ribbon Day 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all across 
Canada people will be wearing iconic red ribbons as a 
supportive commitment to sober driving. Today is Mothers 
Against Drunk Drivers Project Red Ribbon Day, and this year 
marks the 30th anniversary of the launch of the campaign. For 
the past three decades, project red ribbon has been raising 
awareness about the dangers and ramifications of impaired 
driving. 
 
Although strides have been made to reduce the number of 
impaired driving cases, they still occur far too often. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the highest impaired driving 
rates in Canada. Over 600 people have been killed and 4,000 
people have been injured as a result of alcohol-impaired driving 
over the past decade. And while our government has taken 
strong steps, with more coming this morning, projects like red 
ribbon remain a vital part of the goal of eliminating impaired 
driving in our province. 
 
That’s why I’m proud to say that our government supports this 
campaign through Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. And with 
the holiday season fast approaching with parties and 
celebrations all around, it is important to take time to remind 
everyone about the devastating impact of impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Mothers Against Drunk Driving, 
on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, for their commitment 
to this noble event and for all that they do to raise awareness 
and funds to battle impaired driving. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Access to Mental Health Services 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, all members of this House have 
heard stories in the past few weeks around access to mental 
health services in our province. Too many people are waiting 
far too long for the services that they need. For some, they are 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

unable to access these services at all. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has some of the lowest funding for mental health 
services of all the provinces and nationally far below funding 
levels of countries leading the way. 
 
To all those who recently shared their personal stories and 
worked to advocate for better emergency mental health services 
I say, thank you. It was because they brought the issue to the 
front line in order to secure even a temporary mental health 
assessment unit at the Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
But our lack of mental health care in this country and province 
isn’t going away and isn’t going to be fixed overnight. 
 
But we need to talk about it and people need to be aware of the 
serious issues facing our communities, to be aware that we have 
the lowest number of psychiatrists per capita in Western 
Canada, to be aware and understand that rural and remote areas 
of this province continue to have an epidemic of suicides, and 
to be aware that mental health care is health care and deserves 
meaningful investment, Mr. Speaker. We must recognize that as 
a province we fall behind when we leave people waiting for 
services that they desperately need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
Mental Illness Awareness Week which took place in October, 
but to also recognize that the discussion around mental health 
can’t be limited to a single week. Let’s bring these issues to the 
forefront and work to create change for those suffering from 
mental health issues here in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Connection to World Series Win 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Houston Astros won their first ever World Series last night, 
defeating the LA [Los Angeles] Dodgers in game seven by a 
score of 5 to 1. Now I’m not just making this statement because 
I’m a Houston fan myself, but really I’m proud to say that there 
is a Saskatchewan connection to this success story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Terry Puhl from Melville, Saskatchewan played 
for the Astros for 14 seasons from 1977 to 1990. A member of 
both the Saskatchewan and Canadian Sports Hall of Fame, 
Terry can attest to the difficulty of achieving baseball 
immortality. Twice he reached the National League 
Championship Series but never advanced to the World Series. I 
have no doubt that he is very proud of the team today and 
ecstatic for the city of Houston. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Houston’s vice-president of marketing and 
communications, Anita Sehgal, was born in Big River and 
raised in Regina. She received her Bachelor of Business Admin 
with a focus in marketing and human resources from the 
University of Regina. She joined the Astros in 2015. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you know that she is a Saskatchewan kid at heart 
because her bio on the team website references all of the 
volunteer work that she does for her new home city of Houston. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the Houston Astros 
organizations and both Terry and Anita for everything that 
they’ve accomplished this year, and thank them for representing 

Saskatchewan so extraordinarily. Thank you. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Foster Parent Appreciation Week 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October 15th to the 
21st was Foster Parent Appreciation Week. On Friday, October 
20th the annual foster parent appreciation banquet for the 
northeast region was held in Prince Albert. 
 
Throughout my career as a social worker, I saw the hard work 
and dedication of foster parents as they welcomed vulnerable 
and at-risk children into their homes. I know the difficulties as 
well as the joy and sense of fulfilment experienced by both 
foster parents and children as they build new relationships 
together. The work done by foster parents and the support they 
give the children in their care is admirable. The love, guidance, 
and mentorship given to the children by their foster parents last 
a lifetime, and every foster parent needs to be acknowledged for 
this gift. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this banquet was held to acknowledge foster 
parents in the northeast region. They are all deserving of this 
recognition and our thank you. Congratulations also to the 
social workers at the Ministry of Social Services in Prince 
Albert, Melfort, and Nipawin for organizing this banquet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
acknowledging the great contributions made by foster parents 
and families in the northeast region and indeed throughout all of 
Saskatchewan and in thanking them for their dedication to our 
most vulnerable children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Jaw and District Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on October 20th I 
had the pleasure of attending the third annual induction 
ceremonies at the Moose Jaw and District Sports Hall of Fame. 
The Hall of Fame is dedicated to recognizing the commitment, 
the contributions, and accomplishments of people from Moose 
Jaw and surrounding area, allowing their legacy to live on as 
well as preserve the sports history in our city. 
 
This year there were six inductees, including three individual 
athletes, two builders of sports, and one team. Congratulations 
to Rod Heisler, a talented baseball and hockey player; Steve 
Michaluk, a lacrosse player and sports program developer; and 
Ryan Anholt, a baseball player, on their personal inductions to 
the hall of fame. Dr. Graeme McMaster was recognized for his 
involvement in track and sports medicine, and Brian Towriss 
was recognized for his efforts with coaching, recruitment, and 
mentorship. 
 
The 1995 masters senior Relics women’s fastball team was 
inducted this year for both their accomplishments on the field 
and their 25 years together, which had very minor changes to 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

their rosters in that time. 
 
Thanks to the organizers, the board of directors, and volunteers 
for putting on an outstanding celebration of sport in Moose Jaw. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating this year’s inductees on their successes and 
accomplishments in sport here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Report Indicates Optimistic Outlook for the Future 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
third quarter 2017 results of the Regina Executive Leadership 
Outlook report were recently released, showing Regina and area 
have one of the best executive confidence index results ever. 
 
Executives in Regina and area have renewed optimism and are 
confident that we have successfully navigated the recent 
economic challenges faced in our province. The report cited 
rebounding oil prices, potash prices, strong manufacturing 
employment numbers and sales, and a respectable earning for 
this year’s crop production as major factors in improving 
growth in our value-added businesses and service industries. 
 
Most notably, over three-quarters of respondents indicated that 
they expect sales revenues to increase in the next 12 months. 
Over 70 per cent of respondents expect their business 
profitability to increase over the next year, and 80 per cent of 
respondents expect their fixed investments to remain the same 
or improve over the next year. 
 
Our government will continue to make Saskatchewan an 
attractive place to do business by keeping taxes low and 
reducing red tape. Just recently our government announced the 
extension of the small-business rate of 2 per cent from the first 
500,000 of income to the first 600,000, the highest threshold in 
Canada. And unlike the members opposite, our government will 
never support a carbon tax that will impede growth in our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

New Schools Open 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to announce that Plainsview School and St. 
Nicholas School are now open in my constituency of Regina 
Rochdale. The two schools are part of this government’s 
joint-school projects, and both are just extraordinary. Mr. 
Speaker, for the first time in 30 years, here in northwest Regina, 
we have opened a Catholic elementary school. The community, 
staff, and students are in complete awe of the spaces that have 
been created. St. Nicholas School principal James Wahl said: 
 

Having been part of the building process since last May, I 
have tried to explain the schools to others, but I have never 
been able to do them justice. Only seeing, can people 
understand how advanced they are. 

 
It is so encouraging as I drive through Regina, as I pass school 

after school such as École Connaught Community School, 
mâmawêyatitân centre, Sacred Heart Community School, École 
Wascana Plains School, École St. Elizabeth School, École 
Harbour Landing School, and St. Kateri Tekakwitha Catholic 
School. Our record speaks for itself. We have opened a total of 
40 new schools, 21 of which are open this year, along with 25 
major renovations of existing schools. 
 
The efforts by this government can be seen in the advanced, 
state-of-the-art classrooms and resources that are now being 
utilized by the students, staff, and by the communities. This 
government is meeting the demands of its growing population, 
and unlike the NDP in their time in government, Mr. Speaker, 
we will continue to open the doors. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisition 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s only been a week since we 
came back to the legislature, and in that week the Premier’s 
gone to great lengths to avoid providing any answers to the 
people who have elected him. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal is an issue that more 
and more Saskatchewan people are turning more and more of 
their attention to, and they don’t like what they are seeing. 
 
When the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] starts 
knocking on a sitting Premier’s door to discuss a criminal 
investigation, most people understand that’s a big deal. And 
Saskatchewan people deserve to know what role their Premier 
and each member of the cabinet and Sask Party caucus played 
in the GTH scandal. 
 
We have two stories coming from him and we want to know 
which version he told the RCMP. Did he stick with his story 
that he knew what was going on at the GTH all along, or did he 
go with the official statement that said he had nothing to do 
with any negotiations? Which of those did he tell the RCMP? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I respectfully disagree with much of what is in the 
preamble to the hon. member’s question. Mr. Speaker, we have 
ensured, we have moved to ensure that every single question 
that was asked by an independent officer of this Assembly, by 
the way, the Provincial Auditor, who members opposite wanted 
to inquire into the GTH issue, we assured that every single 
question was answered. 
 
We assured that those who were involved in the decision 
making were available to be interviewed . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well does the member from Cumberland want 
to hear the answer to the question his leader’s asked? Because 
the answer is, the answer is every single official involved, every 
single official involved in the decision making has been 
canvassed who needed to be canvassed by the auditor on this 
particular issue has been made available. And I would also 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that every cabinet document, every 
cabinet item related to the matter was turned over to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
She has made her report. We have adopted her 
recommendations. She also said publicly, publicly, that she did 
not see any red flags, and I’m paraphrasing, but not any red 
flags in terms of conflict of interest or fraud. That’s what the 
auditor said. 
 
Subsequent to that, there has been an RCMP review. Absolutely 
if the RCMP are asking questions about it, I am going to meet 
with them; other members of the government will meet with 
them. Their review will be complete soon, Mr. Speaker. I look 
forward to those results, and when the results are in, we will 
rule out nothing in terms of further review. We want people to 
understand that there were mistakes made, but there is no 
scandal here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, these are questions raised by the 
people of Saskatchewan, and they deserve answers. I think he 
doesn’t want to give a clear answer, so let’s briefly recap a 
small part of what we do know. 
 
A Sask Party supporter paid way too much for some land. 
When he was told that it could be expropriated and was offered 
a chance to cancel the deal, he took a pass. Around that time, 
some in the Sask Party cabinet tried to get the GTH to buy that 
land, but the deal was blocked by the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. Then lo and behold, a second Sask Party supporter 
bought the same land from the first supporter for $6 million 
more than the too much that he had paid. Then the Sask Party 
government bought the land for GTH for $5 million more than 
the second guy had paid. 
 
Now the Premier says he was involved with the GTH from the 
start. And we know, throughout this process, Laurie Pushor was 
advising the then minister, Bill Boyd, and was also in contact 
with the Premier’s chief of staff and at least the second buyer. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake says, had he been Premier, he 
would have fired the minister and Mr. Pushor. Why didn’t this 
Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment, 
GTH and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is that information that has been canvassed fully 
by the Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
has conducted a review, issued a report, and the government is 
implementing all of the recommendations of that report. This is 
a government that has fully co-operated with the Provincial 
Auditor, with the office of the Provincial Auditor, provided all 
documentation to the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would just note that this is in stark contrast to the way 
that members opposite dealt with an issue that raised the 
attention of the public, Mr. Speaker. We have the case . . . in the 
case of the NDP [New Democratic Party] that were the 
government — and there were members who were a part of that 

government sitting on the opposite benches — where $35 
million was lost. And what was the process in terms of 
accountability for that? 
 
The premier of the day had his deputy minister to the premier 
conduct a review, Mr. Speaker, after the fact, after court 
documents revealed what had actually happened. Four years 
after a memo was written by then-Deputy Premier Dwain 
Lingenfelter to the premier saying that what we’re saying in 
public is not the truth in private, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way 
that the NDP dealt with matters. We have worked fully, 
co-operated fully with the Provincial Auditor’s office, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll do things a different way than the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Bypass Project 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, again no answers. But the GTH 
is not the only growing scandal here in the Regina area alone. 
From ripping up and rebuilding Pinkie Road, to an overpass that 
doesn’t work, and an entire community that is being blocked off 
and shut out, there’s the Regina bypass. This is a project that 
was originally supposed to cost $400 million, but Sask Party 
handed the contract to a foreign conglomerate from France and 
beyond and the cost ballooned to $2 billion. And that doesn’t 
even include the land acquisitions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a project that they’ve insisted time and time again 
they’ve “studied to death” but it doesn’t work for transport 
trucks, it doesn’t work for first responders trying to save lives, 
and it doesn’t work for producers moving farm equipment. Mr. 
Speaker, why did the Premier think the only company capable 
of building this bypass was the foreign conglomerate? Does he 
agree that cutting off an entire community and building a traffic 
circle in Saskatchewan that doesn’t work for transport trucks, 
farm equipment, or first responders proves that Vinci were the 
wrong conglomerate for the job? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you 
for the question. We are very honoured to have the bypass 
being built in the province of Saskatchewan and the work that’s 
being done. 
 
The Ministry of Highways has worked with the community of 
Balgonie when there was a letter written back in the early ’90s 
that said when an overpass was built for Balgonie that the Main 
Street access would be taken out. Our ministry officials have 
worked with the town council of Balgonie. We addressed their 
concerns. First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, this is all about 
safety. It is safety first for us in the Ministry of Highways, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s . . . When we had to take the Main Street 
access, we worked with the town council and the first 
responders. We are putting an emergency exit on the east side 
of the town that will be gated and controlled by the first 
responders of the community of Balgonie, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also put on . . . We’re going to put lights on the west 
side of the town of Balgonie to address their concerns there, Mr. 
Speaker. But first and foremost this is about safety and we have 
addressed those concerns. 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All we 
hear from that minister is excuses. It’s not just truck drivers and 
producers that have issues with the bypass. Balgonie businesses 
are laying off staff and facing closure. And first responders, 
volunteer firefighters, Mr. Speaker, are now raising concerns 
that the permanent closure of Main Street is restricting access of 
emergency vehicles. When asked to reconsider this dangerous 
approach, the Sask Party said no. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The community offered simple and sensible solutions but the 
Sask Party stubbornly refused to admit their mistake and 
consider any alternatives. Right-in, right-out? No way. Special 
eastbound access for emergency vehicles only? No way. Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to saving lives, we trust the words of 
firefighters and first responders, Mr. Speaker. Why doesn’t the 
minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in my 
first response, this is all about safety and safety first, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s been two lives lost in the last seven years at 
that intersection. The community knew that when a bypass was 
going to be built for the community of Balgonie that the Main 
Street access would be coming out. 
 
We worked with the community on addressing their concerns 
for emergency access. We are building an access for them on 
the east side of town for emergency response that they will be 
in control of, Mr. Speaker. I want to make it very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe there’s a safe way to build highways — not a 
Sask Party way, not an NDP way — a safe way, and we’re 
going to build it that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, more excuses from a tired, old 
government, Mr. Speaker. The people of Balgonie are offering 
simple and reasonable options, but the Sask Party isn’t 
listening. The bypass was supposed to serve Saskatchewan 
people and make the roads safer. Turnpike double transport 
trucks and the kind of equipment that Saskatchewan farmers 
and producers use may not be a concern in France where Vinci 
is from, but they sure matter here, Mr. Speaker. And Vinci may 
not care what the people of Balgonie think, but this government 
should. 
 
At the very least, the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
should. And that’s why people watching today want to know 
why he doesn’t care. He was bragging about the bypass the 
other night in this House but he hasn’t taken the time to listen to 
his own constituents. He has never even acknowledged or 
answered the first responders who are concerned about the 
safety of their community. Mr. Speaker, why has the member 
failed his constituency so bad? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 

addressed the concerns of the community quite well by building 
them an overpass so they have safe access in and out of that 
community of Balgonie, Mr. Speaker. And the overpass was 
built to meet all the technical standards that are in place for 
everything that’s going to be used in the equipment in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ministry also brought in an independent engineer from 
Alberta to communicate with the community of Balgonie on 
why the Main Street access had to be taken out, Mr. Speaker, 
and he explained it to the town council. They got it, that there 
was a safety issue, that we had to have at least 1000 metres 
between the two overpasses, the one coming from No. 10 in 
Yorkton and the Balgonie overpass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said, and I will continue to say, this is all about safety 
and it’s safety first for the Ministry of Highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, they love to justify their $2 
billion bypass for Regina. It’s over 70 per cent of their current 
highways budget. But they have nothing but excuses for the 
refusal to build a second bridge for Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, 
let me remind the members opposite that all movement of 
goods and people across the northern Saskatchewan River is 
restricted to a single, poorly maintained bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a key artery in and out of 
northern Saskatchewan that should be completely cut off if 
there is ever a need to close, even temporarily, the Diefenbaker 
Bridge. A second bridge is good for the economy and it’s good 
for northern Saskatchewan. In fact, it would benefit the entire 
province. So while the government is bragging about their 
bypass, can they set aside even a fraction of the ballooning 
costs and finally build a second bridge for Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year, in 
October of 2016, I met with the city council of P.A. [Prince 
Albert] and we had a discussion about the bridge in Prince 
Albert. And we actually hired an independent engineering firm 
to come in and do a full assessment of the bridge. That review 
has been done, Mr. Speaker. We have communicated it with the 
city of Prince Albert. 
 
There is some medium . . . early work that we’re going to do. 
We’re actually going to put sensors on the bridge so that we can 
monitor every load that’s coming over the bridge. There’s some 
short-term issues that we’re going to deal with and some 
long-term that we’re going to work with the city on. When the 
city is in control of the asphalt, when they’re going to put a 
repave on it, we’re going to do some minor work to the bridge, 
Mr. Speaker. We are working with the city on this issue. And 
we are comfortable and we are very appreciative of the work 
that has been done by the independent that has addressed the 
concerns, not only for the Ministry of Highways, Mr. Speaker, 
but also for the city of Prince Albert. 
 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, their mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste has consequences. They’ve led to the Sask Party’s 
deep cuts and unfair tax hikes. Saskatchewan people in our 
municipalities are struggling too. In my own community of 
Prince Albert, the city was able to balance the budget. But in 
the face of the province chopping their funding, the mayor and 
council were forced to make difficult decisions — increasing 
property taxes and making cuts to services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these tax increases and service cuts are Sask Party 
tax increases and service cuts. Mr. Speaker, there is only one 
taxpayer. So why is the government forcing the people of 
Prince Albert to pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
the question. I think the member opposite probably forgets 
about revenue sharing that’s gone towards the cities and the 
municipalities and whatever, as compared to when the NDP 
were in power. So in 2017, there was over $257 million in 
revenue sharing to the municipalities. Mr. Speaker, this is a far, 
far cry from what it was under the NDP, when they never knew 
what they were going to get for revenue sharing. This 
government stands committed to our municipalities, and we will 
move on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector 
Compensation 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has zero respect 
for the principle of an independent, merit-based public service, 
and for the public servants themselves. The Sask Party wants to 
cut their wages, throw them out of work, and force them to take 
unpaid time off. They want to take $250 million out of the 
pockets of the hard-working people who keep our public 
services going, and it could get even worse, Mr. Speaker. For 
example if the member from Saskatoon Willowgrove ever 
becomes premier, he won’t just cut salaries; he’ll just fire more 
public servants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the Sask Party think it’s fair for our 
public servants, nurses, teachers, highway workers to pay the 
price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
the member opposite agrees that we have to let the collective 
bargaining take place at the collective bargaining tables, and we 
won’t be doing that on the floor of the Assembly. 
 
He also knows and recognizes that resource revenues are down 
$1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, and somehow in each and every area 

within government the members opposite are asking for more 
spending, not less. And we have increased spending. We have 
increased nurses. We’ve increased doctors. We’ve increased 
teachers, Mr. Speaker, but that does put pressures on the budget 
to be sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they do not want the taxes to increase. They want 
to increase spending. They don’t want any increase to debt. 
How on earth, Mr. Speaker, are they going to explain that 
mathematically on how we’re going to balance the books? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, they want to cut public servant 
pay and throw others out of work. The only people not worried 
about wage cuts or losing their jobs, Mr. Speaker, are the 
hand-picked Sask Party insiders placed at the top of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Laurie Pushor started in this government, he 
was advising ministers and their staff to use their personal email 
accounts to avoid accountability. He was involved in a 
correspondence chain where that Minister of Finance stated, 
and I quote, “The Public Service Commission is getting all 
crappy about us hiring people without open competition . . . 
Blah . . . Blah . . . Blah. Lots of fun. I really don’t care what 
they think!!” 
 
No kidding, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Pushor is at 
the centre of the Sask Party’s GTH scandal. He helped organize 
a deal that wasted millions in taxpayers’ dollars and who knows 
what else. But he still draws a salary paid by the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it in any way fair that public servants are 
threatened with job losses but Mr. Pushor certainly gets to keep 
his? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All of the 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], the cabinet 
ministers, as well as the employee that that member referenced 
took a three and a half per cent cut. So all of the permanent 
heads of government took a three and a half per cent cut to their 
wages, Mr. Speaker. But you know what? We’re not going to 
go the NDP answer to when there is resource revenues that are 
low. And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They closed schools 
and laid off teachers, Mr. Speaker. They closed health facilities 
and laid off nursing staff as well as other medical staff, Mr. 
Speaker. That was their answer to dealing with it. We’re going 
to do things differently in this province. We’re going to balance 
the books while still providing services to our citizens. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Leadership Candidate and Role of Public Service 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s plain they have no respect for 
the public service, and that was abundantly clear when they 
gave the top non-partisan, independent public service job to a 
Sask Party partisan. She’s so partisan, Mr. Speaker, that she’s 
now running to lead the Sask Party. It’s an alarming precedent, 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

Mr. Speaker. But leave it to the Sask Party to take it even 
further. Anyone with an ounce of respect for the public service 
would have at least resigned. If not, any self-respecting 
government would have asked for a resignation before letting 
someone run to be the leader of their own party. But she’s just 
taking a leave of absence. 
 
While public servants worry about the future of their jobs, this 
person knows that if she doesn’t get that gig, she’s always got 
the old job to go back to. Mr. Speaker, how can the Sask Party 
in any way defend this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the five 
individuals that are running for the leadership position in the 
Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, I’m also grateful for and 
proud of the work that Alanna Koch did as a deputy minister in 
Agriculture for many, many years in this province. 
 
I think, in respect of Ms. Koch, she is well regarded by the 
agricultural stakeholders in this province and by people in 
general for her work as the deputy minister of Agriculture. I 
think you could say the same would be true of the public 
service. I invite the hon. member to take an informal poll or 
canvass people that he knows in the public service and ask 
about the work that she did, that she did professionally and in a 
non-partisan way. Well the Deputy Leader is yipping from his 
seat again as he’s wont to do, Mr. Speaker. It’s nothing new. 
 
And my point to my hon. friend is, he’s kind of smearing 
someone who was a public service professional in this province, 
who is well regarded by the public service. He might want to 
take that drive-by attack on her, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think she 
should. And by the way, with respect to the policy of the 
government, it has not changed. People can take a leave of 
absence while they’re pursuing political activities. That’s been 
the case when people in the public service wanted to do so for 
either parties in the House. But, Mr. Speaker, I am a bit 
surprised that that member is smearing and attacking a 
professional woman who served as a very capable deputy 
minister here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Premier could tell the 
House where he thinks it is that the Sask Party ends and the 
Saskatchewan public service begins. Because there is a 
long-standing tradition that the head of the public service, the 
independent, merit-based public service, ought not to be a 
partisan, Mr. Speaker. They’ve taken decades of precedent and 
turned it on its head. And again, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense 
inasmuch as this is a government that has a hard time figuring 
out where their own interest ends and the public service begins. 
So again, could the Premier tell the province how it is that 
they’ve got a partisan seeking the leadership of that party and is 
there on leave and ready to come back to head the independent 
public service? How does that work, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — This is an amazing line of questioning that 
betrays a fundamental understanding of the history of the 

country and the province, even back to the last election. The 
NDP candidate in Last Mountain-Touchwood, I believe, was a 
Highways worker. That person was allowed to get a leave of 
absence and, when she was not successful, to go back to the 
public . . . as it should be, as it absolutely should be.  
 
[10:45] 
 
Allan Blakeney, Allan Blakeney was a senior official in the 
Government of Saskatchewan and ran to be the leader of a 
party, a partisan person. Lester Pearson is another example. 
Lester Pearson was in foreign affairs, a senior official of the 
government, and changed that role that he played in 
government from a public servant, as Allan Blakeney did, to an 
elected person, Mr. Speaker. Well and some go the other way. 
Jack Hillson’s another good Saskatchewan name. Jack Messer 
is another good example who goes sort of back and forth 
between politics . . . So, Mr. Speaker, I would just say I find the 
line of questioning a little surprising coming from the hon. 
member. 
 
Here is a woman who has served the province very well as a 
deputy minister, both in Agriculture and now with respect to . . . 
in my office, Mr. Speaker. She has stepped out and chosen to 
run. We have another very qualified woman in the leadership 
race that’s running. We have three other men that are running in 
the diverse leadership campaign. I am proud of all of them. I 
look forward to the rest of the campaign, notwithstanding the 
drive-bys that might come from hon. members opposite about 
one or more of the members that are seeking that leadership. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, day after day the Education 
minister’s comments about school funding have failed to pass 
the test. Yesterday when pushed about why school divisions, 
our kids’ classrooms are getting less funding this year over last, 
even though the people across Saskatchewan are paying more in 
education property tax, the minister said, “That’s the new math 
at work.” Mr. Speaker, that was addition and subtraction. Let’s 
be clear. Education property taxes went up by $67 million but 
the Sask Party cut $54 million out of our classrooms. Mr. 
Speaker, no one is buying that minister’s shell game. So can the 
minister finally come clean, stop spinning, and admit to the 
facts that everyone but her seems to understand? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, there is no spin here, and I 
will say it again. When you have a $1.9 billion budget and you 
collect 750 million in education property tax, every dollar goes 
back into education, 100 per cent. In fact we’re actually 
spending two and a half times more than we are collecting — 
two and a half times, Mr. Speaker. The NDP method of funding 
education led to unfair outcomes, not only for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, but for Saskatchewan students. Tax revolts on the 
steps . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tax revolts on the 
steps of this legislature, that is their record. In contrast, we have 
provided a fair, equitable way to provide record investments in 
our education system and ensure that all Saskatchewan students 
have a chance to succeed. Keep in mind that the education 
property tax amount for both ’07 and ’17 were almost identical 
at $750 million. That says a lot, Mr. Speaker, about our record 
and our commitment to the taxpayers of this province. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 81, 
The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 
moved Bill No. 81 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 82, 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 82 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 83, 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2017 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 83 be now introduced and read a first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Carr, seconded by Mr. Nerlien, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today to respond to the Speech from the Throne. This is a 
Throne Speech that ignores the realities faced by people of 
Saskatchewan and instead it seems to be much more about the 
Premier’s legacy, and I’m sure we’ll hear more about that later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party likes to talk a lot of our province’s 
success during the decade of record resource revenue. It’s easy 
to look good when oil is at $100 a barrel, but now that things 
are harder, the Sask Party are failing. They’re pointing fingers 
all over but not taking responsibility for their own 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Consider the fact that there are twice as many people out of 
work today than were when the Sask Party took office. Across 
the country we see more people working and fewer people 
relying on EI [employment insurance], but here in 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

Saskatchewan the opposite is true. And, Mr. Speaker, in just 
five years the Sask Party will have doubled the province’s debt, 
having grown the debt to $16 billion. At the same time they’ve 
cut in health care and in our kids’ classrooms. There are fewer 
health care providers and longer wait times. Small businesses 
are still struggling from the PST [provincial sales tax] hike and 
expansion. And seniors are still suffering from having their 
long-term care fees triple and their drug coverage and other 
supports cut. 
 
At the end of the day, the speech is full of bluster and Sask 
Party spin. And, Mr. Speaker, this is at times when 
Saskatchewan people not only deserve but need better. And you 
don’t have to take my word for it, Mr. Speaker. Everywhere I 
go, I hear how frustrated people are. Every day the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement is becoming clearer. Their scandals are getting 
deeper, and their waste just keeps piling up. 
 
But there was no mention of any of that in their Throne Speech, 
Mr. Speaker. People are asking for the Sask Party to stop their 
unfair billion-dollar tax hike that not only raised the PST but 
also added it to everything from kids’ clothes to insurance and, 
yes, even a case of beer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party have made Saskatchewan the only 
province where people are forced to pay PST on health and life 
insurance. And of course the Sask Party made all of these hikes 
while they handed tens of millions of dollars in tax breaks to 
corporations and their wealthy and well-connected friends. And 
while the Sask Party is talking more about aid for their friends, 
there was no mention of help for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that they are a government that 
wants desperately to sell off our Crowns. And while they’ve 
promised to undo the damage done by Bill 40, we’ve heard this 
song before. And they’ve already backed down even on that 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve already scrapped and sold off STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. They’ve auctioned 
off the assets. And how is that not a sell-off, Mr. Speaker? We 
still know that they had over a dozen meetings to sell off SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. And no matter what 
tune they pretend to be singing now, let’s be very clear: they’ve 
put SaskTel in the hands of the same minister who oversaw the 
scrapping of the STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to remind this government, whenever they 
reveal their next plan to sell off our Crowns and sell out our 
province’s future, they better believe we’ll be ready because our 
Crowns belong in the hands of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be nice if the Sask Party could at least 
accept some responsibility for the damage they’re doing. But 
instead they are plowing ahead with attacks to our classrooms, 
hospitals, and our most vulnerable, and attacks against 
Saskatchewan workers with threats of layoffs and a cut to 
salaries across the board. I don’t need to tell you how unfair all 
of this is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was not the Saskatchewan people who blew through billions 
of dollars in surpluses and the rainy day fund left by the 
previous NDP government. And it’s not the Saskatchewan 

people who mismanaged years of record resource revenue or 
caused the scandals and the waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just look at the Sask Party’s GTH scandal, 
for example. Day by day it continues to grow deeper. But we 
know that neither we nor the Saskatchewan people will stop 
digging until we get to the bottom of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course there’s also the Regina Bypass. We 
talked about it a lot at question period. This is a project that was 
originally supposed to cost $400 million, but the Sask Party 
handed the contract to a foreign conglomerate from France and 
beyond, and the cost ballooned to $2 billion and growing. This 
is a project that Sask Party ministers have insisted time and time 
again had been “studied to death.” But this is a highway in 
Saskatchewan that doesn’t work for transport trucks; it doesn’t 
work for first responders saving lives, and it doesn’t work for 
producers moving farm equipment. And it’s just another 
example of how the Sask Party isn’t working for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we will keep working, even with Sask 
Party resignations, a Premier with one foot out the door, and 
leadership candidates trying to ignore their actions and rebrand 
the Sask Party. Mr. Speaker, no matter what each Sask Party 
leadership candidate promises, it will always be the same old 
Sask Party that is making deep cuts to our kids’ classrooms, 
raising school taxes while cutting education funding, and hiking 
taxes and power rates. 
 
But there is an alternative. Saskatchewan New Democrats have 
proven when we work together with people from across the 
province, we can build a stronger and a fairer Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, we were proud to be part of the work that stopped 
the Sask Party’s plan to eliminate library funding, and proud to 
have reversed some of the cuts to funding for funerals for our 
most vulnerable, and for shining a light and bringing an end to 
the Sask Party’s practice of giving the Premier partisan bonuses 
funded by their out-of-province donors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud of the work done to get the 
Sask Party to pass legislation supporting those with 
work-related PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder]. And I think 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale should be thanked for 
that as well. And I’m proud of the work we’ve done together to 
ensure steps were taken and legislation was passed toward 
providing support for survivors of interpersonal violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a first step and even though it wasn’t . . . It 
was another thing that was also ignored in the Throne Speech. 
We still have the highest rates of domestic violence in the 
country. The Sask Party has missed opportunity after 
opportunity to do more and we have so much more to do when 
it comes to interpersonal and intimate relationship violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a government that is better at standing up 
for people across this great province. Mr. Speaker, I was 
disappointed to not see more interest by this government in 
their Throne Speech to work together toward meaningful 
reconciliation and turn words into action. There was nothing in 
this Throne Speech about the North or making life better for 
First Nations and Métis peoples. Mr. Speaker, as young 
children in the North take their own lives, we have yet to see 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

any real action. As one after another northern indigenous people 
have died in tragic accidents on the side of the road as they try 
to hitchhike, we have seen no real action. And as one after 
another indigenous youth have been shot and killed, we have 
seen no real action. 
 
From the Sask Party it feels like the only action we’ve seen is 
cutting, cuts to indigenous education programs like NORTEP 
[northern teacher education program] and NORPAC [Northern 
Professional Access College], cuts to job training for 
indigenous peoples, and cuts to the Aboriginal court worker 
program and alternative measures programming. Mr. Speaker, a 
better way is possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though the Sask Party said nothing in their 
Throne Speech to undo the damage done by scrapping the STC, 
in British Columbia, after nearly a decade of lobbying by the 
affected First Nations and as part of a strategy to stop the 
tragedies that gave the province’s Highway of Tears its name, 
the government invested millions of dollars in a transportation 
safety plan that includes the creation of bus routes that have 
begun providing service in June. 
 
Meanwhile the Sask Party scrapped the STC and left people 
across the province stranded without a safe and reliable service 
to get around. In BC [British Columbia] it’s the NDP 
government that is pushing this project even further, but it was 
the previous government that got it started. This is not a 
partisan issue, not right or left wing. This is simply the right 
thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then there’s also the tragedy of the Sixties Scoop. 
Still two years after promising an apology, the Sask Party are 
making excuses and actually pointing fingers at the FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] for why the Sask 
Party hasn’t apologized yet. Mr. Speaker, let me give the 
government a little tip: if you want to apologize for past 
wrongdoings, try some genuine sincerity and some good faith. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford to wait while the Sask Party plays 
games. Look to the suicide crisis in the North. The child and 
youth advocate put it clearly. Children are literally dying as we 
continue to fail them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a new issue. Research and experience 
shows us the connection between youth suicide and autonomy 
of indigenous communities. Working on reconciliation and 
empowering communities must be a part of the solution. Mr. 
Speaker, one place to start providing hope and opportunity is in 
the classroom. But every time we bring up the education 
funding gap, the Sask Party point to the federal government and 
say that it’s their fault. 
 
But if the federal government won’t keep their promise, if they 
refuse to make sure that all students on- and off-reserve get the 
same funding for their education, then we need a government in 
Saskatchewan that will. We must close the funding gap and 
send the bill to Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, the North needs 
meaningful commitments and support, not cuts to education 
programs, health supports, and job opportunities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s only by making meaningful progress on 
reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous 
communities that we can truly start moving forward and 
building together. Mr. Speaker, we must never forget we are all 
treaty people. These issues affect all of us, and it’s on all of us 
to walk this road together. While our shared histories means 
that the road to reconciliation is not easy, the reality is being 
faced by indigenous communities across the province — 
on-reserve and off, in rural communities, and in our cities. 
Make this a challenge that we must commit to taking on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Throne Speech that ignores the realities 
being faced by Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, despite all 
of the backtracking and bravado, the Sask Party are refusing to 
back down on their heartless cuts and unfair tax hikes that are 
hurting Saskatchewan people, and they are still handing tens of 
millions of dollars to the wealthy and well-connected. Small 
businesses across the province are still reeling from the Sask 
Party’s increase and expansion of the PST and the elimination 
of their compensation for collecting it. The changes in the 
Throne Speech fall well short of what is needed. 
 
The Speech from the Throne also highlights a number of 
changes that could have been avoided if the Sask Party had 
listened to Saskatchewan people prior to their last budget. 
Whether it’s Bill 40 or organ donation, the Sask Party has 
wasted resources and time by refusing to listen to Saskatchewan 
people and experts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to remind everyone over there 
that every single Sask Party MLA voted for their budget. Now 
as they start to admit they were wrong, they need to own up to 
the full cost of focusing on those failed initiatives instead of 
helping Saskatchewan people, come clean on why they offered 
nothing in their Speech from the Throne to help the 
Saskatchewan people looking for work or to support northern 
Saskatchewan and indigenous communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is the definition of 
unambitious and gives Saskatchewan people no reason to have 
more hope or faith in the Sask Party. Saskatchewan people 
deserve better from their government, and that’s why I will be 
voting in favour of the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I very much appreciate the chance to enter into the 
debate and to provide my address in reply to the Speech from 
the Throne, Mr. Speaker. It’s the last time I’ll be able to have 
this honour, to engage in a debate on a major effort of this 
House. There are two, as we know, with each session — the 
Speech from the Throne and the budget. And each time for the 
most part, for most of my 17 or so years as an MLA, I’ve had 
the chance to participate in the debate, and I’m grateful to do so 
again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to begin, as I have in the past, with a 
thank you, and I’ll go through these quickly. On the weekend 
we will meet in convention and I’ll have a chance, I hope, to 
perhaps ensure that my thank yous are longer and more 
complete because I have many people to whom I am very, very 
grateful, and for whom I’m very, very grateful. And so I 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

recognize them again here. 
 
Nola Smith in the constituency office in Swift Current 
continues to serve the constituents and the province very, very 
well. In our office we field calls, not only related to Swift 
Current issues, but from around the province, owing to the 
nature of my own duties. And Nola does a great job. 
 
Everett Hindley has been stuck with me since I began as an 
MLA, first as a constituency assistant and now as an executive 
assistant. And well, he’s like a younger brother. He’s a great 
friend and a great support, not just to myself, but a friend and a 
support to our family. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
Everett publicly here as well. 
 
I have a great constituency organization that has to do a lot 
more than other constituency organizations typically because 
their candidate is MIA [missing in action] on so many elections 
and in other activities. And I thank the president, Joel Friesen, 
and his group there. Mr. Speaker, I am so fortunate to have 
friends and family, some friends that I’ve known since grade 
school who are still good friends and help me to carry out my 
duties, with supporting me with friendship. Ed and Tom are a 
couple I’ll throw out right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I also want to obviously acknowledge my family. My 
brother and his wife have recently returned from Alberta, and 
they’re living south of Swift Current. Barry’s been here at the 
legislature with my nephew, Darren, on occasion. And they 
were all here for the Speech from the Throne, except for my 
nephew, Brett, who is an autobody technician in Saskatoon. He 
couldn’t make it. He’s a brand new dad, and so I want to 
acknowledge Barry and Glenda and their family. And my own 
parents, who are amazing and have always been supportive of 
me in this effort and have always encouraged me to pursue 
these dreams even at the earliest age when I harboured these 
thoughts of politics from that early age. I want to thank them for 
that. 
 
And then my own family, I want to . . . Just before I get to my 
own family, in this building the Executive Council staff are also 
family, and many have served since I began. We have a new 
Chief of Staff who is sort of no stranger to our organization, 
Ken Krawetz. But I want to thank Ken and Reg and Kathy and 
the entire group in government business, Jarret — all of them 
for what they do every single day. And Ruth and Rhonda, who 
have been running this province for the last several years — and 
doing an outstanding job, I would say, Mr. Speaker — to the 
extent things have gone well in government, they should take 
the credit. In terms of the mistakes, those rest with me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to also thank and acknowledge my wife. Tami has been a 
support for me in this endeavour since the very beginning, even 
though I began politics when our family was very young. When 
I was first elected September 16th, 1999, a week later we 
celebrated Faith’s first birthday. That’s how . . . The kids were 
all very young. Now Megan would have been turning five that 
November, and Colter would have been three. And so you can 
imagine in addition to her starting and operating a business, my 
wife Tami, and then later on as an assessor, did some 
assessment work, and now back engineering. She is a civil 
engineer, as people will know. And balancing all of that with 

being a mom and trying to, not just trying, being so supportive 
of me in my efforts. And I just can’t say enough about her, and 
I’m grateful for her. 
 
Our kids have been wonderful throughout this. I think they were 
pretty interested and excited about my job as Premier when they 
were younger, and well maybe somewhat less excited as they 
grew older into young adults. But still just a huge source of 
encouragement and support to me. Our youngest is Faith. She’s 
now in second year university. And Megan has completed her 
master’s degree recently at de Louvain in Belgium and is back 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And of course Colter is doing his thing. He’s pursuing his 
music career. I think last night he played in Montreal. They had 
a good crowd there for Colter Wall and the Speedy Creek Band 
in Montreal. And tonight, I think, they’ve got a long trip. 
They’re going to be in Toronto tonight I think — tonight or 
tomorrow. They’re going to play the Horseshoe Tavern. 
 
The Horseshoe is one of the most famous venues in the country; 
in fact it’s reputed to have been the place that the Rolling 
Stones would go and kind of rehearse for their North American 
tour. And everyone has played at the Horseshoe. Waylon 
Jennings, who I’m perhaps a little too enthused about, he played 
there. Willie Nelson, I mean it’s a long list. And so I’m sure 
he’ll have a great . . . I think they’re sold out at the Horseshoe 
tonight, so that’ll be wonderful for them. I want to acknowledge 
my kids in all of this — our kids. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m mindful of the time, and I want to 
first of all thank all the members who participated in the debate 
on both sides of the House. It’s an important feature of our 
democracy that we begin a session with a debate like this, and 
competing ideas can be presented. And I think all members who 
were participating in the debate served that purpose and that 
endeavour well. And so I want to acknowledge all of them. I do 
especially want to thank members on this side in the House for 
their efforts. Not everyone had the chance to speak but many 
did, and I want to thank them. 
 
Many of them had very nice things to say about me, and again 
I’ll have a chance to more properly thank them in the weeks 
ahead and maybe at convention this weekend. But I thank those 
members who were offering best wishes and saying some very 
kind, overly generous things about me and our family. I 
appreciate them. This is like family as well and has been since 
I’ve had the pleasure to join it. The family members have 
changed over time. Some family members have changed over 
time but that principle, that team approach, the family 
atmosphere that we have has not changed. And I’m so grateful 
to have had the opportunity to work with women and men such 
as these. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was one effort in particular in the Throne 
Speech debate that did quote a song called, working the high 
wire, and it was the member for Estevan. It’s a song by Waylon 
Jennings, and so therefore it probably was the best address in 
reply to the Throne Speech in the history of addresses in reply 
to the Throne Speech. But I should acknowledge that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to offer a few thoughts. I think a 
Throne Speech is a good opportunity to evaluate a government, 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

any particular government, in terms of how they would measure 
up to what people would expect, to what the constituents of this 
province, the people of Saskatchewan expect from their 
government. I think this is true regardless of who the 
government is. People have certain expectations of that 
government. I think they want their government to have a 
vision, a long-term vision and plan for their province regardless 
of who the government is. They want them to have that 
long-term vision that is in fact worthy of this province. 
 
What I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, is that this province is 
providentially blessed with amazing resources and wonderful 
people. World-scale potash amounts and oil and gas and 44 per 
cent of the country’s agricultural land, arable land that we know 
is increasingly important in the world economy and in ours. 
And that’s just a short list. Fifteen per cent of the uranium. I 
mean, this province is so blessed that I think the people of 
Saskatchewan want their government to have a vision for it that 
is worthy of all of these things, worthy of our resources, worthy 
of our people. So that vision by definition, therefore, should be 
hopeful. It should be a bold vision for a place like that. 
 
That’s what people expect of their government. That’s what 
they should see in the Speech from the Throne. They should see 
that a government that is going to be continued to be informed 
by that kind of a bold vision that is worthy of the province, that 
the government should be improving that vision and growth 
plan with each effort, with each Throne Speech, or perhaps as 
every couple of years go by. I think that people expect our 
government in Saskatchewan to be aspirants to national 
leadership as well, to want to lead in terms of economic growth, 
for example, knowing that the economic growth pays for 
quality of life that we like. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, if you look in this Throne Speech as to 
that test, does it reflect people’s own desire for a vision from 
their government? Well the reference to the economic growth of 
the last 10 years, informed by our growth plan, is all over this 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve actually sought to 
improve the growth plan. We’re going to add a value-added 
incentive in terms of agricultural jobs, agricultural-related jobs, 
so a new-growth tax incentive to lower taxes for those that are 
creating jobs in the agricultural value-added space. That’s in the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
We know as well that the fiscal plan is endorsed in the Speech 
from the Throne. That’s a long-term proposition, Mr. Speaker. 
The fiscal plan for the province calls on us to realize that 
resource revenues in the province have been now $1 billion 
short of what they had been, well historically, contemporarily 
speaking anyway for about three years when no immediate 
prospect of those revenues increasing. Even as industry goes 
back to work, in the oil patch in particular, they are doing so on 
a lower cost framework because the price of oil hasn’t gone up. 
People are going back to work though because companies have 
lower costs. So that’s great for Saskatchewan. That means 
people are going back to work in the sector. That’s what we 
want. That’s what we cheer for. But the reality also is that our 
budget is going to be impacted in the long term. 
 
And so well, you know, notwithstanding the debate or even the 
speech from my hon. friend just gave about all the shortcomings 
in spending of the government, we need to come to terms with 

the fact that resource revenue is off a billion three. And I guess 
we can have a debate about who’s to blame for that. Fair 
enough. But eventually, Mr. Speaker, eventually even members 
on that side of the House have to step forward with what they 
would do to reconcile the fact that resource revenues, down a 
billion three, are not . . . Look we don’t see them coming back 
any time soon, at least to the billion three level. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So they’re opposed to any tax increases. They’re opposed to 
any spending restraint. They would start up the bus company. 
She said that an NDP government would fill the gap, would 
fund on-reserve education. I’m not sure how . . . I hope she’s 
costed that out. There is a long list of spending that they would 
do. In the last election, we calculated that the NDP plan would 
add another $500 million to the deficit. And I get that, you 
know . . . 
 
And now we have a leadership campaign under way, and my 
hon. friend from Saskatoon Meewasin to his credit is proposing 
policies, but the policies that I’ve seen will have a significant 
cost. People expect in a Throne Speech and in a budget, they 
expect a plan, a fiscal plan for the province that’s responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest this to this House: that party over 
there has changed since I sat there and watched it over on this 
side of the House, and it has most assuredly changed from the 
days of Roy Romanow. Because Roy Romanow faced fiscal 
challenges that he inherited, I readily admit. He faced them 
down. He made some very, very difficult decisions but he 
realized, democratic socialist or not, that you’ve got to balance 
the budget eventually. 
 
And I think Mr. Calvert thought the same way about budgets. 
There was a fiscal rectitude that ran through both of those 
governments. I think that was frankly part of the NDP brand. 
Part of the reason why the NDP were successful in a number of 
elections is that people would look in on them and look at their 
policies and realize, well we may not agree with the 
government nationalizing the potash thing or wanting to own 
everything or some of their economic policies, but we’ll kind of 
give them marks for fiscal management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. I’ve watched the evolution of that 
party opposite. They have completely abandoned the heritage of 
Romanow and Calvert or Tommy Douglas when it comes to 
these matters. They have abandoned it in successive elections 
where they promised to spend more, to spend the people’s 
money, to reverse all these, and they’re doing it again even in 
their speech, even in their efforts in address in reply to the 
Throne Speech. 
 
And I do think it’s helpful because people are going to have to 
make a decision. Long after I’m out of this job, there will still 
be decisions to make — one coming up in 2020 — and people 
are going to have to ask the question, which party is going to 
deliver for this province a long-term fiscal plan, a responsible 
plan that will not burden the next generations in this province 
with debt unnecessarily? And that party over there is going to 
have to explain why they’ve become the more hipster, urbane 
version of the NDP we see in other parts of the country. The 
much more ideological left wing, dogmatic party is what 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

they’ve become, moving away from the pragmatic approach 
that we saw from people like Romanow and people like Premier 
Calvert even, with whom I had a lot of disagreement, and even 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess in the interests of the Saskatchewan 
Party continuing to form the government, I hope they don’t 
change because people are going to see through that. People 
will not support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s other signs in the Throne Speech of 
long-term thinking. And we’re going to hear more from the 
Minister of the Environment, who’s left for an FPT 
[federal-provincial-territorial] meeting, I understand, but we’re 
going to hear more from him this session about our emissions 
plan in the province. We will not have a carbon tax in this 
province. We will fight the carbon tax from Ottawa. But Mr. 
Speaker, on the strength of the white paper that we have 
presented, we’ll also flesh out a real emissions reduction plan. 
Our concern with the carbon tax, as you’ll know, Mr. Speaker, 
is that where it’s been implemented — and we have an example 
from 2008 now in British Columbia — it hasn’t reduced 
emissions. Emissions have gone up. There’s been a similar 
experience in other places.  
 
Carbon pricing sounds good maybe, especially if a government 
is wanting tax revenue for something, but it is not efficacious in 
terms of reducing emissions. We will present a long-term plan 
for this province that has real targets, that will help this country 
meet its Paris commitment, and that is actually about emissions 
reduction and not another tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here again I think there’s an interesting 
contrast because the leadership candidates over there, especially 
I think the member from Meewasin, wants to capitulate to the 
federal government on this carbon tax. He has said over and 
over again that well we’re going to have to do this. 
Notwithstanding the empirical evidence that it doesn’t work. 
And I think the member for Regina Rosemont, not to be 
out-flanked on the left by his only competitor in the race, is 
joining that carbon tax parade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well you know, and I’ll get into this more in a moment, but 
people are also looking for a government in their Throne 
Speech and in their actions one that will stand up for 
Saskatchewan’s interests. And for as long as we have the 
pleasure of serving, whoever sits in this chair, people will know 
that the Saskatchewan Party is aptly named because 
Saskatchewan will be first and foremost for us. We will always 
defend the interests of our economy and the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think people want to look at the Throne Speech 
and the government’s actions and see a government that also 
deals with current issues. Long-term plans, but there are current 
issues before us. And if you look in the Speech from the 
Throne, you will see the government’s commitment with a $300 
million investment in better Internet coverage, better cellular 
coverage for the province. 
 
I remember, in the 2016 election, we travelled around in our 
pickup, and we heard from people on highways certainly. And 
we always do, but more . . . It was the first election I remember 

this happening. More than highways, we heard about Internet 
coverage, especially in rural Saskatchewan. We have amazing 
agri-businesses out there that need connectivity We have urban 
. . . Well we have residences obviously and we have urban 
businesses that need that connectivity. It’s the new 
infrastructure. It’s about growth for the province. It’s in our 
growth plan, and it’s a current issue we must face. 
 
Ride sharing, another example of the government facing current 
issues that’s right here in the Throne Speech. We have too 
many people drinking and driving. It’s the view of the 
government we should have as many options as possible for 
people not to do that. And one of them, just one arrow in the 
quiver, is the new ride-sharing apps you can get. Lyft and Uber 
are the most popular. 
 
We’ve got tech folks in Saskatoon and I think some in 
Manitoba that are looking at, and we want this to happen, an 
application, an Uber-like application for rural Saskatchewan. 
The Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, he’s asking 
those tech folks to design Ruber. I’m not sure that’s the name 
that anybody would go with. But, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to the 
fact that we want to deal with current issues. 
 
And here again by the way, interesting by contrast. You know, 
the world is using these apps, these modern apps, whether it’s 
Airbnb or Uber or Lyft. And what party, what modern party 
opposes the availability of Uber in Saskatchewan? The NDP, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s incredible. You wonder. I’m sure they have 
meetings. They must wonder why are we so out of touch with 
Saskatchewan. I think they should look at their resolutions and 
look at the policy decisions they make when they say things 
like, well we don’t really know if Uber’s right for the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, organ donations also is referenced in 
the Throne Speech. It’s a current issue. It’s a pressing issue. We 
need to improve those numbers. We’re going to have physician 
teams to assist with that, and I think one day perhaps move 
towards presumed consent although that might be long past my 
time in this venerable Assembly. 
 
The bill on unauthorized electronic distribution of images also 
represents a government dealing with a current issue, an issue 
that wasn’t an issue when I first was elected, or dare I say, when 
our government was first elected. But it is today. And we want 
to protect those who are vulnerable, who are made vulnerable 
by others that would use revenge porn. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to move on that because again I think it’s important for 
governments to reflect current issues as well. And the Speech 
from the Throne does that. 
 
Government should also keep its promises. I think that’s 
another position that the people of the province would expect, 
would want to see in their government. You said you’d do 
things. Are you actually going to do them? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
this Throne Speech sought to keep two campaign promises: 
individualized funding for kids with autism, as well as the 
seniors’ tax deferral program.  
 
Government should reflect and protect the values of its citizens. 
Right? I think people would look at a Throne Speech or 
evaluate a government with that question. Does it reflect my 
values? Does it protect the values, sometimes unique values, of 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

the people of this province? Well, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne 
Speech there is an historic reference to the fact that our 
government will move forward with the notwithstanding clause 
to protect school choice in this province. 
 
I want to give credit to the member for Regina Rosemont, who 
was then leader of the party, and I think basically supported the 
government’s position. The new leader doesn’t support it, I 
don’t think, or is certainly equivocating on it because she said, 
well I don’t think the notwithstanding clause is needed because 
it’s going to take a long time in the courts. That kind of 
dithering also, I think, speaks to the disconnect between the 
NDP and the people of this province. 
 
Parents whose kids are starting out in school would like some 
assurances. They’d like to know the surety that school choice 
will be protected, that separate schools will be offered, public 
schools will be offered, that the government would continue to 
partner with private chartered schools in this province as we 
have since we were elected. They would like that assurance. 
They have it in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government works hard to reflect and protect the values of the 
people of this province. We don’t need to wait for the court 
case. We’ll do that protecting right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the people of this province would look at the Throne 
Speech and wonder, well does it represent a government that 
listens. Is the government listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, here again I think, I hope, 
people would look at the Speech from the Throne and say, you 
know I don’t . . . maybe I don’t agree with everything the 
government’s done or maybe I don’t even agree with very much 
of what the government’s done, but I respect the fact that they 
have listened on Bill 40. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sought to provide a privatization definition that 
wasn’t there when the NDP proposed the Crown protection Act 
that we voted for. People clearly didn’t agree with the 
definition. And so we reflected that fact in the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done that on a number of issues. 
 
And the NDP call it backpedalling, and they take shots at our 
government for making these adjustments. Here again I would 
say that when a government does that, whatever its stripe . . . 
although it sure didn’t happen much when those folks sat over 
here, where they were clearly offside with Saskatchewan people 
but just went ahead in a bullheaded way and went ahead with 
policies, which is, I think in part, why they sit where they are 
now. 
 
They can criticize us all they want, I guess. Take all the shots 
you want about how we have listened to Saskatchewan people 
and made adjustments. I hope and I believe this to be true with 
the five excellent candidates we have running for the leadership 
and the women and men that make up this caucus: I hope and I 
know that this party will always be a party that is humble 
enough to listen and learn from Saskatchewan people and 
reflect their views. And, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 
Throne, I think, does that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think also that people want to look at a Throne 
Speech or the activities of a government and know that their 
government, whatever its stripe, will fight for their interests — 

and I touched on this a little bit earlier — and not in an 
equivocal way, but clearly and resolutely defend the interests of 
this province. That’s what they want to see. They would have 
seen that reflection in the Speech from the Throne. They would 
have seen a reference to what we’re prepared to do with respect 
to Alberta continuing to ignore a New West Trade panel ruling 
on beer. They would have seen references not just in the Speech 
from the Throne but our work as a government on things like 
pipelines that we know are good for the province or the carbon 
tax I’ve already talked about. 
 
It was very telling for me when the NDP had their convention 
recently and they invited their federal leader to speak to their 
convention. I hope, I hope that the new leader of the party, and 
certainly those who aspire to be premier . . . And I saw the 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin take a shining, smiling 
picture with Mr. Singh. I hope that before or after the picture 
was . . . Well I would say to my friend, the hon. . . . There’s 
nothing wrong with the picture. What I would say is it would be 
important that we would know in this House that before the 
picture was taken or after the picture was taken or at some time 
that weekend, sometime that weekend, that that would-be 
premier of the province and the member for Rosemont, who 
wants that same job, and the current Leader of the Opposition 
would have taken him aside and said, you oppose Energy East. 
That’s the most important pipeline as far as Saskatchewan’s 
concerned. It has Saskatchewan oil in that pipeline. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well she says she did do that. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to hear, I would like to have seen it or 
read it in the news. I guess we just trust her, Mr. Speaker. We 
would just trust all the candidates. Oh don’t worry, we talked to 
Jagmeet. How about say something publicly? Because this . . . 
What I’m trying to offer here today, what I’m trying to offer 
here today is that you have to defend Saskatchewan’s interests. 
You have to publicly defend Saskatchewan’s interests. 
 
And the member for Rosemont’s heckling now and that’s 
always interesting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right. I would 
like to know what he said. He tweets a lot. I follow his Twitter 
account. He’s on social media. He has access to the media. I 
think they’ve been trying to call him. What did he say publicly 
about it? What has he said in this House? 
 
Energy East would have Saskatchewan oil in it. It would mean 
millions of dollars in infrastructure investment in that pipeline. 
It would mean less oil on the rails. It would mean less oil that 
we would import from places like Nigeria and Saudi Arabia. 
And rather than sort of mealy-mouthed equivocations from the 
NDP, they should be standing up for Saskatchewan’s interests, 
for our energy sector, and standing up against their own federal 
leader. 
 
I’ve heard the Leader of the Opposition say — I read it in a 
Moose Jaw Times-Herald article — how welcoming she was of 
his leadership. This will be great for the NDP. That would have 
been a good opportunity for her to maybe put an asterisk and 
say except, Mr. Speaker, here’s what we will not stand for. We 
won’t stand for the federal NDP blocking the growth, blocking 
the interests of the province, and I won’t support the federal 
leader on that or the federal party. But apparently she talked to 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2017 

him quietly, maybe somewhere at a table at the convention. I 
would say — Saskatchewan people would say — that’s not 
good enough. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The same is true on the carbon tax. I remember — I think it was 
the last session — the Environment critic basically stood on her 
feet, said we should price carbon. Notwithstanding the fact that 
it doesn’t actually reduce . . . Well that we should have a carbon 
tax. It doesn’t reduce emissions and, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
very telling because I think they come to it from an ideological 
perspective informed from some other new NDP sort of Central 
Canadian approach to what used to be a prairie populist, 
democratic, socialist approach that they used to have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think by all of these measures, the Speech 
from the Throne is not . . . You know, it represents a document; 
it represents the work of humans. It doesn’t represent 
perfection. But it meets some very key tests that I think people 
apply to the government. 
 
I want to close, if I can, just quoting a few things from an 
overly generous and overly kind email I received from a young 
person on the 29th of October. He says: 
 

Good morning, Brad. I’d like to start with a thank you. [He 
says,] I’m Regina, McLean, Sask born and raised. I’m a 
22-year-old and I feel too young to be concerned with 
politics, but for my own sake, I have become very 
observant about what happens around the province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know a friend of mine that votes, 
however I vote. That is because I know . . . 
 

And he says something very kind about me here. He says he’s 
currently employed on the Regina bypass. Pretty proud of that, I 
think. He would have been interesting to watch the NDP in 
question period today for the umpteenth time castigate that 
project, misrepresent its costs, and oppose the largest 
infrastructure project in the history of the province. But he says: 
 

I’m currently employed on the Regina bypass, happily I 
may add. I’m extremely successful thus far at my age, and 
it’s partially [he says thanks to myself]. 

 
I would tell him here it’s not due to me or anyone on this side of 
the House. It’s due to his work and his efforts, and he should be 
proud of what he is doing and what he’s achieving. He goes on 
to say some very nice things about me personally, and then he 
ends with a request that I would stay in this job. He very 
generously asks that I would stay on. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
not going to do that, obviously, however I want to give him 
some assurance through my address in reply to the Speech from 
the Throne today. All the things that he wants for this province 
aren’t directly related or dependent on any one person, certainly 
not on me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government over these last 10 years, and in 
the Throne Speech I hope, you have seen represented a 
government that is working hard, if imperfectly, to ensure that it 
has a long-term vision for the province that is worthy of 
Saskatchewan. That we will continue to be a government that 
deals with current and pressing issues as they arise. That this 

government is one that will keep its promises. That this 
government will continue to reflect and protect the values of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. That this government, 
regardless who the leader is, this government will listen to 
Saskatchewan people when they have concerns, when they seek 
change. And this government, as long as we have the honour to 
serve, will always put Saskatchewan first. We will always fight 
for Saskatchewan’s interests. 
 
I would tell that young man today that he should be very, very 
hopeful about the province of Saskatchewan, not just because 
our growth rates are forecast to be solid next year, not just 
because we’re dealing with the temporal issues of resources, 
and not punting on balancing the budget, not just because we 
have a new, underlying strength in Saskatchewan, born of 1.16 
million people — just 10 years from being a million — born of 
64,000 more jobs in the province than existed before we got 
elected. He should be hopeful, as well, that there are earnest 
women and men on this side soon to be led by an earnest 
woman or man who will continue that work, who will continue 
to have a long-term vision, to respond to local issues, a 
government that will keep its promises, a government that will 
reflect and protect their values, one that will listen, and one that 
will always put Saskatchewan first. 
 
I am opposing the amendment put forward by members 
opposite. I reject the Leader of the Opposition’s contention this 
is not an ambitious Speech from the Throne. All of the editorial 
comment would say otherwise and so does the speech itself, 
which is why I will vote in favour of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment moved by the member from Nutana. We 
will take the motion as read. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 11:35 until 11:38.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amended motion from the Speech from the Throne moved by 
the member from Nutana. We’ll take the motion as read. All 
those in favour of the amendment please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 11] 
 
Sarauer Vermette Chartier 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Mowat McCall Beck 
Meili Wotherspoon  
 
The Speaker: — All those against the amendment please stand. 
 

[Nays — 43] 
 
Wall Heppner Makowsky 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 



November 2, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

Harpauer Cox Marit 
Hargrave D’Autremont Docherty 
Merriman Doke Bonk 
Tell Eyre Harrison 
Ottenbreit Ross Weekes 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Steinley Nerlien Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Young 
McMorris Michelson Buckingham 
Lambert Moe Carr 
Dennis Kaeding Steele 
Fiaz Cheveldayoff Olauson 
Wyant   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 11; 
those opposed, 43. 
 
The Speaker: — The amendment fails. Is the Assembly ready 
for the main motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The yeas have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 11:41 until 11:42.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
Speech from the Throne, moved by the member from Estevan. 
All those in favour please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 43] 
 
Wall Heppner Makowsky 
Stewart Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Cox Marit 
Hargrave D’Autremont Docherty 
Merriman Doke Bonk 
Tell Eyre Harrison 
Ottenbreit Ross Weekes 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Steinley Nerlien Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Young 
McMorris Michelson Buckingham 
Lambert Moe Carr 
Dennis Kaeding Steele 
Fiaz Cheveldayoff Olauson 
Wyant   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Sarauer Vermette Chartier 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Mowat McCall Beck 
Meili Wotherspoon  

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the address in reply, 
43; those opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the member 
from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:45.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2771 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2771 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Project Red Ribbon Day 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 
 Access to Mental Health Services 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 
 Saskatchewan Connection to World Series Win 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2773 
 Foster Parent Appreciation Week 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2773 
 Moose Jaw and District Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2773 
 Report Indicates Optimistic Outlook for the Future 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 
 New Schools Open 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisition 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2775 
 Regina Bypass Project 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2775 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2775 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2776 
 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2776 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2776 
 Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2777 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2777 
 Deficit Reduction Measures and Public Sector Compensation 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2777 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2777 
 Leadership Candidate and Role of Public Service 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2777 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2778 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2778 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2778 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2779 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2779 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2779 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2779 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2781 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 2786 
 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 2787 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


