






















































Hansard: April 06, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 71A  THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 2017, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2155 
 April 6, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to inform members that Mr. Speaker is not 
present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. And 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce three people, four people in the gallery: Ms. Bronwyn 
Heerspink and her grandparents, Ms. Dorothy White and Hank 
and Darlene Heerspink. The Heerspink family are friends of 
mine and deserve recognition on their own, but today I wanted 
to particularly welcome Bronwyn. 
 
Recently Bronwyn attended the Forum for Young Canadians in 
our nation’s capital. Forum is a program for high school 
students across Canada who are interested in government or the 
Canadian political process. During her time at Forum, Bronwyn 
was able to learn from government insiders and experts about 
what goes on at Parliament Hill, as well as meet Speaker Geoff 
Regan. She also represented our great province during a first 
ministers’ conference simulation, among many other 
mind-challenging experiences on the trip. Bronwyn encourages 
all 15- to 19-year-olds in Saskatchewan to apply for the Forum 
for Young Canadians, as it is a great experience to learn about 
our country’s parliamentary system.  
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Bronwyn and her 
grandparents to this honourable Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased again 
today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts to 
spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that they 
don’t believe that this government knows what spiritual care is 
actually about, nor do they think the government knows the 
impact that it really has in our health care setting. 
 
They point out that in this budget the Sask Party’s eliminated 
funding for spiritual care services which provided spiritual care 
within Saskatchewan’s health facilities. They point out that 
Saskatchewan will be the only province within Canada to not 
fund this support for patients, residents, and their families 
seeking wellness. They point out that the Sask Party hid their 
plan to scrap funding for spiritual care within the health region 
facilities during the 2016 election, just a year ago, and that 
spiritual care responds to the spiritual and emotional needs of 
patients and residents and provides a compassionate listening 
presence in times of crisis. 
 

They point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making important and difficult decisions, and that 
spiritual care can provide support for all families, patients, and 
residents, regardless of faith or belief, in obtaining comfort and 
support. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for pastoral care services 
in this province’s health regions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Cando, Landis, Wilkie, Biggar, Perdue. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province, and that by scrapping STC out of the blue without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little they care 
about protecting our Crowns like SaskTel. And that STC helps 
to drive the economy with its parcel service that services farms 
and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plans to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, and to resume transportation 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported and signed by many good people of the province. 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I stand in my place and answer the call, under the 
direction of the member from Prince Albert Northcote, for 
anyone in the Assembly to help her in her battle for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert. I stand in my place to offer that 
support to her because she does need someone to stand with 
her. So, Mr. Speaker, the petition is a reference to a need for a 
second bridge for Prince Albert. It’s never been clearer than it is 
today; Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert 
and businesses that the people and products that go through the 
Prince Albert area and through the bridge require a solution.  
 
So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Ask that the Sask Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, as 
we stand up in our place day after day and present page after 
page, are from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this 
particular page the people that have signed this petition are 
from Meadow Lake, Air Ronge, and Regina. And I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
my place today to present a petition opposed to Bill 40 and a 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people 
who have signed this petition would like to bring to our 
attention the following: the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a brand 
new definition for privatization that allows this government to 
wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this definition is not found anywhere in the 
Commonwealth to date. 
 
In 2015-16 alone, our Crown corporations gave $3 billion in 
dividends to pay for schools, roads, and hospitals . . . or 300 
million, and over 3 billion over the last 10 years. Our Crown 
corporation employ thousands of Saskatchewan people across 
the province; and under section 149 of the Income Tax Act of 
Canada, Crown corporations are exempt from corporate income 
tax, provided not less than 90 per cent of the shares are held by 
a government or province. The Sask Party’s proposal would 
allow up to 49 per cent of a Crown to be sold without being 
considered privatized. This short-sighted legislation risks 
sending millions of Crown dividends to Ottawa rather than to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
and start protecting jobs and Crown corporations instead of 
selling them off to pay for Sask Party mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition today are 
from Saskatoon and Martensville. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition concerning pay equity here in Saskatchewan. 
And the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
want to bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of 
this province believe in an economy that’s powered by 
transparency, accountability, security, and equity; and that all 
women should be paid equitably; and that women are powerful 
drivers of economic growth and their economic empowerment 
benefits us all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar that a man makes, and in Regina, women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
the term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people signing this petition come 
from the city of Saskatoon and the city of Martensville. I do so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to present a petition to increase the funding to Prince 
Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that mobile 
crisis, the services they provide, fill a gap that’s in our 
communities. They oftentimes go to situations that other 
ministries don’t necessarily cover the services. So they’re 
trained to be able to provide those services, and it’s very 
necessary in communities such as Prince Albert. And due to 
some financial cuts, the Prince Albert mobile crisis unit had to 
close its doors during the daytime hours, resulting in a loss of 
resource for the people in distress in the community. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies, like I said before, who may not be trained and/or 
qualified to provide the counselling and intervention services 
that are necessary for these clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the individuals signing this particular 
petition are from the communities of Birch Hills and Prince 
Albert. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition to restore library funding in the province. Those who 
have signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: whereas the Saskatchewan government has cut 
funding for regional libraries by more than half and eliminated 
funding for libraries in Regina and Saskatoon, this drastic 
funding cut will have a devastating impact on libraries, 
especially regional libraries and the many people who depend 
on them. 
 
Whereas libraries are a vital part of communities right across 
Saskatchewan and the services they provide enrich the lives of 
many, this drastic cut imposed on libraries will lead to branch 
closures, program cuts, and reductions in hours as we’ve 
already seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Whereas libraries are about more than just borrowing books; 
meeting rooms are used by community groups; library staff host 
educational programs and clubs; and the publicly accessible 
computer terminals are essential to many. 
 
Whereas these cuts have a disproportionate impact on rural 
communities where libraries are vital community spaces, 
potential closures or reductions in service will severely impact 
our communities. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Therefore in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
renew its commitment to the invaluable programming, 
educational opportunities, and public spaces our libraries 
provide across the province and restore the $4.8 million in 
funding for public libraries that was cut in the 2017-2018 
budget. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these petitions again are coming in from 
all over the province. The particular petitions that I have before 
me today are signed by citizens of North Battleford, Saskatoon, 
and Hague. I do so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to present a petition calling on the government to restore 
funding for post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to 
bring to your attention the following: that the Sask Party is 
making students and their families pay for Sask Party financial 
mismanagement. 
 
They point out that Saskatchewan students already pay the 
second-highest tuition fees in Canada. They point out that this 

budget cuts $36.8 million from post-secondary education. They 
further point out that this budget cuts $6.4 million from 
technical institutions, and they point out that funding for the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund and scholarships have been cut 
by $8.2 million. Finally, Mr. Speaker, they point out that the 
Saskatchewan Party has broken a 2016 election promise by 
cancelling their first home plan. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners respectfully request that the Government of 
Saskatchewan immediately restore funding to 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and stop the 
damaging cuts to students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition calling for critical supports for victims of 
domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of 
having the highest rate of domestic violence amongst the 
provinces. Victims of domestic violence should be able to end 
rental agreements in order to leave dangerous situations. 
Employers should be obligated to reasonably accommodate 
victims of domestic violence in the workplace. As well, 
employees who are victims of domestic violence should be able 
to take a leave of absence from their employment without 
penalty. And Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, must do more to 
protect women and children who are victims of domestic 
violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Legislative Assembly to pass legislation providing critical 
supports for victims of domestic violence. 

 
Individuals signing this petition today come from the Moose 
Jaw area. I do so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Minister of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I’d request leave of the 
House for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First, seated 
in the west gallery I’d like to introduce to you the family of 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Courtney Schaefer. Courtney was a tow truck operator who 
tragically lost his life while helping others in a blizzard near 
Gerald, Saskatchewan on March the 7th. We are joined today 
by Courtney’s wife, Kim, and their daughter Tarren. And with 
them are Courtney’s brother Corey and his wife, Brittany. 
Thank you for being here today during what must be an 
incredibly difficult time. 
 
On behalf of all the members of this Assembly, I offer our 
sincere condolences to you for your loss. No one should have to 
worry that they might be hurt, or worse, as a result of simply 
doing their job. We are grateful that you could join us as we 
introduce new legislation that could potentially prevent other 
families from experiencing such a devastating loss. I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming the Schaefer family to their 
legislature. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
introduce Harv Britton, vice-president of the Roadside 
Responders Association of Saskatchewan. Mr. Britton is also a 
tow truck operator and the owner of Harv’s Autobody and 
Towing. In addition to helping motorists on the side of the road, 
he is also helping to advocate for his fellow tow truck drivers in 
his role as vice-president of the Roadside Responders 
Association of Saskatchewan. The RRAS has been a strong 
voice in calling for increased safety, and we are pleased to have 
their support of legislation that we will be introducing later this 
morning. 
 
Members of the Assembly may recall the procession of tow 
trucks and other emergency vehicles that were held a few weeks 
ago to draw attention to safety concerns. Mr. Britton is joined in 
the gallery by a number of other tow truck operators: Jamie 
Kemp from Rosetown Towing, Mel Leveque from Eagle 
Towing in Melfort, Dallas Baillie from Baillie Boys Towing in 
Yorkton, Shon Crumley and Austin MacKimmie from Dakota 
Towing in Rouleau, Geoff Roller from Astro Towing in 
Saskatoon, and Tyler Temple from TRK Towing in Lumsden. 
And lastly, we have Scott McIntyre with us. He is the 
vice-president of CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We are pleased that they could also be on hand to honour 
Courtney and to support a new initiative that we hope will 
prevent future traffic fatalities. I would ask all members to join 
me in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to take a 
minute to join with my colleague, the minister, and welcome all 
of our guests to our gallery today. And thank you to all of the 
operators and the folks from CAA for all of the work that you 
do, responding to people in their times of distress and need on 
our highways, and all too often putting yourselves in danger in 
the process, and I want to thank you for that. 
 
But I want to make special mention of the family of Mr. 
Courtney Schaefer, and welcome you to this Assembly today. I 
know that you are still struggling with the loss of your partner, 
and your dad, and your brother, and brother-in-law, and I want 

to welcome you here and express our deepest sympathies on 
behalf of the official opposition and all members here on your 
loss, and hope that you know that our thoughts have been with 
you many times over the past month or so here. And I invite all 
members of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming and 
thanking all of these guests today. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Vimy Ridge 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise in the House today and to recognize the sacrifice that our 
Canadian and Saskatchewan veterans made 100 years ago in the 
capturing of Vimy Ridge. On April 9th, 1917, the Canadian 
Corps braved sleet, snow, and machine-gun fire to scale the 
steep slope in Vimy, France. The ridge was a critical position in 
the heavily armed German defence, who were bunkered down 
in barbed-wire trenches. 
 
Thanks to their valour, on April 12th our troops had taken full 
control of the ridge. This military victory is known as a turning 
point in our nation’s history, and it came at a heavy price. The 
corps suffered nearly 4,000 fatalities in the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge, with just over 400 of those soldiers coming from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To pay tribute to these heroes, this Sunday, April 9th, the 
Government of Saskatchewan will host an outdoor ceremony, a 
reception, and an exhibit at the Legislative Building. Earlier in 
the day the Royal Canadian Legion will be holding a ceremony 
at the Victoria Park Cenotaph. 
 
We are proud to recognize this historic feat, express our 
gratitude and sorrow for those who sacrificed their lives to 
achieve it, and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I 
would like to thank all our veterans for keeping our country 
true, strong, and free. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
Sunday marks the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge. Though it has been a full century since that day, the 
legacy of those courageous Canadians in the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge lives on. 
 
It is important to recognize that the Canadian regiments from 
across Canada who stood together in triumph helped create a 
stronger sense of the Canadian identity. For many, it was on 
those harsh April days when Canada came of age as a country. 
 
This accomplishment was not without loss, Mr. Speaker. The 
battle lost 10,000 casualties, with 3,598 Canadian soldiers lost 
in action. We must remember those Canadians whose bravery 
contributed to the quality of life and the freedoms we enjoy 
today. 
 
And as we turn our minds to the 100th anniversary of this 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

watershed battle, I would also like to recognize the important 
work of the Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans Association, 
who raised funds for 20 women and men to tour First and 
Second World War sites in France during these centennial 
events. Saskatchewan First Nations and Métis veterans played a 
vital role in Canadian conflicts and they have earned their place 
in the special gatherings, ceremonies, and tributes planned to 
mark this centennial. I call on all members to join me in 
recognizing the courage and the determination of all our 
Canadian troops who paid the ultimate price for our freedom 
and for our Canada. We will not forget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Campaign 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year marks 
the 60th anniversary of the Canadian Cancer Society’s daffodil 
month. The daffodil became the symbol of the Canadian Cancer 
Society after a group of volunteers during a cancer fundraising 
event decorated a table with daffodils in order to convey a 
cheery, hopeful atmosphere. 
 
Throughout the month of April the Canadian Cancer Society 
will once again be selling fresh daffodils and daffodil pins to 
raise funds for cancer research. This is to support people living 
with cancer, celebrate those in remission, and to honour all 
those who have lost their battle with the terrible disease. 
 
Since the inception of daffodil month in 1957 smoking rates in 
Canada have gone from 50 per cent to 18 per cent, survival 
rates have gone from 35 per cent to over 60 per cent, and the 
Canadian Cancer Society has raised 1.4 billion for cancer 
research. Our government understands the challenges faced by 
cancer patients and so we are providing the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency with funding of over 170 million this year, an 
increase of 3.3 million year over year. 
 
I encourage all members to join me in thanking the Cancer 
Society for their ongoing contributions to cancer research and in 
supporting daffodil month by buying a fresh daffodil or pin. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

World Health Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow, April 
7th, marks World Health Day. This is the day sponsored by the 
World Health Organization and is used as an opportunity to 
draw worldwide attention to a subject of major importance to 
global health each year. 
 
The theme for this year’s World Health Day is Depression: 
Let’s Talk. It is the high point of a year-long campaign with a 
goal of ensuring people with depression both seek and are able 
to receive the help that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, depression is the leading cause of ill health and 
disability worldwide. According to the latest estimates from the 
World Health Organization more than 300 million people are 

now living with depression. Depression is a condition that can 
be treated with relatively cost-efficient and effective care, but 
despite this about 50 per cent of cases of major depression still 
go untreated. Lack of support for people with mental disorders, 
along with fear of stigma, prevent many from accessing the 
treatment they need to live healthy, productive lives. 
 
And depression just doesn’t affect those who suffer from it. 
There’s a high social and economic cost as well. Low levels of 
recognition and access to care for depression and other common 
mental disorders results in devastating economic losses each 
year. These losses are felt by households, employers, and 
governments alike. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in 
recognizing the World Health Organization’s year-long 
Depression: Let’s Talk campaign, and to commit to doing 
everything in our power to end the stigma and provide adequate 
mental health resources for those people living with depression 
in our own province. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Parkland College Scholarships 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
honoured to bring greetings to the Parkland College’s 2017 
internal scholarship presentation in Yorkton on March 17th. 
This year the college recognized 78 students who received the 
Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarships, worth 
over $100,000. Receiving this scholarship was truly a testimony 
to the hard work and dedication that these students have 
modelled in their education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the programs that were awarded this scholarship 
included various university programs, trades, skills training, and 
HR [human resources] management postgrad. This scholarship 
program was developed six years ago, focusing on Parkland’s 
strategic plan which includes indigenization initiatives, areas 
that are important to local employers and the local community. 
Since the program was implemented, Parkland College has 
awarded over 460 scholarships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this investment into our education programs is an 
investment into the future of Saskatchewan. I encouraged the 
students to stay in Saskatchewan, as we all know it is such a 
great place to live, work, and raise a family. Mr. Speaker, with 
programs such as this and the graduate retention program 
available for students who choose to work in Saskatchewan, we 
are providing tremendous opportunities to keep our young 
people here at home. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the recipients of the Saskatchewan Innovation 
and Opportunity Scholarship, and the board members and 
leaders of Parkland College on their dedication to the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Proposed Commercial Development in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 
pleased to announce the Canwest Commercial and Land 
Corporation is planning to start work on its proposed World 
Trade Center Saskatoon project this summer. This 
Saskatoon-based commercial real estate developer is planning 
for the new 50 million, eight- or nine-storey office to be located 
in the heart of the city’s downtown core. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Canwest said that it was recently granted 
an option to seek membership in the World Trade Centers 
Association, which is a business network active in 98 countries 
around the world. CanWest is currently working with WTCA 
[World Trade Centers Association] to meet the needed 
requirements for approval. The membership would allow 
tenants to take advantage of a global network of business 
connections. 
 
Saskatoon’s former mayor, Don Atchison, who is now a senior 
consultant for Canwest said that: 
 

What we need is a ‘one-stop shop’ whether it’s our own 
companies selling to the world, or the world coming here. 
In every sense of the word, it will be about ‘serving 
Saskatchewan.’ 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very exciting project and a great 
opportunity for the city of Saskatoon. I ask all members to join 
me in congratulating CanWest Commercial and Land 
Corporation for being granted the option to seek membership in 
the World Trade Centers Association, and we wish them the 
best as they move forward with this project. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

New Schools for Warman 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased once 
again to talk about this government’s record investment in our 
education system and the construction of two more new schools 
in my constituency. 
 
Prairie Spirit’s Traditions and Saskatoon Catholic’s Holy 
Trinity are the two new schools being built in Warman. These 
two new schools are part of a joint-use P3 [public-private 
partnership] school, which means they will be built faster, 
remain in like-new condition for 30 years, and will save 
taxpayers $100 million. 
 
The over 600 students who will be in these schools in 
September will have access to flexible learning spaces, student 
commons, technology environments, and outdoor learning 
spaces. The new schools will also include 90 child care spaces, 
community support services, multi-purpose and fitness areas, 
and other common space that will be available to the entire 
community. 
 
Constructing these new schools is also creating jobs for the 
people of Warman and Saskatchewan, along with 

Saskatchewan-based businesses that are building and designing 
these schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think our dedication to education is clear in my 
riding. In the last nine years, five new schools have been built 
and a major renovation of Martensville’s high school. Mr. 
Speaker, our government is making Saskatchewan the best 
place to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we asked a 
direct question about documents related to the Sask Party’s 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal that they’re refusing 
to release. The Privacy Commissioner has twice called for them 
to be released. But instead of releasing them, we heard pretty 
much the same old, tired talking points that the minister has 
been asked to recite each and every day, except for the fact that 
he claimed that they’re supposedly co-operating with the 
Privacy Commissioner. 
 
After QP [question period] though, the Minister of Highways 
went out to speak with reporters. He admitted that even though 
we ask about this issue every day, and even though he’s been 
the minister for eight months, and even though there’s an 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigation and that 
millions of dollars have been wasted, he hasn’t yet read the 
documents. He said he’d leave that to the ministry officials, but 
he also said, “I’m not disagreeing with the Privacy 
Commissioner.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier: if they’re 
co-operating, so-called co-operating with the Privacy 
Commissioner, if they’re not disagreeing with him, will they 
simply release those documents and start to come clean with 
Saskatchewan people today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And of course freedom of information requests are 
handled by professional civil servants in a clear and a 
well-understood process, a process that the members opposite 
should be familiar with. It was the same process that was in 
place when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course ministers are not directly involved in the process. It’s 
handled by professional civil servants who make determinations 
in terms of what should be released. There are, as members 
opposite are also very well aware of, provisions with regard to 
commercial confidentiality. We will continue to co-operate and 
work with the Privacy Commissioner on these matters, Mr. 
Speaker, as we move forward. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

Support for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, making a mockery of 
accountability. This is, of course, as we had a retired civil 
servant who has spoken out and said that there’s been political 
interference in this GTH scandal — a scandal that of course has 
wasted $11 million of taxpayers’ money that was handed over 
to two Sask Party supporters, and millions of dollars more 
that’ll be wasted on artificially inflated land. But the Sask Party 
of course refuses to take this seriously. 
 
And while they ignored their own mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste, they’ve targeted our kids for more cuts. Mr. Speaker, 
with this budget, the Sask Party is giving at least $674 less in 
funding for each and every student across Saskatchewan, 
attacking our kids’ already strained classrooms. 
 
School boards are being forced to make deep cuts. They’re 
being told to put everything on the table, and the results are 
coming in. Daily kindergarten is being cut. Busing for 
four-year-olds is being cut. And so are programs for those who 
have experienced severe trauma, for those with hearing 
problems, for those with autism, for those with intensive needs. 
These disgraceful cuts to our education system must be stopped. 
How can the minister stand there and defend these heartless 
cuts to Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable children? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had met 
with and I had talked to the Chair of Regina Public School 
Division at the time the budget came out, saying we will work 
with you to try and deal with the challenges that you might face. 
Those discussions are ongoing. But, Mr. Speaker, for the 
benefit of the members in the House, we will not see and 
approve a budget that does not have those programs included in 
them. So to the families of those that will be benefiting from 
those programs, those programs will be there and those 
programs, Mr. Speaker, will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we feel that the small decrease in funding to 
division operating can be managed by the divisions. Division 
operating funding has increased by 32 per cent since we have 
formed government. The vast majority of reduction in education 
is due to the completion of capital projects. Mr. Speaker, we 
have continued the projects that are under way. We’ve added 
new projects this year, and we will work with the divisions to 
make sure that services are delivered to our students in the most 
effective, appropriate manner. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a thing called 
ministerial responsibility. It’s past time, it’s past time that 
minister show some, Mr. Speaker, and take some. They are 
making Saskatchewan people pay more in school taxes, but kids 
in classrooms are getting less. And those cuts are Sask Party 
cuts, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to the Sask Party, school boards are 
hamstrung. And that minister is offering nothing more than 
threats and more cuts. 
 
In face of all that, the minister is pushing through a bill that 

takes Sask Party arrogance to a whole new level, Mr. Speaker. 
A bill that would change the law, that would silence and get rid 
of the role of democratically elected trustees, Mr. Speaker, local 
voices in education who run our schools, and consolidate all of 
that out of the minister’s office — a disgraceful takeover of 
education by that Sask Party minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s cuts will hit the classrooms of all 
kids. The minister’s cuts will most hurt our most vulnerable. 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister seriously not understand why 
parents are so angry? With all the cutting he has done, does he 
blame them for not trusting them with their kids’ education? 
Will the minister finally do the right thing and reverse the 
disgraceful attack on our province’s education system? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
wants to talk about governance and the changes that are coming 
in The Education Act. Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the critic for this, did not submit any kind of a 
proposal on behalf of herself or on behalf of the party. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite that has a lot to say today — and 
I believe that she believes in education — belongs to a group 
called RealRenewal. She was a co-founder and former 
spokesperson of RealRenewal, a Regina-based advocacy group. 
Do you know what they asked for, Mr. Speaker? They made a 
submission. They asked for changes to education governance. 
They asked for a review of trustee remuneration, less 
administration, trustee term limits. They also suggested there 
are savings to be found and we should look at joint busing and 
purchasing. They called divisions top-heavy, and there should 
be fewer superintendents and division office staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite themselves couldn’t see 
fit to submit any kind of a submission on governance, at least 
their groups did. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the things 
we’re going to look at very carefully, and I thank her for her 
submission. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That minister 
can try to wiggle his way out of responsibility, but the people of 
Saskatchewan are watching. These are his cuts. These are Sask 
Party cuts, and they’re being felt all across this province as 
board after board and division after division grapples with what 
that Sask Party and that minister have done. 
 
Let’s look at Chinook. They had to lay off 15 people who 
worked in our schools, 15 people who worked every day to give 
our kids supports, like psychologists, counsellors, speech and 
language pathologists, occupational therapists, and educational 
assistants. These are not the cuts that the school board wanted 
to make. It wasn’t their choice. That Sask Party minister is the 
one who is holding the axe. 
 
School divisions told the minister he couldn’t get blood from a 
stone. They warned him that more cuts would hurt our kids, but 
he cut anyway. And now, thanks to him and that Sask Party cut, 
students who are struggling with mental illness and students 
who have special needs won’t get the supports that they need. 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister still going to stand there and 
suggest that he didn’t see this coming when he said that 
everything is on the table? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that we’re going 
through challenging economic times. I would ask the members 
opposite how much they are willing to raise taxes and how 
much their position would be for funding going forward. How 
much are they willing to do those things? Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite sit there . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — We heard the question being asked. 
You might want to listen to the answer. I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have no appetite to 
take over and run school boards. But we do have a strong 
desire, Mr. Speaker, to try and make sure that the boards are 
effective and efficient and financially accountable. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something the boards have asked for as well. I 
have some quotes that I’d like to read. 
 
Lloydminster Public: “We would welcome changes to 
legislation and regulations that would give greater clarity 
regarding ministry standards and expected . . .” 
 
Northwest School Division: “Strategic direction and 
accountability, changes in legislation, setting outcomes and 
standards — do it.” 
 
Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division: “Simply reducing the number 
of boards will not produce enough savings to make the turmoil 
it will cause worth the effort. Governance costs . . . [should] be 
lowered in other ways, some of which might be set at the 
provincial level.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have more that I can read in, that came directly 
from the school divisions who want to work with us to find 
savings. Why? Because they want to do what’s right for the 
students in this province. And we will support those divisions 
all the way in spite of what the members opposite might say. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish that that minister 
loved the facts as much as he loved his lists. Even after these 
cuts, the Chinook School Division has a shortfall of $3.3 
million. So, Mr. Speaker, even more cuts are coming. 
 
And Chinook is not alone. Across this province, these cuts are 
hurting our kids and the shortfalls are simply staggering. Regina 
Public has a $9.5 million shortfall. Regina Catholic, $1 million. 
Saskatoon Catholic, $9.6 million, and Saskatoon public, $11 
million. Mr. Speaker, an $11 million shortfall means that they 
are short $460 for each of their students. That is not the school 
division’s fault, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s not the fault of 
the people who work in our schools, and certainly is not the 
fault of our children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The minister is already gutting our educational system with 
massive cuts. So how does he possibly justify passing a law that 
would give him almost full control over our classrooms? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I just got a text message 
from Liam Choo-Foo, the director of education at Chinook, 
who says they are going to be able to work within their budget 
and not have any cuts in the classroom. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
since I’ve been standing here. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another quote I’d like to read from Donna 
Ziegler, chairperson of Regina Catholic, and this is what it says: 
 

“Nobody gets a pink slip,” board . . . [Chair] Donna 
Ziegler said Monday, but they will be “reallocating 
individuals back to the front lines.” 

 
This will include a superintendent, a number of consultants and 
co-ordinators and coaches, taking those through the attrition 
and moving them back into the classroom where resources 
belong and should be, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s going to 
happen with this side of the House. We’re going to work with 
the divisions. We’re going to support the divisions. We’re 
going to let them run the schools and the divisions and we’re 
going to make sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the resources 
stay in the classroom for the benefit of our students. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that minister has a profound 
misunderstanding about the reality in our classrooms today. 
That minister once stood as a school board Chair, and now he’s 
gutting everything he claimed to stand for. And he’s even doing 
more to our provincial libraries. 
 
The Sask Party slashed library funding by 58 per cent, and 100 
per cent to our two largest cities. And they said that everything 
was on the table. Now he’s pretending to be surprised that 
interlibrary loans are on the chopping block. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the loan system relies on STC to ship books. But 
somehow the minister claims that libraries can simply send 
materials through the mail at the cost of a buck per book. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year almost 700,000 items were shipped 
between libraries in the province by STC at no cost. The 
minister’s new plan would increase costs by nearly $1.4 
million. For the minister to even make this suggestion after 
slashing millions from our libraries is simply . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may continue. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Simply ridiculous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Will the 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

minister admit that he has no plan and no clue to save the 
interlibrary loan service, and that his reckless cuts are 
threatening the very future of our public libraries? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have over 90 
communities in the province that have a library that also have a 
library in their school. Mr. Speaker, why can’t we share those 
resources? Mr. Speaker, why can’t we look at some better 
savings and some cost efficiencies? Why don’t we realize, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is but one taxpayer in the province, and if 
you pay for that at a municipal level, why should you pay for it 
again at a provincial level? Mr. Speaker, if you drive between 
Martensville and Langham you will pass five libraries. Between 
Saltcoats and Langenburg you will pass four libraries. Between 
Indian Head and Regina you will pass four libraries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have a total of 306 libraries 
serving a population base of 1.2 million people. Alberta 
understandably has more libraries than we do. They have 307, 
one more than we do, but serving a population base of over 4 
million people. Manitoba has only 128 libraries serving a 
population base of 1.3 million people. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
per-person ratio in our province of 4,000 per library. Alberta, 
14,000. Manitoba, 10,000. Mr. Speaker, we want to work with 
the library system to make sure that the good interlibrary 
system we have can continue so that it serves the citizens of our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, STC supports all kinds of 
services. It’s not just books. Our health system uses it to help 
cancer patients get to treatment, and blood shipment across the 
province. Mr. Speaker, STC ties us all together — job seekers, 
students, seniors, the list goes on. 
 
Who will pick up the slack, Mr. Speaker? This cut will hurt 
other ministries. It will hurt our economy and it will hurt our 
people. When will they get it right and cancel the sell-off? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
The STC . . . I just should remind the member opposite about in 
1993 and 1994, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] cut 13 routes when the subsidy was $2.18 per, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know, we’ve looked at that and we found that 
the ridership has declined and the number of rides per year has 
declined 35 per cent — 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker — since 2012, 
Mr. Speaker. Eighteen thousand rides in just the past year, Mr. 
Speaker. That subsidy has gone from $24 or $25 per ride, Mr. 
Speaker, all the way up to $94 per ride, Mr. Speaker. Now 
that’s 85 to $100 million over the next five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They keep talking about, we need more funds for social 
services. We need more funds for education. We need more 
funds for health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that 85 to $100 

million could well be used in those other needs and those other 
priorities of the government, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Financial Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s just more cutting 
without planning, and downloading without accepting 
responsibility. In so many cases it’s municipalities who will be 
left to pick up the tab. It’s our cities and towns who will have to 
cover the Sask Party’s library cuts, and our cities and towns 
who will have to make up for the cuts to the grants-in-lieu. And 
it’s our cities and towns who will have to find new funding for 
community rinks and for parks, jewels like Meewasin Valley 
and Wascana Centre, and community parks and playgrounds for 
the Sask Party’s P3 schools. 
 
Cities and towns are up against a wall. They either have to 
impose huge Sask Party tax hikes or Sask Party cuts. And all of 
this while the Sask Party has already raised education property 
taxes. Given that many of our cities and towns have already 
finished their budget, will the minister at least admit they 
should have consulted with municipal leaders before making 
these huge cuts? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there was a number of 
forums as well as meetings that we had with municipal leaders, 
and it was very clear that everything was on the table for this 
budget, that it was going to be a very difficult budget, and we 
were going to be looking at all programs. 
 
One thing that the municipal leaders said very loud and very 
clear is they wanted us to keep municipal revenue sharing. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a program of course that’s predictable for our 
municipalities, as well as, since we have formed government, it 
has increased funding by over 100 per cent. Our municipal 
partners have been supported more than any other sector by this 
government. 
 
The second request is to keep funding for infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve made record investment in infrastructure, and 
many of them are with the shared programs with our 
municipalities. And they appreciate being able to add those 
upgrades to their water sewer systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was difficult decisions beyond a doubt. And 
there will be challenges for our municipal sector in this 
particular budget, but we have more than supported them. In 
nine or eight consecutive budgets, Mr. Speaker, they have seen 
increase over increase over increase, year over year over year. 
This is the first time that this government has asked for a 
reduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the city of Prince 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Albert is luckier than others. The ministry did back down and 
help out a little for this year. But the minister is still giving no 
help to the other 100 communities, and no clarity for anyone. 
 
As Mayor Dionne said, “It seems like every time I wake up it 
has changed direction and going a different way.” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he expects that the city will be cut $3.5 million next 
year, and he wants clarity from the government. He wants a 
plan: “But now we have the next four to five months to talk 
about where we go from here. This was a three-year plan going 
into 2018 and 2019.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister provide some clarity? 
Will she reverse the cuts for this year and sit down with 
municipal leaders to lay out a plan for the coming years? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
well aware that the Minister of Finance has been to P.A. [Prince 
Albert] since the budget was introduced and the government’s 
plan was laid out, as well as there was a forum in which case 
questions could be asked. And in fact he said he sat right beside 
the mayor. They had the conversation. The mayor of Prince 
Albert knows that I’m available at any time that he requests any 
conversations, as does every mayor. 
 
It was interesting. At the beginning of her question, she said 
that hundreds of communities were affected. So it goes to show 
that yet again she doesn’t understand her file. What this affects 
is 108. It was a very strange program that only a select number 
of municipalities received the funding. It was unfair. It was not 
transparent. It was not understood, even by the municipal 
leaders. We have one town that gets it. The town next to it may 
not. We can go down the road a few more and they may or may 
not get it. 
 
So we need to address the inequities and the unfairness. You 
would think the members opposite would be supportive of 
directing . . . or looking and reviewing a program that simply 
wasn’t fair, transparent, predictable, or explainable. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Test Facility 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, municipalities are being 
punished for Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
And they spent, of that waste, $1.5 billion on CCS [carbon 
capture and storage]. And for what, Mr. Speaker? They can’t 
even show us that it works. 
 
Emails from the CEO [chief executive officer] of SaskPower 
say: “I’m getting somewhat concerned about the accuracy of 
our statements around the ability to produce 1 million tonnes of 
CO2 a year.” And then after some redactions in the email, he 
goes on to say we need to “begin signalling to others what our 
real max achievable capacity is.” Clearly there are issues. Mr. 
Speaker, in response to the impending federal regulations, 
SaskPower has said, “December of 2016, we may be shutting 
that plant off much more often in the future for sure.” 

Mr. Speaker, if they aren’t even sure that we can use their $1.5 
billion boondoggle, how does it make any sense for the people 
of Saskatchewan to pay for it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, this is the cleanest fossil 
fuel plant in the country, and that’s something that this 
government and the people on this side of the House are very, 
very proud of, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the facility’s been 
operating at a very good capacity — 1.4 million tonnes of CO2 
as of January 31st, 2017, Mr. Speaker. That’s the equivalent of 
taking . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s asked the question. 
They may want to listen to the answer. I recognize the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, taking 350,000 cars off the 
road.  
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, the answer . . . one of the answers with 
respect to carbon, Mr. Speaker, is research and technology. And 
we’re very, very proud of the work that’s been done at 
Boundary dam and the people at SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll continue to work on this facility, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
continue to work on it. But to suggest that the facility doesn’t 
have to be shut down for regular maintenance is ridiculous, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s like any other commercial facility, Mr. Speaker. It 
will be shut down for regular maintenance. These are scheduled 
maintenance, Mr. Speaker. And it’s performing to the capacity 
which we had expected. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We’re moving on. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 65, The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2017 immediately. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has requested leave to 
introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 65, The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2017 immediately. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize 
the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 65, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for SGI 
may proceed to move second reading of this bill. I recognize the 
minister. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2017. In a moment I’ll outline what this amendment will do, but 
first I’d like to say a few words about a man named Courtney 
Schaefer. 
 
Courtney was a husband, a father, a brother, and a friend to 
many. He was also a tow truck operator who helped people in 
need night and day, in all kinds of weather, on the roads and 
highways in the Esterhazy area. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did not have the pleasure of knowing Courtney 
personally, but his friends and colleagues describe him as a man 
who would never leave someone stranded. Last year, Mr. 
Speaker, Courtney won the Roadside Assistance Award of 
Excellence from CAA Saskatchewan. His job was to help 
people, and he was good at it. 
 
Tomorrow will be one month since Courtney went to work, 
responding to a call near Gerald, Saskatchewan in the middle of 
a blizzard. In the midst of whiteout conditions, there was a 
four-vehicle collision, and one of those vehicles was a semi. 
Courtney died while doing his job, trying to help someone in 
need. 
 
His story is a tragic example of the dangers that tow truck 
drivers often face on the sides of roads and highways in this 
province. We’ve heard from tow truck operators about how 
they risk their lives daily responding to motorists in distress, 
simply because other drivers may not be aware and slow down. 
If you talk to a tow truck driver and ask them about close calls, 
they’ll tell you about being brushed by the mirrors of vehicles 
speeding by. They’ll tell you about their road markers being run 
over. They’ll tell you of motorists who simply ignore the 
flashing amber lights on top of their trucks. 
 
Currently the regulations under The Traffic Safety Act only 
permit amber lights for tow trucks. In the wake of Courtney’s 
passing, we have heard the calls from his fellow roadside 
responders, and the addition of a different colour would make 
their trucks stand out more. They say a different colour would 
remind motorists that they are required by law to slow to 60 

kilometres per hour when passing a tow truck on the side of the 
road. 
 
We have heard those calls, and we have taken action. The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 permits blue lights to be 
used in conjunction with amber lights on tow trucks. 
Saskatchewan is the first jurisdiction in Canada to allow a 
two-colour lighting combination for tow trucks. Tow truck 
operators will also be able to strategically install lights to the 
tow truck and trailer, provided there is at least one amber light 
on top of the truck that can be seen 360 degrees around the unit. 
 
We believe and our friends in the towing industry believe that 
adding blue lights will increase visibility and heighten 
awareness. No one should fear for their life while they are 
doing their job. It is our hope that this will make our roads safer 
for tow truck operators out there doing their jobs and putting 
their lives on the line every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the members opposite as 
well for their co-operation on this very important legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for SGI has 
moved second reading of Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I rise to add 
some comments to the minister’s statement. And of course we 
are, as the official opposition, fully support this bill and the 
changes that would increase safety on our highways for those 
people, those tow truck drivers who are out there providing 
service and care to people in often very desperate situations on 
the side of our roads all across this province. 
 
We fully support this bill, and I thank the minister for the 
briefing about this legislation prior to. I know that there have 
been consultations with, not only the tow truck drivers and the 
RCMP and SGI, as well as the families that have been so 
tragically impacted by accidents on our roads. 
 
And I do also welcome the accompanying public campaign to 
make all drivers in this province aware. I mean it’s important, 
these lights will be important, but it really will be incumbent 
upon all who drive on our highways to slow down, to respect 
those who are working on the sides of our highways. They’re 
putting their lives on the line, and it really is incumbent upon all 
drivers to ensure that they do their part to respect them and to 
ensure their safety. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to just thank the 
minister, and confirm our commitment and our support of this 
bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Minister Responsible for SGI that Bill 
No. 65, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I designate that Bill No. 65, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills and that said bill be 
considered in Committee of the Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands committed to 
Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 
Whole on Bills. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — The item before the 
committee is Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2017. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Her Majesty, by 
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
I now recognize the Minister for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the committee report the 
bill without amendment. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — It has been moved 
that the committee report Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. I 
recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — It has been moved 
by the Minister Responsible for SGI that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. D’Autremont): — Carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I am instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 65, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017, 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for SGI 
may proceed to third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 65, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017, be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 57, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read for the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
58, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be now read a third time. 
Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 58, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to answer 
the questions 288 through 325. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled 
answers to questions 288 to 325. 
 
[11:15] 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Libraries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my honour 
today to stand and speak to the 75-minute debate, this motion 
that’s before us: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for their 
senseless budget cuts to libraries across the province, and 
for crippling these vital community hubs that provide 
essential services and programming for children, seniors, 
and all Saskatchewan families. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as noted, this is a 75-minute debate, but 
really if I were to just go into the comments and the emails that 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

I’ve had to my office over the last week, I think we could do 
probably a 75-day debate on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is certainly an issue that has really caught the attention of a 
lot of people in the province because it was a devastating cut 
that was introduced in this most recent budget. We heard from 
. . . I’ve been around the province talking to folks who work in 
our libraries and people who support our libraries, and this is 
some of the context of where we find ourselves today. 
 
The day of the budget, directors were brought into Regina into 
an embargo, and about 1 o’clock they found out that they were 
going to lose 58 per cent of their funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Last year the funding in estimates for our provincial library 
system was $12.7 million; with passage of the budget that 
number will be reduced to 7.9 million. So as you can imagine, 
on its own a 58 per cent cut to library funding is absolutely 
devastating. But when you take into account that libraries run 
their budgets on a calendar year, so from January to December, 
that means that a quarter of their budget has already been spent 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is absolutely 
devastating to the system. 
 
And it has become apparent, I’m afraid, in subsequent days that 
there is a fundamental misunderstanding about how libraries 
run in this province and how much they are valued by people 
across the whole province. A 58 per cent cut has already led to 
layoffs, substantial layoffs in regional library headquarters 
around the province. We’ve seen that in Parkland. We’ve seen 
cuts up in Lakeland. We’ve seen cuts in Chinook. We’ve seen 
cuts at Palliser. These are already having a huge impact. And of 
course to the interlibrary loan system, which has been 
suspended across the province, and really to devastating effect. 
 
There is, of course, one of those unintended consequences that I 
find myself often talking about, was the fact that STC was also 
cut in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is how most of 
the interlibrary loan items, about 700,000 items a year, get 
around this province. And there doesn’t seem to be any 
understanding of that fact, nor does there seem to be any plan 
for how we are going to move those items around. But I guess 
in part that’s a moot point at this point, because due to the cuts, 
that program has been suspended. 
 
I’m going to freely admit that I know more about the provincial 
library system today than I did a week ago. And I really want to 
thank all of those people out there who are working so 
diligently to raise awareness, to rally people to make sure that 
their voices are heard, and ultimately to try to reverse this really 
senseless cut. 
 
We’re talking about, in terms of the provincial budget, a fairly 
small cut in terms of dollars, but decimating our whole 
provincial library system, a system that really has been the envy 
of the whole country for the past number of years is . . . I have 
to question the logic in that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It would appear that this was a decision made by looking at a 
spreadsheet and looking at some numbers and really not 
understanding what it is exactly that is behind those numbers 
and how much value there is. You know sometimes you can 
look at a cut and understand that is a cost, but what is often 
hidden from those cuts is how much it would cost without that 

service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We are a province that unfortunately struggles with low rates of 
literacy in many communities, and this, the library system — as 
I think one would expect — is one way that we can promote 
literacy in the province. One of the problems that many school 
divisions find is lower rates of literacy, or the summer slide in 
literacy rates because children don’t have access to books. 
They’re not in classrooms, and library programming, in 
particular the summer reading programs, are one of the ways 
that libraries help support that literacy of our children. 
 
And of course they’re not just for children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. People of all ages value and use our libraries. And 
we’ve certainly heard from people from almost every 
community in the province and people of all ages who really are 
concerned about these cuts and the impacts that are going to be 
felt. 
 
One piece of information, I think, that is fundamental to this 
decision — and I’m not sure that it’s well understood by 
members opposite or even the minister — is just exactly what 
the provincial funding pays for and what it doesn’t pay for. The 
minister has talked about getting out of the bricks and mortar 
business but I’m afraid that the province doesn’t fund the bricks 
and mortar in our libraries. That’s funded by the municipalities. 
 
So what the province does pay for is new materials; the van 
delivery, so actually getting the books around the province; the 
e-resources that the minister has spoken of frequently, that is 
actually what’s being cut here, so services like Hoopla; the 
payroll system, people do need to be paid, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
the headquarters staff. So this is where we’ve really seen those 
drastic cuts. We had six employees here from Palliser who had 
80 years of combined service who all, again, with a stroke of 
pen with this budget, lost their jobs. And including — ironically 
when we have a minister talking about the importance of 
electronic items — including their IT [information technology] 
director, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This money also pays for the computers in our libraries. It is the 
case that not every community in this province has access to 
high-speed Internet, and often the library is the place where 
people can go to access that service. And we’ve certainly heard 
that from people building their resumes. We’ve heard that from 
elderly people who are on a fixed income who perhaps don’t 
have the money that it would cost to have Internet service at 
home, but it’s a way that they can keep in touch with their 
families and maybe stay in their communities longer. 
 
People who want to apply for jobs, I know we were in Weyburn 
recently and there were people at the computers who were 
accessing job services. I know communities that have been hard 
hit by the downturn in oil. There are a number of people 
obviously who would be looking for jobs, and that service is in 
jeopardy at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that, I think 
the number is about 60 per cent of employers only accept 
resumes online, and if you don’t have a computer at home or 
high-speed Internet or that service, that becomes a real problem. 
 
Other things that the provincial funding pays for: the vehicles, 
the gas, the insurance, the maintenance, and replacement of 
those vehicles. And provincial program coordination such as the 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

summer reading club, literacy kits, the very things that we 
should be bolstering, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we’re not. 
We’ve dealt this devastating blow to this system. 
 
I want to go back a few years. I know we should probably avoid 
looking backwards, but there was a lot of excitement in 2009 
when this provincial system was brought in. There was . . . I’m 
looking at an article from The Western Producer from 2009: 
“Saskatchewan adopts a single integrated library system.” I’m 
just going to just pull some quotes from this document. 
 
“Saskatchewan’s public libraries, which serve more than 
500,000 active cardholders, are on different computer systems 
depending on which of the 11 public library systems they use.” 
So that was the case prior to this in 2009. “What it will actually 
do is increase services for rural areas because some libraries 
might not have had the seed money for upgraded computer 
systems.” 
 
So this was actually, at that point back in 2009, about a $5 
million investment over several years to upgrade this system. 
And once fully implemented, this became the envy of the 
country really, in terms of a provincial library system. This is 
what’s at stake here. They used this “. . . grant to install the new 
Millennium software, which will be the largest implementation 
of a single system [anywhere] in Canada.” That’s what’s at 
stake here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Patrons will be getting more of everything — more access 
to more resources, an increased . . . [availability] to reserve 
materials from other libraries [that’s what’s been cut this 
week] and access to any library’s services with just one 
card. 

 
So this is a real benefit to those smaller libraries in smaller 
centres where they perhaps don’t have a large catalogue 
themselves but they’re able to access from the cities and other 
collections, which really has been just a brilliant and well-used 
system. 
 
The minister has talked a lot about stats on a spreadsheet, and 
again it’s . . . You really ought not to make decisions that way. 
You ought to look at the full context. There has been some 
reduction, I understand, with the number of cardholders and the 
physical checking out of books. But the electronic borrowing of 
items and the attendance at programming, that has really 
skyrocketed. And that is what a modern library looks like, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that’s what we’re in danger of losing here 
if we don’t get a reversal on this decision which really, really 
ought to happen. 
 
There’s so many places I want to go with this. I continue to be 
inundated at the office; I believe we’re up to about over 2,000 
emails at our office alone with people just very, very distraught 
about this cut. And I know that other MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] on both sides of the House are hearing 
from people as well. This is not . . . This can’t be understated 
how devastating this 58 per cent cut retroactive to January 1st 
really is to this system. 
 
I’m just going to read a few of the comments here, if I may, 
because I think that they ought to be read into the record. One 
from a 15-year-old boy: 

I’m 15 years old and I’ve been constantly using the one 
card, one province program for my whole life. I actually 
have books that are in e-transit right now from libraries 
across the province. The Sask Party has now ruined my 
chance to keep on reading and learning. 
 

So that’s a perception from a 15-year-old child, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And we’re hearing those comments from people of all 
ages, and people who really would like the minister to come out 
and actually understand what’s being done here. It’s one thing 
to look at a spreadsheet and make a cut. It’s a very other thing 
to go out and look at people who are impacted by these 
decisions. 
 
The province, as I mentioned, you know . . . Some of the 
misinformation that’s been passed around on this getting out of 
the bricks and mortar business, the province didn’t ever fund 
the bricks and mortar business. What this allowed was 
municipal libraries to have access to this large system across the 
province. That’s a fundamental misunderstanding and, I think, 
one that the minister needs to correct, and the impact to rural 
communities in particular. These communities often have no 
other access point for the Internet, as I mentioned, and the 
isolation there. This is something that allows people to remain 
in communities longer when they have access to those types of 
computers. 
 
Just mindful of the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
sincerely could go on and on. I would invite members opposite 
to go look through the comments section, to read the emails that 
are coming into their offices and understand that you don’t want 
to be in front of this decision, a decision that takes the best 
interlibrary system in the whole country and wipes it out 
without really understanding what the consequences are, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So again I will hopefully get some more points in the debate 
here but, before my time is up, I’d like to read this motion: 
 

That the Assembly condemns the government for their 
senseless budget cuts to libraries across the province, and 
for crippling these vital community hubs that provide 
essential services and programming for children, seniors, 
and all Saskatchewan families. 

 
[11:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Regina Lakeview: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for their 
senseless budget cuts to libraries across the province, and 
for crippling these vital community hubs that provide 
essential services, programming for children, seniors, and 
all Saskatchewan families. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
budget released on March 22nd was a budget with some tough 
choices, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this government does not 
take these decisions lightly. Ever since our province was 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

created, we’ve had to deal with change and difficult 
circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and libraries are not 
immune from this. 
 
Today with so many different types of electronics on the market 
such as e-readers, laptops, and iPads, technology has made it 
much easier to access information. Understandably not 
everyone uses an electronic device when reading, and we are 
not advocating for closing libraries. Unfortunately in this 
difficult financial situation the province is in, difficult financial 
decisions had to be made. Many services governments provide, 
including libraries, experienced a reduction in funding. 
 
Regional libraries, the two city libraries, and the northern 
library system have seen a reduction in the number of registered 
borrowers, as well as a reduction in the number of items 
checked out. That is not to say that people do not use libraries, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when we are faced with a reduction in 
resource revenues, a decline in the usage of any service, we 
should always look and have it evaluated. And while it was a 
difficult decision for government, it was not one made lightly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will support the tough decisions made by 
this government, and we must all do our part in order to fight 
the provincial deficit. This government recognizes the 
importance of making sure that our finances are kept in check. 
It is not a coincidence that this province has a AAA credit 
rating and has the second-lowest debt-to-GDP [gross domestic 
product] for provinces in Canada. If we were to borrow money 
like our NDP neighbours to the west, it would only be a matter 
of time before we would see our credit rating slip, costing 
government and everyone more. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this and 
the need to eventually pay back the money borrowed would 
result in having less taxpayer dollars to spend on much-needed 
social programs that Saskatchewan people rely on. 
 
With resource revenue much lower than anyone would have 
expected over these last three years, our government knew it 
had to look at different ways of finding a stable revenue source, 
which we see in our shift towards consumption taxes. Further, 
to help combat the deficit sooner rather than later, this 
government had to couple that with a reduction in spending. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government, since being elected in 
2007, has been committed to finding ways to better use 
taxpayers’ money. I think it is also important to point out that 
although we have reduced library funding, there are other ways 
that communities can fund libraries using revenue sharing. 
Since forming government in 2007, revenue sharing has been a 
solid source of revenues for communities right across this 
province. Revenue sharing is an unconditional and predictable 
grant given to communities and rural municipalities to do with 
as they see fit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at funding for the 
Saskatoon Public Library, which also includes the Mayfair 
Branch Library in my constituency of Saskatoon Westview, the 
total amount of funding for libraries from all sources is $23.7 
million. The amount that was reduced from this year’s budget 
for libraries in Saskatoon is $658,000. That amount represents 
2.75 per cent of their total budget. This reduction in spending is 
smaller than many other government ministries and agencies 
that have been asked for a reduction in spending. And as I said 

before, the city could backfill this amount using money from 
the revenue sharing the city receives from the province. 
 
Another way the city of Saskatoon could fund their libraries is 
by using some of its reserves. The city of Saskatoon has 
reserves of over $140 million and, although they are reluctant to 
use it, one of the reasons they increased the reserve funding was 
in case of rainy days. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said 
before, the province has had reduced resource revenue income 
of over a billion dollars for three years, and I think that would 
probably qualify as a rainy day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some would say that we should have put 
away more money into a rainy day fund. The reality was that, 
with the massive infrastructure deficit created by the previous 
NDP government, municipalities were at our doorstep looking 
for money for projects which had been underfunded. Revenue 
sharing was significantly less during the NDP and was not a 
stable revenue due to that government not being committed to 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since forming government in 2007, we 
have provided a predictable amount of revenue sharing that 
municipalities could count on right up to this day, revenue 
sharing that could be used to fund any projects that they deemed 
to be important. We were clear and concise during the budget 
process that everything was on the table, so it should be no 
surprise that adjustments were going to be made on how we 
would spend taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for municipalities to think that we would 
not be looking for reductions from the cities that received the 
most infrastructure dollars while resource revenue was high 
would be difficult to understand. Considering the massive 
projects completed and under way in and around the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon, you would think they would be more 
responsive to the needs during these shortfalls in resource 
revenue. 
 
This government is investing $1.8 billion in Regina on the 
bypass alone which has created countless jobs during this 
significant time of growth in our province. And when I think of 
the schools under construction and all those man-hours that 
have been created. Regina has a new stadium with some 
funding from the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon has 
had significant infrastructure dollars invested in bridges and 
also construction of the children’s hospital and capital works at 
the University of Saskatchewan in the amount of half a billion 
dollars. Saskatoon, like Regina, has also benefited with new 
schools which are set to open this fall, one of them in my 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, right across this province, we have seen 
record investments in roads, hospitals, and schools. And all of 
these projects are needed to provide as a solid foundation for 
the future of the province, a future, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is committed to. But equally important is the 
financial health of the province. This province cannot afford to 
go back to the old days of closing schools as a rate of one a 
month. Nor can we afford to ignore needed infrastructure to 
maintain highways or keep motorists safe.  
 
We need to do all we can also to attract investment in our 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

province and further diversify our economy. This is exactly 
why, the reason why we will be reducing the corporate tax by 
one-half per cent this year and one-half per cent in 2019. There 
are strong signs that our economy is gaining strength with the 
thousands of jobs being created this year already, and it’s an 
indicator of the confidence our economy has by the business 
sector. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we all work together, we can come 
through this stronger than we were before. But it will take 
compromise and co-operation to achieve our goals, not just the 
goals of the province but the goals of all our communities, large 
and small. 
 
This budget encompasses almost everyone in the province, and 
it was meant to be that way, and I mean that sincerely, Mr. 
Speaker. We all benefited from the decade of significant growth 
in our province, and now that we need to tighten our belts it will 
require effort from everyone. That is why I completely support 
this government and the difficult but balanced approach to 
addressing the budget deficit. 
 
Libraries are important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but so are the 
hundreds of other programs and services this government 
delivers. We will persevere and remain strong as we move past 
the challenging revenue shortfalls. 
 
I cannot support the motion put forward by the member from 
Regina Lakeview. Reductions to libraries are a part of this 
government’s efforts to fight the provincial deficit. And while 
challenges still remain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is 
meeting the challenge. We will work hard to ensure that 
taxpayers’ dollars are used in the best possible manner. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to enter into this debate because I think that my 
colleague has hit the mark right on when it comes to this 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
senseless budget cuts to libraries across the province . . . 

 
And it really is senseless, that we don’t have the foresight of 
what it really means, these libraries and literacy and the joy of 
learning. And this is a short-sighted action by this government. 
And the motion goes on: 
 

and for crippling those vital community hubs that provide 
essential services and programs for children, seniors, and 
all Saskatchewan families. 

 
I think this just hits the mark. And this is really unfortunate that 
this government has decided to target libraries across this 
province for this kind of senseless cut that really will have 
unintended consequences, and the impacts will be felt for 
generations. 
 
Now it’s interesting, on budget day, it was kind of ironic. I 
made a member’s statement that day about the renaming of the 

library in Pleasant Hill area of Saskatoon to the Freda 
Ahenakew Library. Here was a woman with, I think, 12 
children, who devoted her life to knowledge in all sorts of really 
tough circumstances, but in the end got her Ph.D. [Doctor of 
Philosophy], was recognized throughout Canada for outstanding 
academic work when it came to literacy. And the library felt 
that it was an important gesture as Truth and Reconciliation, 
one of the calls to action, that we should recognize literacy as 
an important tool in overcoming racism, poverty, many of the 
things that we find in our society that holds us back. 
 
So this is a short-sighted, mean, mean-spirited cut that, while 
the member can stand on his feet and say they had to do some 
things, we will, at the end, talk about how they gave a tax cut to 
the wealthiest that cost $38 million, but they would prefer to do 
that tax cut to the wealthiest. And what do they do to help pay 
for that? They cut the library programs right across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a period of time I was fortunate to live 
in Makwa, Saskatchewan. And at that period of time when I 
was teaching at the school, I was also on the local library board. 
So I got to know and appreciate the local library, just a small 
room in the municipal office. They had a little area in the back, 
and it was pretty special for the kids to come down and borrow 
books from the library. They felt, in many ways, their 
community was a rich community because we did have two 
libraries. We one had at the municipal office, a small room in 
the back; and we had a library at the school, another small 
room. But, you know, we felt pretty rich because we had two 
libraries in that small hamlet, and we could talk about that. 
 
And I remember a pretty special occasion when we had a guest 
author come up from Saskatoon, Geoffrey Bilson, who has now 
passed away, but did a reading to this very small group of kids. 
And I think these are the important events in a student’s life 
when they get to see authors come out from the cities or travel 
around and talk to each other. So this is a very, very important 
thing that we’re going to lose. We’re really going to lose that. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I’m also worried about the impact on newcomers to this 
province. You know, this government particularly will celebrate 
the fact that our population has gone up, and that is a wonderful 
thing. That is a very wonderful thing. But libraries are the place 
where people go to learn the new culture. They go to learn it 
from the books, the videos, what’s being presented there, the 
special events. Those things will be really scaled back now, and 
the richness of our culture will not be showcased in our libraries 
to the degree it once was. In fact it will be really scaled back. 
 
And I think this will be a real problem because, you know, 
when we have newcomers come from all over the world, and 
they come here, and whether they’re learning English as an 
additional language or they’re looking for books that will help 
them learn the language or kids’ books to read to their own 
children to help them familiarize themselves with the customs 
and cultures of Canada, that will now be a little bit more 
difficult, and particularly when it comes from the interlibrary 
loans. So this is really a challenge that will be out there, and so 
this is why it’s so important that this government reconsider its 
drastic cuts to the library system. 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

We also are really worried about the situation about the ending 
of the one province, one card sharing program. And this is 
something that we really held as something we could be really 
proud of in Saskatchewan, really proud of this one card, one 
province card that meant you could borrow books anywhere in 
this province and it would be delivered to you. And this was a 
really innovative thing, and now we’re taking two steps back — 
and actually now compounded with the cuts to STC — many 
steps back because how can anybody really afford this? And it 
is rich for the minister to stand up where he gives such a drastic 
cut to the libraries, but on the other hand commands, demands 
from the libraries that they continue certain programs when he 
is unwilling, unwilling to foot the bill for it. 
 
And it’s a minor bill that we could . . . because of the choices 
they have made, and the choices they’ve made to foot the tax 
cut for the wealthiest in the province, as I have said, that costs 
$38 million a year. They have chosen as a priority over there, 
every one of those members have chosen and have stood on 
their feet to say yes to tax cuts to the wealthiest and cuts to the 
regional libraries. This is not going to be a positive sign for our 
province at all. It fails our families, and I think this is a real 
problem, Mr. Speaker. I want to also talk a little bit about 
families. 
 
You know, it’s interesting that the member from Westview 
stood on his feet and he mentioned Mayfair Branch Library in 
Saskatoon, which I am very familiar with. It’s on 33rd Street. I 
live on 29th Street. My granddaughter goes to that library, and 
now I’ll have services cut there because there won’t be the 
interbranch library. She likes some books in French which are 
hard for her grandfather to read, but her family does like to be 
bilingual. So this is a reduction in services. 
 
Now I don’t know if the member’s family from Westview uses 
the Mayfair Branch. I’m not sure if they do. But our family 
does, and I know the Mayfair area. Mayfair area is in one of the 
core neighbourhoods in Saskatoon. It’s not a wealthy 
neighbourhood, it’s not a wealthy neighbourhood at all. They 
value their library. 
 
If you go to their library, it’s a relatively new library, you 
would see a library that is well used because of the nature of the 
community that feels safe in the library. There are books there 
for them to read, a wide selection of books. And it’s from the 
children right up to grandparents who are looking for 
knowledge, for the joy that books share with you, but also the 
Internet that they can get resources, knowledge from that, but 
also just a sense of community. 
 
And so these cuts will have an impact. And I think it’s really 
rich and it really shows the member’s not understanding how 
the city works where he talks about . . . Just really, here it is 
downloading to the city, demanding that the city just pick up 
the pieces. And I think this is really, really unfortunate. I think 
that the folks in Mayfair area would be very interested to know 
the feelings of their member towards the Mayfair Branch 
Library and that he’s not really that supportive of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think this Education minister has not really been fully briefed 
on this. He’s making comments in the question period which 
really shows. Yesterday he talked about Canada Post delivering 

books for $1. We know that program no longer exists. He 
should have had, he should have had better research. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to end with this one quote that I’ve 
adapted. I think the minister will soon find out that hell hath no 
fury like a librarian scorned, and he will see that tomorrow 
afternoon at the demonstrations across this province on Friday. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all I 
would like to clarify the perception has been created by 
members opposite. They have been saying that we are closing 
down libraries and are not investing in our province. I assure 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are not doing as the NDP and 
as the motion is debating today. 
 
In the last decade while we had the privilege of forming 
government, we have invested record amounts in education, in 
infrastructure, in social programs, and we have developed the 
municipal sharing formula that has provided sustainable 
funding for municipalities to invest in communities. Mr. 
Speaker, our government actions are for the betterment of 
people of Saskatchewan, better education, and better 
education-related programs. 
 
This is still the case, even though we have been forced to make 
some tough decisions to make sure that our budget gets back to 
balance. We have always been working for a better future of 
Saskatchewan people and will continue to do so. Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to our responsibility as a government, we need to 
think about the big picture and have a visionary, long-lasting 
plan which is the best for the public interest, economic growth, 
and not leaving unnecessary debt behind to be paid by the next 
generation. Mr. Speaker, in this contemporary situation in our 
province, our government action is one of the excellent 
examples of managing the public money. 
 
This has led to us having to make some tough decisions, but 
when you look at the province we are doing what’s the best. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not arbitrarily closing libraries like 
the NDP suggested. This is unlike the NDP, where they closed 
hospitals and schools. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to 
remind the Assembly that the NDP closed nearly one school a 
month during their time in office. That’s their record, and I can 
only imagine the number of libraries that was closed with all 
those schools closing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true that our government had to make difficult 
decisions, but it is a part of our plan to make sure that our 
budget gets back to balance in the next three years. Sound fiscal 
management is important, and we take that very seriously, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would like to share a quote from Dominion Bond Rating 
Service when they were talking about our budget: 
 

In presenting this plan, the Province has acknowledged the 
longer-term consequences of lower commodity prices and 
has demonstrated its willingness to make difficult, but 
necessary, decisions to address the deteriorating budget 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

outlook. The plan introduces modest pro-growth tax 
reform, rationalizes government services and maintains a 
focus on core government priories such as health care, 
education and social services. While DBRS recognizes that 
the plan is ambitious and savings may not accrue quickly 
as expected, DBRS does view the plan as credible because 
of the extent and immediacy of the proposed measures. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in order to meet the fiscal challenges, we do like 
to reduce expenses. The NDP like to reduce hospitals and 
schools and MLAs. I believe every school usually has a library, 
so out of 176 schools, how many schools had a library that was 
closed by NDP? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Public Library is mostly funded by the 
municipality through the property tax. Their building, books 
belongs to the city and implies being paid by the city. The 
provincial grant was 3 per cent and was not granted in the 
budget in 2017-18. 
 
The same is the case with Regina Public Library owned and 
being operated by the municipal government, and the previous 
grant was 2.75 per cent and was not granted in last budget. 
 
There are significant changes in the source in acquiring 
knowledge, and it is the reality that the use of paper in any form 
such as books, newspapers, and magazines has been reduced. 
People use many other means such as the Internet, for e-books, 
e-readers, online newspaper, magazine, and movies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with everything that is available on Internet — 
fiction, science, recent research, social media — that is why the 
use of library materials has dropped. That does not mean that 
they are not important, but with the changing time, it is a time 
to evaluate how things are being done. The number of items 
checked out of public libraries has dropped by 1.6 million since 
2007. Also the number of registered library users has dropped 
by 175,000 since 2007. 
 
I talked about tough decisions that had to be made earlier in my 
speech, and when it comes to which services to reduce funding, 
we have to look at the numbers. The reduction in demand 
demonstrated that there would be a smaller impact along with 
understanding the libraries would be able to absorb a change in 
funding. We believe that with the last decade of record 
investment in libraries, municipalities, and school divisions, 
that there are enough resources to meet the existing demand for 
library services. 
 
Over 90 Saskatchewan communities with a library also have a 
library in their school. We’re also still supporting and will keep 
supporting regional libraries outside of the two major cities. 
The changes in funding, however, are an opportunity to find 
efficiencies in the library system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Education has pointed out that if 
you drive between Martensville and Langham, you will see past 
five libraries; Saltcoats and Langenburg, four libraries; Indian 
Head and Regina, four libraries. And we are not closing them, 
and we are not telling libraries what specifically they should do, 
but we are suggesting that there may be efficiencies that can be 
found. One of the suggestions that has been made is that for 
small communities that have multiple libraries, it may be worth 

considering consolidating those libraries to improve services at 
a lower cost. We also will continue to support our libraries in 
public schools, and we encourage communities to look for the 
ways to support their community libraries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP record is one of the closed schools and 
people being forced to leave the province in search of jobs. Our 
government record is very different. Our population continued 
to grow. Key economic indicators are pointing in the right 
direction. We have a plan to get our budget to back to balance, 
and we have overseen a decade of record in investment in all 
sectors of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been working and has worked 
to reconstruct the damage that was done to our educational 
system before 2007. And we acknowledge that we have made 
the tough decisions, but with our record, the people of 
Saskatchewan can trust that we are doing everything we can do 
to make sure our province is a great place to live, work, and 
raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I will not be supporting the motion put 
forward by the member from Regina Lakeview. Thank you. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll keep my 
opening remarks short. I will be supporting my colleague from 
Regina Lakeview, her condemnation of these cuts to our 
libraries, Mr. Speaker. I have a lot to say and 10 minutes is not 
nearly enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is the Sask Party government — without consultation, 
without talking to anybody — has cut our provincial libraries 
by $4.8 million, including 100 per cent cut to the funding in 
libraries in Saskatoon and Regina of the provincial money, and 
58 per cent cut to regional libraries, Mr. Speaker. That is a cut 
to the almost half a million people — that is half our population 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — who are registered 
library users. That is a huge cut. It was obvious, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government was oblivious to the impact that this would 
have on people and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries are about people, and they are people 
who are part of a community. And libraries offer them that 
opportunity to feel that connection to the community when they 
visit their local library. And libraries are for everyone. They’re 
for children who get their first library card and start with little 
board books and work their way up to graphic novels in their 
teens, those kinds of things. 
 
They are for children who’ve taken the programming at Winnie 
the Pooh Corner in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, or children who get 
tutoring or have an opportunity to do research for school, the 
summer reading challenge that happens when kids are on school 
break, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re about seniors, their access to large-print books or audio 
books. About community programming, they’re about seniors 
being able to come out and gather and hear interesting speakers 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

or meet friends. 
 
They’re about newcomers improving their English as an 
additional language; about connecting with family across the 
world; about being able to apply for jobs or put together 
resumes. They’re about our most vulnerable individuals, people 
who don’t have money for expensive outings, but they provide 
an opportunity to do job searches; librarians who help with 
resumés; access to things like newspapers or magazines, books; 
a quiet, soft, safe place to spend some worthwhile time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you about my experience 
with libraries because the personal is political, and I know very 
well that my experience as a mom with young kids is the 
experience of many families across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know that because of the many, many email and 
communications I’ve had with families just like mine, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to acknowledge that my perspective is that of 
someone who lives in a city, who has a large choice of libraries 
in neighbourhoods not far from mine that I can visit, and my 
family and I do visit. But I think it’s important to emphasize 
that I live in a city that has public transit and biking and 
walking paths that can get me easily to those libraries if I don’t 
have a vehicle, Mr. Speaker. And that isn’t the case in rural 
communities for everybody, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t have 
access to a car. This 100 per cent . . . This cut is a big deal in 
our two largest cities, the 100 per cent cut, but it has a huge 
impact in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So my experience as a mom, I started out on maternity and 
parental leave, Mr. Speaker, and chose to be an at-home mom. 
My husband and I, at that point, decided that I would be an 
at-home mom with Hennessey when she was little. We made a 
decision to live on one income so I could be with my daughter. 
Libraries again are important for everyone, all parents, but I can 
tell you that our libraries in Saskatoon were a lifeline for me as 
an at-home parent. 
 
I loved being home with both my kids when I had an 
opportunity to do that, but a very real consequence of being on 
a leave from work or opting out of paid labour, whether you’re 
a mom or a dad, is social isolation. That is a very real 
consequence. It’s a wonderful experience, but it can be lonely. 
It can create fear. Am I the only mom who sometimes feels like 
this is the most difficult job in the world? It can lead to 
depression, all those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Libraries were a lifeline to me, and I know they are to many 
other people. And they still are, Mr. Speaker. I’ll find myself on 
a Sunday afternoon when I don’t have work commitments and 
Ophelia and I are hanging out, and it is the place we go to 
connect. But I think about Hennessey when she was little. 
Mayfair was one of our libraries we visited. It’s not too far from 
our home. It had shorter hours, but the smaller, semi-enclosed 
children’s area was cozy and had a really nice feel. We’d 
sometimes go to Alice Turner, which had just opened up, and 
it’s on the exact opposite corner of the city, Mr. Speaker, but 
it’s such a bright and sunny place to visit. The Cliff Wright 
branch, Mr. Speaker, we’d usually visit after a swim at 
Lakeview pool. We’d go swimming and make a stop on our 
way out at the library. That was the perfect way to end a day, 

Mr. Speaker, where we could go and curl up with our giant 
stack of books at home after a busy day of swimming. 
 
Carlyle King branch, which is not too far from my place either, 
Mr. Speaker. It was much the same as our visit. We could go 
skating and go to the library. And always, always there were so 
many families and many users of these libraries. Dr. Freda 
Ahenakew, formerly the branch on 20th Street, is the closest 
library to me but it opened just in recent years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But our two favourite branches were Frances Morrison and the 
Rusty MacDonald branch. Frances Morrison, Pooh Corner on a 
Saturday morning is always packed. And it’s set up in such a 
way that you could pick out books for your preschooler and 
your preschooler could play and you could keep your eye on 
them. And you could curl up on one of the loungey mats up on 
the windowsill overlooking city hall and read some of the books 
that you picked before you took your giant bags of books home. 
There were always two carts at Frances Morrison library, one 
with brand new books which was always exciting, opening up 
those brand new books and feeling them. But there was also a 
librarian selection and those were always really fun books to 
take home too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Rusty MacDonald branch we spent tons of time at because 
they have a play kitchen. We didn’t have a play kitchen in our 
house. So surrounded by the books, there was a play kitchen 
and tons of puzzles. So Hennessey, and Ophelia now, but 
Hennessey would play in the kitchen, and I’d talk to other 
parents. And much to my kids’ chagrin, I will talk to anybody. 
And in those moments of isolation and loneliness, I would 
strike up a conversation and if they responded, we’d have great 
conversations, Mr. Speaker. Hennessey would make friends at 
the library and play with other kids. That was a really important 
time in our lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think about how it fostered . . . We had one income and it 
wasn’t a big income because my husband was at the start of his 
career at that point. So it was a cheap and enriching and fun 
outing for us to go to the library. We were there at least two 
times a week, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes we’d plan to go with 
friends, but usually it was a spur of the moment. The library 
was the place to go. It fostered a love of literacy in my kids. 
 
From the early days, we used the CDs [compact disc] and I’d 
make tapes, back in the day when you’d make tapes, of lullabies 
for my kids to listen to. Books on tape, Hennessey didn’t watch 
a lot of TV but I’d put a book on tape and she would play quite 
happily. Two of our favourites were Chuck and Danielle, about 
a whippet and a girl — we used to have a whippet — and 
Matilda, Roald Dahl’s Matilda. We’d take out VHS [Video 
Home System] tapes. Sesame Street and Put Down the Duckie 
were one of our favourites, Mr. Speaker. The summer reading 
program was a really important part . . . well it was an 
important part of my life when I was little. It was an important 
part of Hennessey’s life and it is still an important part of 
Ophelia’s life. The thrill of the librarian coming to the school at 
the start of September bringing your certificate was a huge 
thrill. The experiences, those social connections were so 
important, but those books and those materials also had such a 
huge impact. 
 
Magic School Bus, Mr. Speaker, books and videos, I partially 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

credit to Ms. Frizzle and her crew to inspiring my oldest 
daughter to be a science major, Mr. Speaker. Kevin Hinkes’ 
Lily’s Plastic Purse and Chrysanthemum were fun books for us. 
Thank goodness Ophelia wasn’t born in November because she 
would’ve been chrysanthemum. That’s the flower for the month 
of November, and my oldest daughter Hennessey loved that 
book so much that she thought that Ophelia should’ve been 
chrysanthemum, Mr. Speaker. Amber Brown who is a character 
in a book whose parents were going through a divorce. It was a 
wonderful opportunity for me to have those kinds of 
discussions. 
 
And I could go on and on about the kinds of books — the kids’ 
books, the cookbooks, the parenting books. The library was a 
lifeline. The materials were a lifeline, Mr. Speaker. I think 
about how lucky my family is, and has been, to access those 
materials. And I worry about people in rural Saskatchewan who 
won’t have access to those materials because of the loss of the 
interlibrary, the one-province, one-library loan. 
 
Libraries for my kids have such a huge part of their lives and 
had such a huge impact. It has carried on a love of reading and a 
love of learning for them. And I know this is the case, not just 
for my family, but families across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
The personal is political and my experience is not unique, Mr. 
Speaker. Libraries make the world a better place, and our 
government needs to properly support them, whether they are in 
our larger centres or our smallest communities across our 
province. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to join this debate about our library systems and 
regional libraries and the public libraries. First off I’d like to 
thank the member from Lakeview for directing some people to 
her office to talk about the library systems because we had 
some phone calls in our office. And we know that these 
decisions that we made during the budget, we didn’t take 
lightly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wish there was a magic money tree that we 
could fund everything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we had to 
make some difficult decisions in this budget, and one of the 
decisions we made was to reduce spending to regional libraries, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We want to work with our libraries to adjust how they deliver 
their services within the available funding levels. Our focus is 
on supporting things like the electronic resources, interlibrary 
loan, and CommunityNet. It is our hope that local libraries will 
work with their municipalities and school divisions to find new 
ways of delivering these services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have three kids, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And my wife has met 
people at the library and used some of the services that they 
offer, and they’re good. And they see families there from 
around Regina, and her friends go there and they could get 
together. And like the member from Saskatoon Riversdale say, 
it’s a place where people can gather. 
 
Those spaces are still going to be there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Let’s not think that every library in the province is going to shut 
down due to these decisions that we’ve made. I don’t think that 
it’s right to put that view out there in the public. I think it’s a 
little bit of fearmongering, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We know that these are tough decisions, and because we have a 
$1.2 billion hole in our budget, we had to make some of these 
decisions. I think about words our former Finance minister, Mr. 
Gantefoer, said. And he said when we’re talking about budgets 
and the government goes over caucus finalization and cabinet 
finalization, these aren’t decisions made between good and bad 
ideas. The government has to make decisions between good 
ideas and good ideas. And sometimes you can’t fund every 
good idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s something we’re 
going through right now in our fiscal situation where we have a 
$1.2 billion revenue shortfall, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we’ve seen what our priorities are in this budget. Our 
priorities are health care, education, and social services, and, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 75 cents of every dollar goes into that. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I hear the member from Saskatoon Centre 
heckling over here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And to the member 
from Saskatoon Centre, in my budget speech — I don’t know if 
you heard it — I quoted him and I said, when he was the 
minister he said we had to make hard decisions when they were 
in government. And I gave him credit for that. He said we had 
to make hard decisions. And one of those decisions when he 
was a minister was they had to lay off 500 people. 
 
And I give him credit. He said that was a very tough decision 
because they were in tough financial times. And I said 
sometimes these decisions . . . I know he didn’t want to make 
those choices; I know that. I think he’s a good guy. I know he 
didn’t want to have to make those decisions. And sometimes 
when you’re in government you have to make tough choices, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this budget was full of those 
decisions that we didn’t want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Tough choices that we looked forward, we looked at the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. We had our priorities: health 
care, education, social services — 75 cents of every dollar. 
 
And then we continued our commitments of building two new 
schools in Weyburn and Rosthern. And you can see our 
priorities of building new schools, spending money for two new 
schools. Forty new schools over the last 10 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Twenty-one new schools are opening in this province 
this year, this fall. And the members opposite fearmonger again 
and say, well those schools aren’t going to have desks or 
teachers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would you open new 
schools and not have desks and teachers? That’s just more 
hyperbole coming from the side opposite. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And when they had to make tough decisions in the ’90s, they 
made some really interesting choices. We decided to try and 
work with our partners. Yes, we reduced some funding to 
libraries. We reduced funding in Regina, in Saskatoon. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those numbers in Regina and Saskatoon: Regina 
Public Library budget is $21.499 million. Their municipal grant 
is $19.699 million. The municipal grant is 92 per cent of their 
funding. 
 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

Our provincial grant is $597,000. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
provincial portion of funding for Regina Public Library is 2.75 
per cent. And I know we are asking our partners to find that 
shortfall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know that those are tough 
decisions they’re going to have to make, and they’re going to 
have to look at some efficiencies within that system. But we’re 
asking them to find 2.75 per cent. 
 
Our Finance minister had to find 10 per cent of revenue 
shortfall across the province in a provincial budget. Those are 
where those tough choices come from. And our Social Services 
minister has to make some of these decisions on her budget. 
And there’s going to be some increased utilization, and we’re 
going to have to try some efficiencies in those budgets as well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think we’ve proven very good partners with our third party 
entities over the last 10 years. When the funds were there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when the funds were there, we were there for 
our partners and we increased revenue sharing across 
Saskatchewan. In our city of Regina we increased revenue 
sharing by 157 per cent. When we had the funds there, we were 
there with our partners, and now we’re asking, when we have a 
shortfall, we’re asking for them to help find some efficiencies 
as well. 
 
And I think that is fair. And I think when . . . We’ve been good 
partners when we’ve had the opportunity and we’ve had the 
revenue. And I think when times are good we shared in 
revenue, and when times are bad we’re going to have to share in 
some reductions and share in finding some efficiencies, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But on to priorities. The members across the way like to heckle 
and yell about our priorities, and this budget sure does show 
their priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well it does. We do show our priorities. And I used a quote 
from Mr. Biden. He said, don’t tell me your priorities; show me 
your budget and I’ll tell you yours. And we’ve done that with 
health care, education, and social services. 
 
And the members can heckle across, and the member from 
Lakeview, who recently found her rural Saskatchewan stripes 
and she’d been to Fox Valley once in 27 years, thinks she can 
come across and tell us all about rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Well here’s some things in rural Saskatchewan 
that her party did — it was quite amazing — back when they 
had to make tough choices. And the member from Saskatoon 
Centre was there. The member from Elphinstone was there. 
 
There’s tough choices they made as a government, and their 
choices included closing 176 schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
Neville School; Admiral School; Piapot School; Lang School; 
Earl Grey School; Saar Elementary School; Grey Elementary 
School; Wilcox Public School; Francis School; Odessa School; 
Glenavon School; École Ross School, Moose Jaw; Willow 
Bunch School; Briercrest School; Crane Valley School; 
Limerick School; MacDowall School; Prince Charles School; 
Smeaton School; Sylvania School; Broadway Elementary 
School; Camsell Portage School; Isaac School; Griffin School; 
Golden Prairie School; Windthorst School; Lintlaw Okla 
School; Endeavour School; Pleasantdale School, central; Denzil 
Sacred Heart; Sonningdale School; Centennial Park Education 

Centre; Alida School; Gainsborough School; Willowbrook 
School; St. James School; Dore Lake School; St. John School; 
Benson School; Margaret Mcclumb School; Simpson School; 
Radisson School; Dodsland School. I might run out of time 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll just jump forwards a few more: Cadillac School, Brock 
Elementary School, Buffalo Hills School, Minto School, 
Langbank School, Bredenbury School. I think there’s still 
people in Bredenbury. Spalding School, Sheho School. Actually 
my brother-in-law and my wife went to Sheho School for a bit 
until it was closed. Tramping Lake School, Neville School. 
Tramping Lake, I think the minister . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes. Biggar Elementary. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of names on this list of 
schools that were closed, and I’m guessing, I’m not sure but I’m 
guessing there was libraries in those schools. And I’m guessing 
— to get back to the debate, Mr. Speaker — their priority was 
to close 176 schools young people wanted to go to, with 
libraries. That’s their priorities. We’ve seen that in their budgets 
when it was tough times. We’re opening schools, and we’ve 
asked our partners, and actually on a . . . with libraries. 
 
And I listened on a call-in show. There’s a lady from White 
City. There’s a school being built there and she said . . . She 
was a school board trustee, and she said, “I think we should 
co-locate in this school and have some efficiencies.” And she 
was a board member out there, and she was talking on a call-in 
show and saying, “There’s efficiencies that you can find there.” 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think when it comes down to it when 
we talk with our partners and we’re asking to find some 
efficiencies because we’re in tougher times. 
 
We want to work together with our third parties. We want to 
ask them, co-operate with them to see if they can find some 
savings and be a little more efficient so that we can meet the 
targets and make sure that we can balance our budget, because 
like I said, I have three kids. And I want to make sure that we’re 
paying for the services that we can have right now and our kids 
don’t have to pay for those services in 20 years and kick the can 
down the road, so we have to put more and more debt on the 
back of our next generation. Other provinces are doing that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that’s what we decided not to do in this 
budget. It was a budget for the future, and we’re going to meet 
the challenges, and we look forward to working with our third 
party partners to meet those challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
will not be supporting the motion put forward by the member 
from Lakeview. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When 
confronted with unprecedented and sustained global commodity 
price declines, our government has had to make some very 
difficult decisions. And we’re rising to that challenge premised 
on a rational approach to prudent management of debt, efficient 
delivery of services, and a focus on core government services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask the member from Saskatoon 
Centre to comment specifically on the choices they made as 
government when they closed 176 schools. Did they also close 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

176 school libraries? And what was the impact on those 
communities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I find it interesting because here we have a member, and 
not one rural member over there stood to speak on this; they 
had their urban members speak on this. And then you have a 
situation where the minister has alluded at least twice in the 
House that we have too many, too many libraries. We’re 
debating libraries today, and they talk about us closing libraries. 
But I have not heard the minister, the minister when he was in 
Saskatoon, talk about us opening Silverspring, silence over 
there, or Tommy Douglas High. What about that? What about 
Bethlehem? Just three that I can name off the top of my head, 
so I would ask the member to do a little more research. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I noted 
before I didn’t get a chance to read out all the comments, but I 
do want to read this one into the record. Yesterday I was at the 
George Bothwell Library at the RPL [Regina Public Library] 
and was sad to hear a staff member explain patiently to a young 
boy that, no, he wouldn’t get the book on interlibrary loans that 
he had requested about dinosaurs. The boy left and said he 
really didn’t understand and seemed very disappointed. I also 
feel sorry for the staff who have to do all of this negative 
explaining. To the member from Walsh Acres: how do you 
explain those type of cuts to those children? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I have said in my speech before that we are looking for 
efficiencies with our third party partners, and we know that we 
have made some difficult decisions. 
 
And to the young boy who wants his book regarding dinosaurs, 
my son loves dinosaurs as well. Nickson loves dinosaurs, and I 
know that he’d be disappointed as well. But then we’d actually 
go and we’d find some different alternatives of what we’d have 
to do. And one of those alternatives is Canada Post offers a 
delivery service of books for $1.24 return trip, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And we’re asking, we’re asking our partners in Regina library 
and libraries across the province to look at other options for 
book delivery, for service delivery. And we’re going to work 
with our partners to make sure that we can have the best 
possible service across Regina library, Saskatoon library, and 
our regional libraries, and continue to look forward for better 
solutions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As this 
government has already stated, we had to make very tough 
decisions in this budget. We have committed to working with 
libraries to support their resources, interlibrary loans, and 
CommunityNet. The purpose of this budget is to grow and 
strengthen their relationship with their municipalities and 
school divisions so that we can find better and efficient ways to 
deliver these resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the member from Regina 
Lakeview: during this difficult economic time, what is your 
alternative to saving money for this province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would love to 
talk about priorities in this budget, and I thank the member 
opposite for the question. This is a $3.5 million cut to the 
regional library system. This is something that would be well 
covered by the $38 million in tax breaks to the wealthiest in this 
province. This is something that would be well covered by the 
$9.5 million in this budget going to maintain brand new P3 
schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would suggest that this is about 
priorities, and they have got it wrong with this decision. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the . . . [inaudible]. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’ve heard the minister, ill-informed as he is on this topic, 
clearly that way, at least twice in this House allude to too many 
libraries. He’s talked about around Martensville, there’s five in 
a certain area and saying, there’s too many libraries, too many 
libraries. To the member from Walsh Acres: does he agree that 
there’s too many libraries and some should be cut in this 
province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
colleagues from across the way are getting quite used to 
misquoting the Minister for Education, but I think what the 
minister is trying to say is that we are going to have options to 
be able to co-locate libraries in schools and that they’re going to 
be . . . We’re going to work with our partners to make sure that 
they have the best services available. I think the minister has 
reached out and talked to our partners to make sure that we have 
a plan moving forward. And I’d just say that I definitely know 
that the NDP thought there was too many libraries across 
Saskatchewan when they closed those 176 schools with 
libraries in them. So I think we don’t have to take lessons from 
them about respecting rural Saskatchewan, respecting schools 
and libraries across our province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On this 
side of the House we take seriously every decision we have 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

made, and we acknowledge that this budget required us to make 
some especially tough decisions to ensure our grandchildren 
aren’t burdened with outrageous debt. Unlike the members 
opposite, we are up to the challenge. 
 
My question is to the member from Saskatoon Centre. We made 
the tough decisions to help get our budget back to balance in 
three years, and they have criticized. I ask, however, what 
would they do to fill the $1.2 billion hole in revenue due to 
reduced resource revenues? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is really 
rich, them congratulating themselves on a budget well 
managed. Here we have a government that’s in disarray, 
disarray. Eight of our best years, eight of our best years, and 
here we are today. They talk about their grandchildren, our 
grandchildren. I tell you, this is shameful. Today we’re talking 
about libraries that our grandkids won’t be able to go to, 
because they’re giving tax cuts to the very rich in this province 
of $38 million. How can they look at themselves in the morning 
in the mirror? They’re saying, you can’t go to the library, but 
my good friend over here is getting a good tax cut. Shame on all 
of you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been many comments on 
Facebook and questions asked about this cut. There’s one 
person who points out that at a rural library there’s an elderly 
woman who doesn’t own a computer. She can’t afford Internet 
fees. She comes into the library on a regular basis to pay her 
bills. The poster points out that one thing most people don’t 
realize is not everyone in rural Saskatchewan has access to 
high-speed services and most are still on dial-up. One of the . . . 
this poster wants to know from the member of Walsh Acres and 
members across the way is, what does he say to the elderly lady 
that comes into the library in tears, worried that she could lose 
her Internet services that her library provides? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I want to take the time to inform the member from 
Riversdale that not most people in rural Saskatchewan are on 
dial-up. Actually, because of our government’s investment in 
SaskTel, we have better Internet service they’ve ever had before 
in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to take this time to say once 
again that these were difficult decisions, and we understand that 
there’s tough choices to be made in this budget. And we take it 
very seriously, these decisions we made, and we’re going to 
continue to work with our third party partners, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And when it comes to usage of the library, I just want to say 

about the priorities we have on this side of this House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When we made the budget we looked at 
health, education, and social services, a 75 per cent . . . 75 cents 
on every dollar, that’s where our priorities lie, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And we’re going to continue to work hard with our 
third party partners to ensure that we have a way forward and 
ensure they have the best service possible for all the libraries. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — These are challenging economic times and 
difficult decisions have been made. And finding efficiencies is 
not a bad thing. There will be 15,200 child care spaces in 
September, a 62 per cent increase since 2007. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my question for the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale: would you rather that our government have to 
reduce funding to regularly used programs like child care 
instead? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Carr.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise today to support the motion put forward by the 
member from Estevan. I believe the Minister for Energy and 
Resources summarizes it very well when he says: 
 

We are gifted with a variety of resources, and as a 
government we are doing our share to encourage the 
industry and to make sure we are competitive and friendly 
to investment. We have maintained a stable royalty 
structure over the last number of years, supported by clear 
government policies that have helped Saskatchewan 
remain a destination of choice for investors and business. 

 
He also stated: 
 

Aside from having high-quality geoscience information, 
we place a high priority on collaboration with our 
stakeholders in the industry to . . . reduce red tape 
wherever possible. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, making it easy to do business provides an 
investment and opportunity for residents of Saskatchewan, and 
we’ll dive into the value of opportunity in a minute. However 
we must also note that poor policy has resulted in reduced 
opportunities. Unfortunately our fellow province to the west has 
seen their mining attractiveness rating become severely 



April 6, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

downgraded after their politics changed. They were once listed 
at 14th on the index and have slid significantly downward, 
placing 47th overall on the attractiveness index, placing them 
with Russia, Guyana, Colorado, Burkina Faso, and California, 
based on difficulties companies have existing and attempting to 
develop new projects. Mr. Deputy Speaker, policy matters. 
 
Towns and villages across the province have seen their 
populations increase since we’ve taken over in 2007. Mr. 
Speaker, my town, Churchbridge, in the heart of potash country, 
has grown an astounding 20 per cent from the 2011 census. We 
both have residents moving back to the province and new . . . 
and people moving back into the province. 
 
One of my neighbours in town has moved in from Ontario. He’s 
an engineer at Mosaic. His wife, a peds nurse in Yorkton. My 
other neighbour comes from Manitoba. He’s an employee at 
Mosaic. His wife works for the Ministry of Justice. Residents 
down the street from the Philippines, he’s an engineer at 
Mosaic. His wife, a nurse. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our school has grown from over 150 
students in 2011 to well over 200 now in 2016, a 33 per cent 
increase. The average age of our community has actually 
decreased with the incredible influx of young people back to 
our community. 
 
Compare that growth to the 10 years from 1996 to 2006 when 
the NDP were in power, when Saskatchewan’s population 
actually decreased — decreased by 22,000. That’s a sharp 
difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Gone are the days when 
Saskatchewan’s greatest export was the people who called 
Saskatchewan home. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud of this 
government, and I am encouraged by what it’s done for our 
communities in Melville-Saltcoats and the communities of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to spend a little time just to 
provide some examples of what the resource sector means 
exactly to our constituency, the constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m extremely proud 
of Mosaic Company, especially their Esterhazy division. Just a 
few days ago I had the pleasure of standing in this legislature to 
brag a little of our latest achievement — K3, Mosaic K3, a $3 
billion expansion to the potash industry in Melville-Saltcoats. 
This is the first new production shaft built in this province in 40 
years. This multi-billion-dollar expansion solidifies Mosaic’s 
position as one of the largest potash mining facilities in the 
world. This development will have an expected lifespan of over 
50 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since Mosaic has been in my backyard, 
since 1961, they have employed thousands of employees. At 
this time, Mosaic Esterhazy has approximately 1,250 employees 
plus 300 contract workers working on the K3 expansion. At its 
peak a couple of years ago there were over 1,200 contractors 
working on the K3 project in addition to the 1,200 Mosaic 
employees. In total, the expansion alone, Mosaic has invested 
over $3 billion into the facility as well as investing hundreds of 
millions with local vendors since the project began a few years 
ago. 
 
Fun fact: there are now 18 known third-generation families 

working at the Mosaic Esterhazy facility. They have employees 
living in 35 communities within 80 kilometres of the mine, and 
another in 15 communities up to 150 kilometres away. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the fiscal contributions that Mosaic potash and 
PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] Rocanville, 
also in my backyard, are absolutely astounding on a 
year-to-year basis. 
 
In 2016 the municipal taxes from the municipal potash tax levy 
provided the RMs [rural municipality] in our constituency just 
over $4.5 million. Communities in Melville-Saltcoats were 
provided just under 600,000 in 2016 from the municipal potash 
sharing agreement. Mosaic Esterhazy has been a significant 
philanthropic benefactor to the Esterhazy area. In the last 10 
years they have contributed $1.5 million to the St. Anthony’s 
Hospital in Esterhazy; $1.2 million to the Parkland College 
Trades and Technology Centre in Yorkton; $300,000 to the P.J. 
Gillen Elementary School in Esterhazy; $250,000 to the new 
Langenburg school; and countless millions to the many 
communities in the area to help support senior wellness, help 
build new swimming pools, water parks, refurbish skating rinks 
and curling rinks, etc., etc. 
 
They are like your most dependable friend, always there in the 
good times and the bad times. And I can confirm that Mosaic 
helped save countless farms within the trading area. They 
provided employment, that off-farm job for so many ag 
producers who were struggling to keep the crops sprayed or the 
cows fed in the ’90s and early 2000s. I know I had to personally 
arrange my business hours to accommodate shift changes and 
days off for hundreds of Mosaic employees as they came to 
pick up their farm supplies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier has indicated on numerous 
occasions that part of this province’s growth plan is to keep this 
province open for business. Even in the midst of a difficult 
budget and lower than expected resource revenues, the policies 
of our government are keeping our province open for business 
and making Saskatchewan a great place to live, work, and 
invest. These are effective taxes, a plan to get a balanced 
budget, and to keep and build highways, schools, and hospitals. 
We will continue to encourage new investment and new jobs by 
lowering small business taxes and creating new growth tax 
incentives. We need to ensure that we have an investment 
environment that will continue to give us that top grade where it 
matters the most, and that’s to our mining partners. Our record 
speaks for itself. Companies, employees, and families want to 
be here, unlike the days of the opposition, where their record 
was full of empty pages and of success. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to be on record as to supporting the 
motion put forward by the member from Estevan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
partake in this debate. I think first of all though, I was thinking 
about when I was growing up and how my parents, if I was 
acting up or something like that, they would say, you be careful 
or you’ll end up in the salt mines. So at this point in time, I 
think decorum in this House has sometimes gone astray or 
whatever, and I would offer up that I have a salt mine in Unity, 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2017 

and I think we should start sending people there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward in the future here to debate this a 
little bit further, but at this time I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the Assembly adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:41 p.m.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2157 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2155 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2156 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Vimy Ridge 100th Anniversary 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2158 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 
 Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Campaign 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2159 
 World Health Day 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2159 
 Parkland College Scholarships 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2159 
 Proposed Commercial Development in Saskatoon 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2160 
 New Schools for Warman 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2160 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2160 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2160 
 Support for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2162 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2163 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2163 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2163 
 Financial Support for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2163 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2163 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Test Facility 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2164 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2164 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2164 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2165 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2165 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 ........................................................................................................... 2166 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2166 
 



 

 Bill No. 57 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2167 
 Bill No. 58 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2017 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2167 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2166 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2167 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Funding for Libraries 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2167, 2177 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2169 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2171, 2177 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2172 
  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2173, 2178 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2175, 2177 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2176 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2177 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2177 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2178 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2178 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 3 — Mining Investment in Saskatchewan

