


















































November 27, 2017 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 18B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2017, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Nicole Sarauer 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Hon. Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Hon. Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 
Vacancies — Kindersley, Melfort 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 47; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 2 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3121 
 November 27, 2017 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., I call this Assembly to 
order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s my 
pleasure to enter into the debate tonight on Bill 90, The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. This bill has a 
few jobs here that it changes that will impact the way the 
review process for heritage property designation works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did a little walk down memory lane actually. I 
used to be the Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport critic when I 
first became an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in 
2009. I think this is just important for context here. So we look 
at the funding for the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, and 
in 2008-9 — and I was first elected in 2009 — the foundation 
actually received $278,000 in provincial funding. To the 
government’s credit, at the height of the money that the 
government had, when money was really rolling in, Mr. 
Speaker, we had $289,000 in 2009-10. That stayed stable in 
2010-11, and 2010-2011 it was 289,000. 
 
And then in 2011-12 there was an increase, to this 
government’s credit, to $504,000, Mr. Speaker. I just might add 
that that’s a positive increase. I’m a proponent of heritage and 
maintaining and fostering development of our heritage. It’s 
good to know where we come from so we know where we are 
going, Mr. Speaker. But I just want to point out whenever the 
government talks about increasing budgets exponentially in the 
10 years that they’ve been in office, it’s important to point out 
that the revenues increased exponentially as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in 2011 and ’12, the budget for the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation was $504,000. That stayed the same until 2016-17 
budget. Throughout those years — one, two, three, four, five, 
six years — half a million dollars to Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation received. And then in this last budget they saw a 
decrease back to $300,000, Mr. Speaker. So basically we’re, in 
2017-18, when it comes to supporting heritage through the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, we’re back basically to 
levels in 2010 and ’11, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think that’s important in the context here today as we’re 

talking about changes to The Heritage Property Amendment Act 
which will impact designation of provincial heritage facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. I know one of the things that I heard when I was 
the critic, from stakeholders one of the big concerns is that the 
heritage property foundation grants money to support both 
commercial interests and others in facilitating heritage property 
designation. They provide funding for municipal . . . There is 
the Built Heritage grant which provides funding for municipal 
or provincially designated properties to help with costs related 
to stabilization and restoration of those buildings, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no defined amount, but generally it’s noted on their 
website that demand exceeds the resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they also have a one-time grant for non-designated 
commercial heritage properties: up to $10,000 to assist 
non-designated properties with facade and stabilization in order 
to promote conservation and adaptive reuse of commercial 
heritage buildings and raise awareness of the benefits of that 
kind of work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s important to keep in mind . . . I know the things that I heard 
from stakeholders at that point in time, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
amount that was often granted was a drop in the bucket. When 
you think about having to do a roof of a building or stabilize a 
building, there was a little money spread very thin, so it often 
did not allow properties or owners of properties to do the work 
that they’d really like to do to maintain their buildings, Mr. 
Speaker. Noting that the budget has gone down and basically 
back to the level when I was elected an MLA, which was eight 
years ago, to $300,000, there undoubtedly is less money, even 
less money in that pot to support heritage. 
 
But this particular bill, Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act, one of the things it does with respect to 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, there is currently a review 
board, or some of the board members are the ones who review 
the designation or the appeal of properties. So what will happen 
with respect to this bill is there will be now a separate group; 
three people will be designated as the review board, who will 
have no other duties, to carry out review board duties. 
 
So that makes sense. The minister has pointed out in his 
comments that that will be hiving off that, the review from the 
actual operational separation of the actual foundation and the 
granting will give a more transparent and fair hearing to those 
who come before the board. 
 
Because the purpose of the Heritage Foundation is to maintain 
heritage properties, designate heritage properties, grant money, 
those kind of things, so to have the same board members review 
when they have an interest in maintaining heritage properties, 
he’s arguing there’s a conflict of interest. So they’re separating 
those duties. And there will also be updating the rules for 
hearings before the review board, including a party’s right to be 
heard and the ability to accept any evidence deemed relevant. 
There will be updates on how the board will notify the public of 
the time, date, location of a heritage property hearing. And 
there’s also a section being added to allow for more efficient 
processes for amending existing provincial heritage property 
designations. 
 
So I’m just pointing this out. I’m thinking from the vantage 



3122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

point of a heritage property owner who perhaps really would 
like to keep and maintain his or her property and recognize the 
benefit and the value of a heritage designation for all kinds of 
reasons. But it’s expensive. Any of us who’ve embarked upon a 
renovation of some of our homes, I’ve been there, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s not an inexpensive endeavour. So you think about the 
magnitude of maintaining the heritage of a home or a building 
becomes even more cost prohibitive. And so I think in some 
cases there’s developers or there’s folks who own these 
buildings who could use a little bit more support, and that 
support, it just isn’t there. So they don’t have a lot of options, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that that’s a challenge. That was a 
challenge I heard eight years ago when I was the Culture critic, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know when you think about the environmental impact of 
maintaining a building, they say that it’s so much more 
environmentally friendly to refurbish and renovate an existing 
building rather than tear down and build new, Mr. Speaker. So 
from an environmental perspective, restoring or rejuvenating a 
former property to its former glory is positive in that regard. 
 
Knowing a bit of our history and seeing it tangibly in a building 
I think is a really good thing too. I have a daughter who lives in 
Montreal right now, and it’s always so interesting. And I had 
the opportunity as a 19-year-old to spend some time in 
Switzerland doing a French immersion and travel a little bit at 
that point. And those are places that buildings are literally not 
just decades old but hundreds and hundreds of years old. And 
it’s hard to wrap your head around, that events in history 
happened in these places and all the people. You think of the 
stories that have taken place in many of those buildings. 
 
In Saskatchewan, who’s a relatively new province to settlers, to 
Western Europeans — although we have a long history here in 
Saskatchewan, indigenous people going back thousands of 
years — but when it comes to built history of Western 
Europeans the things that we have are relatively new. And I 
know that I certainly appreciate when we’ve managed to 
maintain buildings. 
 
There’s, in my own constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, King 
George Community School. The Saskatoon school board has 
done a particularly good job of maintaining and caring for its 
heritage buildings. They’ve invested in maintenance through 
the years. It’s much cheaper to maintain a facility, too, rather 
than have to start all over, Mr. Speaker. But King George is a 
wonderful example of a building that is well over 100 years that 
has served the people of Saskatoon Riversdale very well. 
 
I think about Victoria bridge in Saskatoon, and I was one of 
those people who was sad to see it torn down. I know there’s a 
new bridge going up that looks very much like the old bridge, 
but I think we missed an opportunity to capitalize on tourism. 
I’ve never been to New York City, but I’ve heard tale of the 
Brooklyn bridge and what they’ve done around tourism and the 
ability to draw people in. I think would’ve been a great link to 
River Landing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no shortage of examples here in Saskatchewan of 
buildings. There’s buildings that have been maintained, but 
we’ve lost many of those buildings from our earlier days, Mr. 
Speaker. 

So just with respect to this bill I think, in the context of funding 
for the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, it’s important to 
note that there is a smaller and smaller pool of money available 
to people who want to restore and maintain their property, their 
heritage properties, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s a shame. I 
know often when budgets get tight, that is the one place where 
governments go. They cut culture. 
 
I have to say reviewing old budgets just to pull these numbers 
was a bit of a walk down memory lane and made me kind of 
sad, Mr. Speaker. We go back to 2010-11 budget, I think it was, 
where SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications Network, got 
funded . . . used to be a treasury Crown here in Saskatchewan, 
and it was a really important part of the film industry. 
 
And, you know, Mr. Speaker, just a few years later this 
government . . . Something else that I noticed in these under 
culture, it’s hard not to recall the film tax credit, which was 
another pillar of the film industry here in Saskatchewan that 
supported employment, that fostered business, Mr. Speaker. 
And so it was a bit of a walk down memory lane and thinking 
about what we’ve lost here in Saskatchewan in terms of sharing 
who we are and our ability to share who we are. 
 
But with respect to this particular bill around The Heritage 
Property Act, I think it’s important to just flag the funding 
levels for the heritage property foundation, which although 
increased in 2011 and ’12, they remained stagnant up until this 
year and then they were reduced basically to the levels of 
almost a decade ago. 
 
So I know the minister had said in his comments that this bill 
strengthens our heritage designation process, but I’m not certain 
how that happens. I know that our critic will have an 
opportunity in committee to discuss this with the minister and 
ask some questions in greater detail as to how he anticipates 
that this will in fact strengthen the heritage property designation 
process. And perhaps he’ll ask how he thinks funding impacts 
heritage property designation, or the lack thereof, of funding. 
But I will leave that to the critic when he has an opportunity 
when this bill moves to committee. 
 
But in the meantime, I would like to move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 90. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 91 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 91 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3123 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
today to get up and speak a little bit with regards to the 
amendments to this bill, Bill 91, The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2017. It’s always an honour to be able to put your remarks 
about some changes to legislation that’s going to be occurring. 
The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017, it seems like it has a lot 
of housekeeping aspects to it with regards to some of the 
changes. The Act is administered by the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, which I would refer to as SGI when I 
refer to it later with regards to my remarks. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to admit I haven’t had an opportunity 
before this time to have a look at this particular Act with The 
Snowmobile Act. And when I looked at the original Act, I was 
trying to find when it was actually implemented and when the 
last time there was some changes with regards to this particular 
Act, because it does look like there was some housekeeping 
aspects on some changes and legislation that was made that will 
implement the Act and that’s why the housekeeping had to be 
done. 
 
So I’m going to talk a little bit about what I see as some of the 
changes when the minister talked about, with regards with his 
remarks, about some of the changes that’ll be happening with 
this amendment. So the changes here, they restrict the 
snowmobile trail to be used only by snowmobiles and trail 
maintenance equipment between December 1st and April 15th. 
And the reason why they decided to make some of those 
changes was to ensure that trails aren’t damaged and keeping 
them safe for snowmobilers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit of the safety of 
snowmobilers. I personally know some people who have lost 
their life and have had quite serious injuries with regards to 
snowmobile accidents. And it seems like every winter you’re 
hearing about someone who’s been really badly hurt or 
unfortunately the fatalities with regards to snowmobiles. I 
myself, as a little bit of a scaredy-cat . . . and I’ve only been on 
a snowmobile a few times because I’m a little bit scared of not 
having more protective iron around me. 
 
And so I do worry about the safety aspect of snowmobiles, and 
I know times have changed and we do look at safety a lot more 
than we maybe previously have had. And so I wonder, when in 
this House we’ve been talking a lot about impaired driving, Mr. 
Speaker, and I wonder with regards to the enforcement of 
impaired driving with regards to snowmobilers, and what 
exactly our government is planning to do to ensure that anyone 
who is operating a vehicle, a motorized vehicle — and a 
snowmobile would be exactly that — isn’t doing it under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs now that we are seeing that we’re 
going to have more drugs being legalized in our province. And 
so how are we going to manage that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I think we need to have that dialogue and that discussion 
here so that we can ensure their safety, also ensuring that people 
are wearing their safety equipment, helmets, when they’re 
riding. And if they’re not, how is that being enforced? And 
young drivers, what’s the regulations with regards to allowing 
young drivers to drive snowmobiles? And that really concerns 
me, and so I would be concerned if there was a child driving a 

snowmobile. Maybe there’s certain training that they can have 
in safety. And how again are we going to ensure and regulate 
that? As a government we have a responsibility that people are 
safe when they’re using motorized vehicles. 
 
And so I was a little concerned about the lack of safety being 
recognized with regards to amendments of this bill. I think this 
is a really prime time when you’re opening up legislation to 
have that discussion and maybe incorporate a little bit more 
enforcement and restrictions with regards to that. 
 
So they indicate that they’re going to restrict certain motorized 
vehicles going on snowmobile trails because they want to make 
sure that they’re maintained properly and they’re not damaged. 
And I wondered about safety vehicles when safety vehicles 
need to get to a point of emergency. I know a lot of RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers and police officers 
and EMS [emergency medical services] agents are using 
snowmobiles as a way to go to these remote areas to pick up 
people who may be injured as well. And so I’m hoping they 
have full access to that kind of stuff. But I’m wondering if they 
needed to get on there, I would assume that would be something 
that would be allowed, especially in an emergency. 
 
Another change to this Act is transferring the authority from the 
Highway Traffic Board to SGI. Apparently from some 
information I was reading before, in January 2016 the Highway 
Traffic Board delegated a lot of these authorities to SGI. So 
again like I was saying before, some things were changed in 
previous years that now need to be put forward with regards to 
the amendments to this bill. And so they’re stroking out a lot of 
references that it says “board” and putting SGI on there so that 
people have a clear idea of exactly who is responsible for that. 
 
So some of these examples are that SGI sets the expiry date on 
certificates of registration and licences, not the Highway Traffic 
Board. And SGI prescribes the form on which accidents are to 
be reported, not the Highway Traffic Board anymore. And SGI 
receives accident reports, and that’s not what the Highway 
Traffic Board is going to be responsible for. And also SGI has 
the authority to restrict or permit snowmobile use for safety 
concerns, and that’s no longer the Highway Traffic Board’s 
responsibility. 
 
And so also previously for municipal bylaws, they needed to be 
approved by the Highway Traffic Board to become enforceable. 
So that would be if someone was looking for authorization to 
operate snowmobiles on any highway or portion of a highway, 
then that needed to be approached to the Highway Traffic 
Board. But now they’re saying because of the changes within 
this Act, people will now need to contact SGI to get permission 
for that. 
 
And so I’m wondering with regards to the changes of this, I 
know some of this has been happening for a while now and so 
it’s been already fully implemented. But with regards to 
reducing the Highway Traffic Board duties, has that meant that 
there has been less staffing there, or have there been just a 
change of duties? I’m not quite sure what the consequences of 
that are. Or how much more is SGI needing to manage, and 
how are they adjusting to this change? And is this something 
that required to have more staff involved to manage, or has this 
had a financial implication? So I think those would be really 



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

some good questions to ask once the critic gets an opportunity 
to sit down with the minister and talk about some of the 
consequences or possible effects of these changes. 
 
So also there were some updates to definitions. So updates to 
definition of “snowmobile” and update to the definition of 
“licence plates.” And so “snowmobile,” apparently changing 
the definition in this Act will now conform with current 
standards of the definition of “snowmobile.” And so having to 
make that updated, that’s important. And then “licence plates” 
too. If people are getting a permit for their snowmobile, they 
don’t need to have their licence plate in view. They just need to 
ensure that they have their permit available. 
 
And then also SGI has changed from instead of having your 
expiry sticker on your licence plate to indicate that it’s current 
and up-to-date, people no longer do that anymore, Mr. Speaker. 
And so again that’s another change that was needed to be made 
with regards to this Act just to get it back up to date to what our 
current policies are with regards to licensing our motorized 
vehicles. 
 
And so again, Mr. Speaker, I believe that all the changes with 
regards to this Act are really housekeeping. There’s some, a lot, 
some questions that need to be asked by the critic, and I’m sure 
my colleagues will have a lot more that they want to add to the 
discussion with regards to changes to this bill. But for now I’m 
going to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 91. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 91. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 92 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
adjourned debates on Bill 92, The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017. I understand that 
this bill undertakes to increase the debt limit for SaskTel from 
$1.3 billion to $1.8 billion and that this is the only change being 
proposed in this bill. 
 
When the minister gave his second reading on this bill, he 
talked about the fact that this amount has been unchanged since 
1991, arguing that the current borrowing limit no longer allows 
the flexibility that SaskTel needs to grow and respond to future 
financial demands on their business activities and investments. 
 
The minister went on to note that SaskTel is currently in the 
first year of a five-year capital investment plan. It calls for the 
corporation to invest 1.4 billion over four years; therefore the 

predicted debt is scheduled to exceed the $1.3 billion debt limit 
that is in current legislation. Some of these plans include 
increasing wireless capabilities, developing a 5G network, and 
other technological changes. The minister argues that SaskTel 
has a robust financial health that will allow it to support up to 
1.8 billion of total debt and that authorizing this change is the 
prudent choice for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Athabasca also had a chance to 
weigh in on the debates of this bill. He aptly pointed out that by 
passing this legislation we are allowing SaskTel to add another 
half billion dollars in debt. This questions their long-term 
viability, Mr. Speaker. I wonder about the exact investments of 
capital that are being made here, what these projects are, and 
what the impact of the extra debt will be to SaskTel. 
 
I see a trend here, Mr. Speaker, where the province is going 
deeper into debt, and the Crown corporations and municipalities 
are going deeper into debt. People of this province are paying 
more for their provincial sales tax and are paying PST 
[provincial sales tax] on more things. Everyone is paying more, 
Mr. Speaker. And we can trace much of this back to the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement through a period of record revenue. 
 
I think innovation and being leaders in the market is important, 
Mr. Speaker, and the work SaskTel is doing with fibre Internet 
is commendable, but we need to be concerned about the bottom 
line. The answer cannot keep being, let’s add more debt. That’s 
not sustainable. If we keep indebting our Crown corporations, it 
sets the Sask Party government up to say this Crown is not 
viable and to sell it off in the future. And we know what the 
consequences of that would be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel provides an important service to this province, bringing 
services across the province that for-profit business would not 
necessarily be investing in. It seems like it might be a small 
change to allow for existing capital projects, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think we need to be careful and diligent about the direction that 
these changes move us in. 
 
When the minister proposing these changes is the same minister 
that was put in charge of scrapping STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], that raises some questions about why 
these changes are being proposed, Mr. Speaker, and whether 
they protect the best interests of this cherished Crown. 
 
This past summer when I was door knocking, I heard from 
person after person that they value SaskTel and the work it does 
for this province, bringing in revenue, providing good-quality, 
mortgage-paying jobs, and keeping rates low for our services. 
The people of this province are not interested in the full or 
partial sale of this Crown, so I suggest that if that is any part of 
a long-term goal, that the Sask Party reassess this plan. The 
people won’t stand for it. So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the 
minister proceeds with caution in adding more debt to this 
Crown. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
92, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 92. Is it the pleasure of the 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3125 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[19:30] 
 

Bill No. 93 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 93 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill 93, The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
Identically to Bill 92, this bill proposes to increase the debt 
limit for SaskTel from $1.3 billion to $1.8 billion. Together 
these two bills refer to the aggregate borrowing limit between 
SaskTel and SaskTel Holdco’s borrowing limit. So we are 
talking about amending both Acts here to reflect these changes. 
 
In the minister’s second reading of this bill, he cites that he is 
proposing this legislation for the same reasons he provided as 
justification in proposing Bill 92. He argues that these changes 
are essential to ensuring that SaskTel can continue to grow and 
maintain the flexibility it needs to adjust to the changing market 
conditions today and in the future. 
 
Again, we would be interested in seeing some of these cost 
breakdowns, Mr. Speaker, knowing some of the details of these 
projects. And I think it’s crucially important that we keep in 
mind the overall financial heath of this Crown Corporation, 
ensuring its continued viability in the future. Adding a half 
billion dollars to SaskTel and SaskTel Holding Corporation’s 
aggregate debt is a lot of money. 
 
I think innovation and leadership are important, so I understand 
the necessity for capital investments. But I also think we need 
to be careful about adding more debt and this government’s 
trend of adding more debt and hoping that will solve our 
problems. People of this province have been loud and clear in 
their statements that they do not want SaskTel sold off, so we 
need to keep ensuring this Crown is in good financial condition 
because selling it off is not an option. And it is a concern I have 
with these proposed changes, Mr. Speaker, that this is the 
direction we could be moving in, and that’s what it points to. 
 
We need to be cautious and keep SaskTel strong so we can keep 
these good-paying jobs in our province, keep servicing remote 
communities, keep these revenues coming into our provincial 
coffers, and to keep our rates low. We need to be cautious. With 
that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 93, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 93. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise tonight on Bill No. 94 and rise to the debate on 
Bill No. 94, An Act to suspend Grant Payments pursuant to The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Act. And its short title may be The Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
I point that out just because of some of the people who were 
watching earlier when we were talking about some of the other 
legislation. We’re starting to see now preambles and political 
titles and stuff. And this one just seems to be relatively 
straightforward. And it is one that is relatively straightforward 
because this is something that is a fallout of the 2017-18 budget 
where the Sask Party announced that their Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings would be suspended 
January 1, 2018. 
 
Now for the people at home, what that program was, it provided 
a grant that matched 10 per cent of the subscribers’ RESP — 
registered education savings program or plan — contributions 
up to a maximum of $250 per year. And then the Sask Party 
announced they would cut the grant and no longer will it be 
paid on contributions after December 31st in just a few weeks. 
So this Act allows for that grant program. 
 
So we continue to see the fallout of the government’s 
mismanagement, waste and scandal that continues and I’m sure 
it will continue and continue. You know, and I hear people 
muttering over there about how the debt is out of control. Well 
what can you do? What can you do? Clearly these folks are 
facing choices, but it’s one that they have made themselves 
because of years of record revenue, record revenue, but bad, 
bad management that led to scandal and waste and 
mismanagement. And we’ve seen that over and over and over 
again. 
 
We’ve seen the . . . Well you see members over there with their 
hands over their eyes. They don’t want to be recognized. The 
galleries are not full. I don’t know who they’re hiding from. 
The camera doesn’t pan over there unless they did want to get 
up and speak to this, and actually that would be very interesting. 
But this is one of the many cuts, one of the many cuts to 
Advanced Education that was seen in the Sask Party’s budget. 
 



3126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

You know, and we have seen this over and over again, the cuts 
to advanced education and how that is really short-sighted, that 
it’s one of those things, you know, where we saw last year or 
last spring in the budget, where we saw tax cuts for the wealthy 
and for business. Now we’re dealing with the fallout of that 
because we’re actually walking part of that back. But this will 
make it harder for families to save for their children’s education 
while at the same time they’ve cut over 5 per cent from the 
post-secondary institutions who are now facing cutting services 
for students and increasing fees. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, this is what’s interesting with this cut. Now 
they’re cutting a grant that was matching up to $250 per child 
per year. But the minister does talk about how the Ministry of 
Advanced Education will continue to pay annual administration 
costs of between 400,000 and $600,000 to the Canada education 
savings program to cover transactions that will continue, during 
the suspension, as the education assistance programs. 
 
You know, it’s one of those things that when you do these, you 
set up these programs, there is infrastructure and you just can’t 
walk away from it. But really, when we’re seeing what they are 
walking away from in post-secondary, it is shameful. And it’s 
not what people thought in that last election where this 
government would not put forward a budget, would not come 
clean in terms of what the actual state of affairs were. And they 
said trust me, everything will be fine. And we saw that, in fact, 
it was not fine and they knew that. They knew that. 
 
And so one of the hits was the SAGES [Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings] program. The SAGES 
program, which I remember a few years ago, they were keen to 
get passed before the December 31st deadline. And we were 
willing to work with them, I think, to make sure it worked 
because we knew families were wanting to make that 
contribution if they could before December 31st. It was one of 
those examples where we do work together. But here we have a 
situation where they have made some choices and here are the 
kids and the families, the parents paying the price for their 
wasting and mismanagement. 
 
And again, as I said, this is one that’s hard to see. And as my 
colleague, who just recently won her by-election in Fairview, 
people would be talking about the budget and what the impact 
of that was. And every little bit helps. Every little bit helps so 
that people can save for their children’s education. And I know 
this will be sorely missed, but unfortunately it won’t be a thing 
that they will have a choice over, because this program now is 
suspended. And probably it will be a hard time, it will be a hard 
thing to see it coming back. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, this is an unfortunate fallout of 
a budget, one of the worst in Saskatchewan’s history, but it is 
what it is. And so we’ll have lots of questions in committee on 
this, but tonight I’m going to move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 
Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
looking forward to this one all day — Bill 95, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act. Well it’s 
certainly miscellaneous, Mr. Speaker, but statuesque, I’m not so 
sure about that. 
 
In terms of the meat of this legislation, as is, you know, as is 
sometimes the case with legislation brought forward by 
members opposite, there’s a bit of the good; there’s a bit of the 
bad, and there’s some of the ugly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the good, you know, it’s housekeeping. The 
housekeeping in the legislature, when it comes to legislation, 
comes in the fall, Mr. Speaker, and then, you know, gets 
wrapped up come the spring. But, you know, so there are some 
things in here that are straightforward and fair enough and what 
you’d expect in a miscellaneous statutes repeal and amendment 
Act. But there’s certainly some, you know, good in that. 
 
The bad, of course, Mr. Speaker, is that, you know, that far too 
often this government comes forward with . . . Housekeeping is 
a centrepiece or is a thematic part of their legislative agenda. 
 
The bad verging on the ugly though, Mr. Speaker, is where in 
section 6 they repeal The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act — The 
Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. Now I haven’t been around this 
House forever, Mr. Speaker, though some days it certainly feels 
like it. But in terms of The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, I think 
this was . . . If you’ll cast your mind back, it’s sort of a 
nostalgia piece, Mr. Speaker. It’s like throwback Thursday 
comes early. 
 
I don’t know if this is like the capstone on the Premier’s legacy 
or what they’re looking to do here, but certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve been around long enough to have been there for what was 
colloquially referred to as the wallpaper. I should probably 
apologize and withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly when the member from Swift Current, you know, 
was a shiny new Opposition Leader and came forward with his 
blueprint for growth or plan for growth or whatever, I don’t 
know, and you know, there was some interesting ideas in it for 
sure, Mr. Speaker. But I forget precisely how this got put, but it 
was something like the North Star of this growth plan, or the 
centrepiece that we’ll be nailing to our masthead for economic 
liberation or something far-flown like that, Mr. Speaker, was 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. 
 
And Enterprise Saskatchewan was going to take over the 
entirety of economic development in this province. It was going 
to get government out of the business of picking winners and 
losers. Enterprise Saskatchewan, being what it was, you know, 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3127 

we thought, well maybe there will be some nifty uniforms that 
come along with it. I’ve always been more of a Star Wars 
watcher, Mr. Speaker, but you know, it does beg the mind if 
there is a bit of a Star Trek theme going on there. 
 
But in terms of The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, like, oh boy. 
You know, after the 2007 election there was the 100 promises 
made and 100 promises kept. That was like right near the top, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if it was the top five or how that 
worked but, you know, Enterprise Saskatchewan, there it was. It 
was this whole new way of doing economic development in 
Saskatchewan. It was going to set us all free, Mr. Speaker. Just 
send your box tops in or something. 
 
Anyway, Enterprise Saskatchewan, you know, one of the sad 
things about Enterprise Saskatchewan was that there was some 
very good work being done out across the province in terms of 
the regional economic development authorities. Or I recall the 
good work being done on the part of the Labour Market 
Commission. But no, no, let’s roll that all into this shiny new 
venture called The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would look back through the years, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d look back 10 years. And you know, so much time 
has flown past, that the individual that I’m about to quote has 
since gone on to have been awarded a Lifetime Achievement 
Award by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce for 
business journalism, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking about Mr. Bruce 
Johnstone. Does that ring any bells? There we go. And well it 
should you know — smart guy, had a lot on the ball.  
 
But in 2007 Bruce Johnstone wrote for the Leader-Post stating, 
“Enterprise Saskatchewan Premier-elect Brad Wall’s vision of 
how to manage the province’s economic development could be 
the biggest achievement of his administration, or it could be his 
biggest flop.” 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. They say history’s a hanging judge. 
But I’m not sure who’s up on the docket for that one because, 
well it’s not even . . . It didn’t take 10 years to get to the point 
where they wrapped up Enterprise Saskatchewan in fact. But 
you know here we are cleaning up the last of it, putting the 
enterprise into dry dock or whatever they’re going to chop it 
down for parts. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act is one 
of the things up for repeal in this. And certainly I think that’d 
probably count for both the bad and the ugly, you know, both 
those categories all at once, Mr. Speaker, a bit of a double 
threat. But again, Mr. Speaker, what they go sliding into a 
miscellaneous statutes piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, always 
interesting to see. 
 
But it does, it does serve as a good reminder that there is a lot of 
sizzle being sold, Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago. And where’s that 
sizzle today? It’s getting repealed, Mr. Speaker. It’s getting 
repealed. And don’t just take my word for it. You’re losing, yes, 
section no. 6, part 1, Bill 95, I don’t know if it’s the night they 
drove old Dixie down, that amendment in this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, or what the deal is. But there it goes, Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. It was but a comet, you know, driving through 

the nighttime sky, Mr. Speaker, and it came and went, but too 
quickly. 
 
Anyway they spent a bunch of time and a bunch of people’s 
effort and a bunch of people’s money, you know, screwing up 
some things that were . . . You know as the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition was wont to say, Mr. Speaker, you know you 
got a lot of good things going here in this province; just don’t 
screw it up. And you know arguably, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
the misadventure and the colossal waste of time and energy that 
Enterprise Saskatchewan was when there were some perfectly 
great things going on in the sector in terms of economic 
development and the regional economic development 
authorities and certainly through the Labour Market 
Commission, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t miss the mark by an 
inch, they missed it by a country mile on that one. And here we 
are 10 years on. 
 
So I’d be interested in . . . I don’t think Bruce Johnstone 
addressed it in his Lifetime Achievement Award at the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce in terms of, you know, 
his demonstrating his powers of prognostication. But was it the 
Premier’s greatest achievement or was it his greatest flop? Well 
I think the jury’s out on the other side of that equation as well. 
There are some other flops flopping along, Mr. Speaker, so 
we’ll see where those come out at. So it’s early days for that 
kind of assessment, but in terms of a flop, Mr. Speaker, pretty 
plain, pretty plain what category this one rolls into. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly some other bills up 
for repeal. And again the Deputy Premier, in introducing this 
legislation, talked about the stamp Act. And you know, I don’t 
know if that was contemporaneous with the Boston Tea Party or 
whatever, so the jokes that like to get told about the reign of the 
Deputy Premier, but that one certainly goes back, back a ways, 
Mr. Speaker. The Lord’s day repeal Act, I mean, again, fair 
ball. Oh there it is, The Trading Stamp Act, you know, yet 
another blow struck for legislative excellence I guess. I don’t 
know how you would say that in lean talk I’d add 
parenthetically, but I’m sure there’s a way to, you know, talk 
about the muda. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think the point is clear. In terms of 
some of the bills up for repeal under this legislation, fair 
enough. But you know, I’m often struck by the notion that 
there’s never any shortage of irony in politics. And in terms of 
here we are 10 years on after all this sort of, you know, hype 
and parade that went into the rolling out of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan, and again, you know, where the enterprise come 
to rest, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, but there’s a scrapyard out 
there some place for sure that’s getting a new rocket thruster off 
that sucker, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of other legislation or other aspects of this piece of 
legislation, it does bring to mind some other aspects of the 
various deeds and misdeeds of this government. But certainly 
there’s a section, in section 22 that deals with The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Act and an amendment there too. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of some of the more spiteful and 
senseless work on the part of this government, Mr. Speaker, for 
something that was working well for the people of 
Saskatchewan that added value, that diversified our economy, 
Mr. Speaker, that gave a tremendous opportunity for a lot of 



3128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

very talented people to tell stories in Saskatchewan, of 
Saskatchewan, to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and then 
get set up in some kind of phony-baloney equivalency in terms 
of, oh well, you’ve got to have the . . . either be doing this, or 
it’s got to be, or we can’t afford Creative Saskatchewan. Well 
you know, fiddlesticks to that, I say, Mr. Speaker. Baloney. 
 
So again in terms of The Film Employment Tax Credit Act, you 
know, I live in hope that one of the . . . You know, they’re sort 
of doing a salvage job on certain aspects of, you know, the 
record that it’s gone before in terms of their leadership, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
And one of the things that’s interesting, the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest has hit upon this idea to sue the federal 
government for fair treatment of our resource revenues. And 
again, you know, we saw a bit of a song and dance earlier from 
the Premier in terms of that and, you know, what we got from 
the Conservative government was really so much better than . . . 
You know, it’s like listening to somebody come home and 
describe their pile of magic beans they got. You know, it’s like, 
these certainly are some fine magic beans that I got in return for 
swapping the lawsuit, or that all these other things that he was 
listing off, Mr. Speaker, somehow wouldn’t happen in the 
province of Saskatchewan but for us dropping the lawsuit and 
standing up for fairness and for fair treatment of the resources 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s kind of rich. 
 
But you know, so they’re salvaging that aspect of what’s gone 
before so, you know, I do live in hope that maybe someone 
would pick this up as an idea that, you know, when they talk 
about diversifying Saskatchewan’s economy, when they talk 
about adding value, when they talk about the importance of the 
Saskatchewan story, you know, here’s an idea: film 
employment tax credit. 
 
You know, like Abbie Hoffman used to have a little something 
called, or a book entitled Steal This Book. So you know, feel 
free to take this idea, Mr. Speaker. Make it happen because it 
worked well. It’s working well in other jurisdictions, Mr. 
Speaker, adding value and diversifying their economies. And 
again, that decision was made, you know, never made sense in 
terms of just the, you know . . . You got beyond the spite. You 
got beyond the senselessness. There wasn’t much to wrap your 
head around in terms of that decision, Mr. Speaker. So you 
know, we live in hope, Mr. Speaker, that this government might 
own up to some of the things they got wrong and make it right. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at even greater length, you 
know. I wouldn’t have to give stardate or anything like that. But 
you sort of feel kind of humbled in your place in the universe 
when you happen upon a debate like this, where something that 
was given such a hype job and given such a promotional, you 
know, tour de force, unbelievable the amount of effort that the 
Premier put into it, and again it was going to be nailed to the 
masthead of this government and on and on. And here it is 
headed for the scrap heap, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to that we say, you know, good riddance. Would but that we 
hadn’t had the government waste so much time, effort and 
resource in the way that they’d gone after that bill in the first 
place, and instead worked with the things that were succeeding 
out across the province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the great work 

being done in our regional economic development authorities 
and again in the Labour Market Commission. What a shame in 
some ways, Mr. Speaker. What a shame. 
 
But with that, I know that other of my colleagues will certainly 
have more to add to this debate. So, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 95, An Act to repeal and amend 
miscellaneous Statutes and make consequential amendments to 
certain Statutes. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 95. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 96 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 96 — The Choice 
of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) 
Act/Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la 
Convention de La Haye) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
tonight to enter into debate on Bill No. 96, An Act respecting 
the Application to Saskatchewan of the Hague Convention on 
Choice of Court Agreements. And we see before it the table of 
contents, and then it’s actually a fairly short piece of legislation. 
And the title, the short title, is the Act may be cited as The 
Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act. And the minister gave some description 
about this, talking about how this is part of the uniform law 
work that’s been done. And actually it seems like a reasonable 
piece of legislation in terms of the fact that we are an exporting 
province and we do import some materials as well, and so it’s 
critical that we do have uniform legal frameworks out there. 
And this is just one of the pieces to make it so. And it seems to 
be odd that we haven’t had this before. 
 
It was designed to offer greater certainty for those involved in 
business contracts and international litigation. And of course 
that is something you find yourself more and more involved in 
because if you do business around the world there is the 
possibility, the possibility increases that you will, in fact, find 
yourself in litigation. And Ontario apparently has this rule 
already. A similar law was passed in March 2017. So I assume 
that it will be coming more and more commonplace throughout 
the country and throughout the world. 
 
And so I’ll take a minute and just reflect on the minister’s 
comments that he made. And that was back just a few short day 
. . . In fact it looks like less than a week ago, last Tuesday. And 
he was talking about how this provides for an implementation 
of the Convention on Choice of Court Agreements which is 
really, really important, and provides support for choices of 
court provisions in international contracts which will help 
prevent litigation in multiple jurisdictions. And this often can 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3129 

happen where, you know, you’re using different partners. 
You’re selling to one country from our province so you may be 
using an international shipper, and even the ports of entry might 
be in a different country. So there is an opportunity for many, 
many jurisdictions to be involved. And so it’s very important to 
get this set up. 
 
So I’ll just sort of highlight this for the folks at home who may 
be watching, the key provisions of the Hague Convention. This 
is what the minister was talking about last week, and I quote: 
 

Firstly, a choice of court agreement must be respected by 
the courts of a contracting state unless the contract in 
dispute is null and void under the laws of that contracting 
state. That is article no. 5. 

 
[20:00] 
 
So that makes sense because some states don’t recognize others 
and that’s important. You have to have, you know, a court 
system, a judicial system that is respected and has credibility 
around the world and is seen to be subscribing to the basic 
tenets of the rule of law. 
 

Secondly, any court not chosen must decline to hear the 
case or suspend or dismiss proceedings unless limited 
exceptions apply, which is [then] found in article 6. 

 
So in that it sounds relatively . . . What’s the point of that? Well 
you might find yourself . . . You know, it’s interesting. While 
we’re in a time where emails fly around the world in seconds, 
sometimes things can happen at a much slower pace. And you 
find yourself that actually court proceedings have already 
started in a country that you thought, well what does that have 
. . . Why is that happening? And so it’s really important that this 
Hague Convention says where it’s going to happen and that 
means where it’s not going to happen. And so this does make a 
lot of sense. 
 

Thirdly, any judgment made by a designated court must be 
recognized and enforced in other contracting states except 
in very limited circumstances . . . 

 
And there’s always those exceptions to the rule. But of course 
what they’re really saying is that it must be a recognized court 
and be enforced in other contracting states. So, you know, you 
could get a court in one country where other countries simply 
just don’t recognize it, and that’s not helpful at all. 
 

Fourthly, the parties to the contract retain contractual 
freedom regarding the application of the convention to 
their contract. 

 
And so that seems to make sense. And he talks about how the 
Government of Ontario has implemented a similar legislation, 
and the federal government is recommending the passage to 
other provinces to facilitate Canada’s accession to the 
convention, which is really important. 
 
So this is important. The minister goes on, says this “. . . aims to 
save time and expenses, both at the outset of proceedings, when 
jurisdictional disputes . . . [often] arise, and after a judgment is 
given, when parties seek to enforce a judgment abroad.” And I 

assume that this will be something where you have appeals as 
well. 
 
And so this is critical, as we become more and more of an 
exporting province, that we find ourselves a partner on the 
world stage. And I think I’ve talked a little bit about how 
Myanmar is a good example in terms of the human rights, that a 
few short years ago they weren’t even allowed by Canadian 
federal law to be trade partners, but now they are and we find 
that we are selling a lot of peas there. 
 
And our people are pretty . . . I won’t say . . . well aggressive in 
a good way, assertive, that they’re out there looking for 
markets. Because that’s what you do when you’re out selling 
the good products of Saskatchewan. You want to make sure if 
there’s markets developing, let’s get known there. 
 
But first of all let’s make sure that we’re setting up a good 
framework so that our base here in Saskatchewan, whether it be 
farmers who are growing peas or others who are in the 
implement industry, manufacturing industry, all can rest assured 
that agreements that they have signed with countries or states 
around the world, that there are processes and protocols in 
place, which means first of all the Hague Convention which is 
an important convention. And that will solve a lot of problems 
along the way. And our business community, our agriculture 
community can do what they do best, and that is grow and raise 
the products they do, manufacture the products they do. 
 
And our export experts with the Ministry of Justice can provide 
the strong advice that they rely on, that they count on, about 
what would happen when things might go wrong. And of course 
we know in business that does happen. Unfortunately it happens 
too much, and when it happens internationally it has huge 
implications for everyone. And we just don’t want to see that. 
We want to see that we can be well prepared, that contracts are 
solid, that they are enforceable, that if they need to go to court, 
that that court will be respected by other states and be 
enforceable, and that people won’t be caught, won’t be caught 
off guard. And ignorance in this case is not an excuse. 
 
So I think that there’s a lot of positives that we can . . . in this 
piece of legislation, especially when we talk about uniform law 
reform. We’ve seen many pieces of legislation come forward 
because of that, and I think that’s a good thing that we have 
standardized many of the straightforward pieces of law or 
legislation across Canada so that there is not unusual, unique 
circumstances. Sometimes there has to be because of the 
province, of the federal situation. We understand that. If there is 
a unique circumstance, we have to provide for that. But if not, 
let’s put the best minds across Canada together and make our 
laws as uniform as possible so that there is an ease of doing 
business across Canada. 
 
We see exceptions to that. I mean I think about the housing, the 
situation in housing between Toronto, Ontario, BC [British 
Columbia], and Vancouver, the international pressures there, 
where it’s very different than Saskatchewan. So we have 
different kind of laws that deal with that. But where there are 
similarities, let’s look for that common ground so that we can 
have a better and stronger legislative regime for our exporting 
companies, for our business companies, for our farmers so they 
can do as well as they can. 



3130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, there probably will be many 
questions in committee on this, I’m sure. It’s always interesting 
to find out maybe what the implications are, if there is any 
specific piece of . . . if there was a court case that caused this to 
come forward or maybe not. Maybe it’s just another uniform 
piece of legislation that we’re dealing with. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move adjournment of Bill 96, The Choice of 
Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 96. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege once again to wade into debate tonight, this time on 
Bill 97, An Act to amend The Arbitration Act, 1992. This bill, 
by and large, has to do with family disputes or the breakdown 
of marriage, those kinds of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
Act actually amends multiple Acts. It accompanies the bilingual 
miscellaneous statutes Act, family dispute resolution 
amendment, which I will speak to after this bill. But by and 
large, it sets out the definition for a family arbitrator and family 
law dispute. 
 
So when we think about an arbitrator, an arbitrator is in an 
independent person or a body that’s officially appointed to 
settle a dispute. And I understand that this option isn’t expressly 
laid out to permit arbitrators in family disputes, and it doesn’t 
include revisions to facilitate arbitration in family disputes. It 
isn’t very often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m in 100 per cent 
agreement with the members opposite but I think on the face of 
this is a very positive thing. 
 
I know in our offices and just in life, you have a large number 
of marriages that come to an end and there are various different 
ways of dealing with that process, some of them more forgiving 
both to the dissolving couple and to children. And court is never 
the best option for anybody, Mr. Speaker, I would argue or it’s 
rarely the best option. There are cases, obviously if there is 
abuse or difficulty for couples to even sit in the same room. But 
creating a process by which arbitration is laid out in law is an 
option, I think is a positive thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what this bill does, as I said, it sets out a definition for a 
family arbitrator and family law dispute in the legislation. So an 
arbitrator includes an umpire or a family arbitrator. And a 
family arbitrator in this legislation, it means a person who is 
recognized by the minister as meeting the requirements 

prescribed in the regulations for family arbitrators. I’m curious, 
I don’t know if the regulations have already been drafted for 
this or what that definition will look like in the regulations. That 
will be interesting to find out in committee. 
 
But by and large, I think this is a good direction to go and I 
know this has been a trend. We’ve had legislation before us 
making mediation and collaborative law easier, Mr. Speaker. So 
any legislation that is good for families, even families at their 
very worst moment when the dynamic is changing, trying to 
make that process easier for everybody involved I think is 
positive. 
 
There’s a section that will be added in or that is added in this 
bill that allows for arbitration for family disputes, and there’s 
several acts involved that could involve parts of The Children’s 
Law Act, The Family Maintenance Act, The Family Property 
Act, or the Divorce Act. And as the minister pointed out, there’s 
a trend to divert family disputes to arbitration which is, by and 
large I think, positive. But I know the critic who is responsible 
for this area will have some questions when we get to 
committee. But with that, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 97, the arbitration amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I’m 
pleased to enter the debate, this time for Bill No. 98, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 which goes along nicely with the 
previous Act, The Arbitration Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I had said in the previous bill that there’s not very often 
where I agree wholeheartedly with the minister, but looking at 
his second reading comments he says: 
 

In some cases an out-of-court or early dispute resolution 
mechanism may be more appropriate in resolving family 
disputes, as they can achieve a fast result, be more cost 
effective, and have less of an emotional toll on the parties. 

 
I will give the minister credit. I’m in 100 per cent agreement 
with him on that statement. Generally speaking when it comes 
to court, the only people who usually benefit when something 
goes to court, particularly family law, are the lawyers, Mr. 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3131 

Speaker. It can be long and drawn out and painful for 
everybody involved and often difficult to get to the solution. 
 
And ultimately when you go to court, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
person, the judge making the decision for you only knows so 
much about you and your family dynamic that a lawyer is able 
to present on both sides. It’s a person who obviously is trying to 
make the best decision with the information available, but the 
judge, he or she doesn’t know you or your family or your 
children the best. So in a perfect world . . . putting in place 
those measures to help support families through this process is a 
good thing. 
 
So this particular bill allows for a larger role. There’s multiple 
Acts that need to be amended here. It’s a miscellaneous statutes 
amendment Act. It amends The Children’s Law Act, The Family 
Maintenance Act, The Family Property Act, and The Queen’s 
Bench Act to add provisions to recognize and promote early 
dispute resolution. 
 
[20:15] 
 
One of the things . . . I did notice that the minister pointed out 
that: 
 

Unlike in regular civil actions before the court, parties to a 
family law dispute are not required to participate in 
mandatory mediation. This new process will require the 
parties participate instead in a form of dispute resolution 
. . . [It might] include mediation [he points out], but could 
also be satisfied by using the services of a collaborative 
lawyer, having attempted arbitration, or other forms of 
out-of-court resolution that will be prescribed in the 
regulations. 

 
I’d like to know a little bit more about what will be in those 
regulations. But I just want to flag as a concern that I appreciate 
that there’s multiple forms of dispute resolution. But the reality 
is sometimes when relationships break down, that the couples 
aren’t always in a position to even to sit in the same room as 
each other. Sometimes there is abuse, both or either physical or 
emotional abuse, that makes sitting down and coming to a 
consensus very difficult. So I just want to flag that as a concern 
because you never want to force someone into a situation that 
isn’t tenable for them and can be even more traumatic. So I just 
want to flag that as a concern. 
 
But by and large, I think trying to help put in place processes 
that help people through this difficult time is important. And 
again the only people who benefit, generally speaking, from 
court action, especially in divorce, it’s usually the lawyers. As I 
said, families are the experts in their own experiences, and 
where they can add their knowledge and work together the best 
they can to come up with a solution with supportive parties, 
whether it’s a collaborative lawyer or a mediator or an 
arbitrator, an independent person who has heard all sides of the 
story, that is a positive thing. 
 
This particular bill adds definitions for “family arbitrator” and 
“mediator.” So those definitions are in the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And it outlines the role of the mediator, and evidence . . . This 
is something I didn’t realize actually. I’ve been through the 
mediation process on a couple occasions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the first time a little bit more effectively than the second time. 
But I didn’t realize . . . I know in signing an agreement when 
you enter into mediation, you’re told — I suppose it depends on 
the mediator — but I was told that none of what goes on in that 
mediation can be used in court. But apparently it cannot be used 
in court proceedings without consent from all parties being 
given. 
 
So I don’t know if that is a good thing. It opens up the 
opportunity to be free with your concerns and your . . . I think, 
without prejudice, being able to speak openly and hash it out in 
mediation without prejudice is a good thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Again anything that makes a difficult time in people’s lives, 
particularly children, but when parents aren’t doing well, you 
always have to remember children live in the context of their 
family and it’s not just about children struggling. If parents are 
struggling, children are usually struggling and experiencing the 
trauma and the sadness and all the various emotions that can 
come with the breakup of a relationship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I appreciate this government’s efforts in making some of 
these changes to ensure that mediation, arbitration, all those 
alternate dispute mechanisms can be more easily utilized. But 
again just flagging that there can be concerns at times where 
couples because of abuse can’t always use that, so I guess that’s 
the reason we have courts, Mr. Speaker. But I look forward to 
hearing a little bit more in committee around what some of 
those regulations will look like. But with that I will leave that 
up to the critic, and for the moment I would like to move to 
adjourn debate to Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to enter into Bill No. 99, An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 this debate. And it’s an odd one; it’s a 
very short one, just one page with three sections.  
 
It came in with a lot of fanfare before the Throne Speech. And I 
think it was a tweet that the Premier had . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well Facebook Live, talking about how the 
Premier had heard from the people of Saskatchewan over the 
summer and heard them loud and clear about privatization and 
how they were going to take a step back from Bill 40. And it 



3132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

was really interesting because a lot of people had placed a lot of 
hope in that comment, that announcement that we were going to 
see something quite amazing, that maybe, maybe the Sask Party 
had seen the light of day truly. And truly they had not.  
 
But this had been yet another one of the Premier’s trademark 
grandstand events where he would say one thing but mean 
something entirely different. And a lot of people really had high 
hopes for that because we had seen a summer . . . And 
particularly with STC, where that was the first victim. Well it 
wasn’t the first victim because we’ve seen ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We’ve seen other 
privatization that was done, but not to the extent that this 
government had really all of a sudden changed its tune, its 
signal with Bill 40 when they said that they would sell off . . . 
privatization would allow them to sell up to 49 per cent of the 
shares. 
 
And it was interesting, as we found out in committee, that this 
was some definition they had taken from the World Bank after 
the collapse of the Soviet Union and how they were dealing 
with many of the Soviet crowns, if you could call them that, the 
Soviet publicly owned enterprises. And clearly a different kind 
of world than we were living in. 
 
And why this was all . . . Bill 40, why was it needed? It caused 
a lot of people a lot of concern. They were very, very worried 
about that. And the public rose up, and rightfully so. They were 
deeply, deeply concerned about what the government was really 
saying. 
 
They felt betrayed by this government in the election of April 
2016 where this government refused, refused to share the actual 
state of affairs of the finances of this province. Could’ve run on 
a budget. Could’ve run on, you know, what the actual state of 
affairs were, but chose not to. Chose not to, and in fact 
preferred to duck any tough questions about that, saying simply 
that it was too difficult for them to get a handle on the situation, 
the financial situation here in Saskatchewan, and that people 
would just have to trust them. 
 
And boy, did people feel betrayed by this government, by this 
Premier who clearly, who clearly knew the state of affairs, and 
clearly had another plan of how they were going to approach 
solving this problem that they themselves had created by waste 
and mismanagement and scandal. 
 
And while some over there think it’s a kind of a funny joke, it 
really isn’t. People are paying for it in the schools, in their 
schools. Today we had questions about how each child in our 
school has seen their funding cut by over $600 because of what 
this government has done. And so how are they going to do 
about this? And of course one of the things that they were going 
to do, in one of their sly ways, was to take a look at the Crowns 
and what can they do about that. 
 
Now it was interesting that the minister in charge of STC, who 
has — I mean it’s ironic because we’ve talked about the fox 
guarding the henhouse — himself, who actually has, you know, 
quite a unique approach to transportation. He’s a car salesman, 
and he thinks that’s probably a good way to get around, and I 
understand that. 
 

But STC meant an awful lot to a lot of people, and particularly 
as we head into these winter months and as Christmas is coming 
up and people who used to be able to go home for Christmas or 
travel to see their grandchildren or their children won’t have 
that luxury this Christmas. Christmas will be very different for 
many people here in Saskatchewan. And we worried about the 
impact of that, and many people did.  
 
And so this bill, this Bill 99 that we have before us, many 
people felt was going to help remedy that, that truly maybe this 
government had actually heard the people. But clearly they 
didn’t hear the people because to them STC was as much a 
privatization as anything else because, at the end of the day, we 
see companies picking up the routes. We see other companies 
picking up the buses. And we see companies . . . We see the 
city of Regina actually picking up, I think, the bus depot here. I 
don’t know if that was in the news. But I’m not sure what’s 
happening in Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about 
privatization and we see that this government in committee last 
year tried to be as cute as possible on the answer about, did they 
need to have this winding up and dissolution remain. And it’s 
interesting because they cut the other six parts of what privatize 
means: 
 

a public share offering;  
 
a sale of shares through a negotiated or competitive bid;  
 
a sale of the assets and business of the Crown corporation 
as a going concern [I suppose they would say that STC 
wasn’t a going concern];  
 
a management or employee buyout of the Crown 
corporation;  
 
a lease or management contract;  
 
any other method prescribed in the regulations. 

 
But they kept the next one, and that is privatization “. . . does 
not include a winding-up and dissolution of the Crown 
corporation . . .” 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we asked in committee, and I 
asked several times about this in committee, about why they 
needed that to be there if they felt that it wasn’t privatization, 
that what was the point. What were they trying to shield 
themselves from in this legislation? Because if they were so 
sure that a winding up of any corporation was not privatization, 
why did they have to articulate it to make that point? What were 
they protecting themselves from and, you know, what was the 
point? And they could not really answer. 
 
And so I’m going to read some of the comments from April 
25th, 2017 where I asked, and I quote, this is on page . . . I can’t 
tell you the page right off. This would be page 222 where I 
asked, “Did you need Bill 40 to pass? It seems the members on 
the committee, some members feel from the government side 
that [it] has to pass . . . for the windup of STC.” 
 
And Mr. Kosloski couldn’t give a straight answer. And he goes 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3133 

on, “So there are provisions in The Crown Corporations Act to 
wind down and dissolve . . . presently. This provision certainly 
clarifies that with respect to the position of STC.” 
 
And I say, “Can you tell me which section specifically speaks 
to winding up? The language is up, not down, and so winding 
up . . . [constitutions].”  
 
And Mr. Kosloski says, “Section 13.” 
 
Okay, “And that’s not The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act . . . Okay, so it’s a different one. But that Act 
has been passed, right? So this is a clarification.” So we’ve been 
talking a lot but “There’s nothing in that Act that is a barrier to 
STC being wound up.”  
 
Mr. Kosloski says, “That’s correct.” 
 
So I say, “That’s correct. So this Bill 40 . . .” This is my third 
try. “So this Bill 40 does not need to pass for the government of 
the day to wind up STC. Is that right? Am I understanding you? 
Is that correct?” 
 
[20:30] 
 
Well Mr. Kosloski says, “Well it certainly provides clarity with 
respect to STC and the provision that a privatization does not 
include a windup. It certainly clarifies any doubts about that.” 
 
And I asked him, “In what section are you referring to?” And 
Mr. Kosloski says, “I’m sorry?”  
 
And I try again. This is my fifth, fifth try: “What section of The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act are you referring to 
that needs clarification?” 
 
“It’s the definition of privatization that’s being clarified.” 
 
“My question was, what section of The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act are you referring to?”  
 
And he goes, well, it’s throughout the Act. 
 
So I go on to my seventh try: “I’m asking for a clarification 
around winding up in The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act that has been passed . . . I’m asking you to be 
more clear . . .”  
 
And Mr. Kosloski says, “I didn’t say there was a barrier. I said 
this provides additional clarity.” 
 
So my eighth try, my eighth try: “And where is that problem in 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act? 
 
“Definition of privatization.”  
 
“I’m asking you to give me the section and number that causes 
the problem.” 
 
So he really couldn’t really talk about winding up. He would 
always go back to privatization. Ten times I tried to get a 
straight answer from that guy. Now I’m concerned that we’re 
still in the same place, that these folks are still working this 

through, that they’ll wind things up. I mean, isn’t that a cute 
way of doing it? They don’t have to say it’s a going concern. 
They just say, hey we’re shutting it down and we’re selling it 
off; that’s not privatization. It is. It is, and everybody knows it 
is. And that’s what they were concerned about and the people 
over there refuse to understand that. They refuse to understand 
that. 
 
What was once STC is now a series of different buses driving 
around. Well that’s privatization. The people know that. They 
know that it used to be a public service and now it’s a private 
one. It used to be one that we could count on in the government, 
and now we can’t. Now they had a cute way of going through, 
oh we wound it up, and it wasn’t . . . And so therefore it was 
done and we can sell off the remains. It was dead. Well it 
wasn’t dead. It wasn’t dead. STC wasn’t dead, and we’re 
worried about what this means for the other Crowns. So people 
are not resting easy. 
 
And this Premier is certainly, as we get into the final days, the 
final days . . . We just had our . . . I have to say the discussion 
about Enterprise Saskatchewan was a very interesting one 
because as we get into the final days of this Premier, he’s 
changing his tune on Bill 40, but not really. To me it’s the same 
sort of thing.  
 
And we saw Enterprise Saskatchewan; the only thing I would 
add is about the disappearing ink that we’ve seen. He’s got 
folks . . . [inaudible] . . . have not resolved in terms of their 
emails. We still have a lot of issues about what will happen 
when this government actually goes, and all these records have 
all of a sudden disappeared because of faulty tapes. It just 
seems like in this day and age, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, it has. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a lot of concerns. And 
while this bill may seem to be very small, it has loaded . . . It is 
fraught, fraught with meaning. And when we get back into 
committee, if it’s the same legal team that we had before us on 
April 25th, 2017, they can expect a lot of questions about why 
winding up is still part of the record, and why the whole thing 
wasn’t repealed, and why we aren’t going back and . . . 
 
You know, I mean, it’s interesting. This government will often 
say, we will recognize when we make a mistake and we will set 
the record straight and we’ll do the right thing. But boy with 
STC, that was not the case. And the film tax credit, that was not 
the case, you know. And Enterprise Saskatchewan, you just let 
that fade, you know. 
 
This will be the interesting thing, as my colleague talked about, 
you know, the flops that have happened by this government, the 
flops that have happened. And we’ve really seen a change in 
this province. And which will be the number . . . You know, 
how we rank them from the worst impact, I tell you STC is 
going to be one that we remember. 
 
And we’ll see, we’ll see what the new leadership over there 
says and what they mean and what their beliefs are around 
privatization of the Crowns, and is this just another way to get 
around the legislation. But unfortunately, I think people are on 
to them. They really blew through the social trust account in the 
last election where they really didn’t come clean with the 



3134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

people of Saskatchewan with the state of affairs. They could not 
tell the people what was the actual state of affairs, or they 
refused to tell the people. It wasn’t that they couldn’t tell; they 
refused to tell the people what actually was the state of affairs 
here in Saskatchewan. And I think people are sorry that that 
happened. We are getting emails to that effect. People who 
never belonged to a political party are now signing up because 
of what has happened in the last few months. 
 
And whether you take the Regina bypass that grew from $400 
million — and the Premier will say it’s a billion, but it’s 
actually 2 billion — and of course the whole GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal that continues to fester and we get 
no answers, not even in terms of the lawsuits, which I think is a 
basic . . . We don’t need to know the individual settlements at 
this point — but at some point, probably — but even just an 
overall global number of how much are they spending on 
lawsuits to defend the GTH and the Regina bypass? This is 
something is concerning. 
 
So this bill does not cut it even though people had high hopes 
leading into the Throne Speech. And here we are in the dying 
weeks of the fall session, and people had expected so much, so 
much more, and this is what they’ve got. And so with that, I 
would move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, An Act to 
amend The Interpretation Act, 1995. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Well it’s certainly a pleasure to join debate tonight on the 
second reading of The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I’m not a lawyer. I should confess that 
right off the bat. But you know, I’ve got some very good friends 
who are lawyers, and one of the things that they say is that one 
of the most thrilling and engaging classes that they take on the 
way to their law degree is contract law. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, you know, that sort of sets you up with some high 
expectations in terms of the thrill-a-minute ride that a piece of 
legislation like Bill No. 103 might be. And I was not 
disappointed in this regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
First off, it’s got the seal of Good Housekeeping when it comes 
to legislation in Saskatchewan as having come from the 
recommendations contained in the 2014 Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan report titled Reform of The Land 

Contracts (Actions) Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m sure 
you’ve got that one on your nightstand just like me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But certainly, all joking aside . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I thought I could hear somebody saying, “It’s 
not a scandal” over there, whatever the heck that is. And maybe, 
maybe if the land contract legislation was more clear, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe we’d have a little less cause for people 
shouting things like “It’s not a scandal” in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But certainly, building as it does on the 2014 Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan report, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act does a number of things. First, it’s “. . . consumer 
protection legislation put in place to protect borrowers by 
requiring lenders to obtain leave of the court before starting a 
foreclosure proceeding.” And I’m referring in this case, Mr. 
Speaker, to the second reading speech from the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
I don’t know if he’s slipping or if, you know, he’s not keeping 
up to his predecessor as the minister of Justice in terms of the 
kind of thrilling oratory and rhetoric that you’d expect to be 
brought to bear in a speech like this. But I’ve got to say, not one 
of his better speeches, not one of his better speeches, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And he can give some good ones; I wouldn’t 
take that away from him. But I’m not sure what happened on 
this day. Maybe he’d had a bad sleep. Maybe he had, maybe he 
had got in a fight in caucus. That can happen, lord knows. Here 
we are in the legislature; sometimes politics breaks out. But 
maybe he was worried about the kind of blistering pace set by 
his predecessor, the member from Saskatoon Northwest. It’s 
hard to say what happened with this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the land contracts . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . And now of course, this being such a great debate, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North wants to get in. 
He’s taken a break from hollering over that “It’s not a scandal,” 
what happened with the GTH, and saying something else. And 
you know, I guess it’s nice that he’s mixing it up. This is a 
member that’s well known for, “What are you talking about?” I 
think is one of his catch phrases. And now of course he’s added, 
“It’s not a scandal” to the repertoire. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
we disagree. We couldn’t disagree more. Yes, it’s sort of like 
the Education minister earlier today, you know. One of the 
school boards said it’s not a total disaster, what’s happening out 
in education land. Well you know, I guess you take your solace 
where you can find it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess is how that 
goes. 
 
But certainly in terms of what’s happening with Bill No. 103, 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act being over 70 years old and 
having first been enacted in 1943, Mr. Speaker, in all 
seriousness this is legislation that comes out of the different 
things that happened with foreclosure and the different sort of 
moves that were made on people’s property in the ’30s and 
different of the lessons that we tried to learn as a province out 
of that time. And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there comes a 
time where you need to modernize, where you need to do some 
housekeeping and, you know, yes, respond to the Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan’s report of 2014 in terms of 
straightening out process, in terms of modernizing, and in terms 
of, in this case as well, repealing The Home Owners’ Protection 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3135 

Act in terms of again the minister provides a rationale for that, 
or The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Act. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly be doing our due diligence 
to ensure that it aligns with the fine work done by the Law 
Reform Commission and that perhaps it will straighten out 
process such to the point that the member from Moose Jaw 
North no longer has to protest too much in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, hollering out things like “It’s not a scandal,” when 
plainly something like the GTH is a scandal . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Scandal, scandal, as some might say. Some 
might say scandal, could be a scandal. You say tomato, I say 
tomato, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the fact of the matter of 
course, not a laughing matter. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Anyway with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got colleagues 
more learned than I on this score that I’m sure I’ll be looking 
forward to their intervention on this front. I hear the former 
attorney general urging that it be sent to committee. I think it 
needs to marinate a while longer, I’d caution that member. 
Certainly I do look forward to the interventions of those of my 
colleagues much more learned on these matters than I, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But with that I’d move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter into adjourned debates today on Bill 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. I understand that this 
bill makes the Human Rights Code bilingual and makes several 
changes to the language throughout the Act without changing 
the content of the code. These are changes like changing the 
word “if” to “where” and changing “shall enjoy the right to” to 
“has the right to.” 
 
The Human Rights Code guarantees each of us dignity and 
equality. Because human rights are so important, this code takes 
precedence over other provincial laws. The code protects us 
against discrimination, which we know is any unfair action 
taken against others because they belong to a certain group. It 
can mean denying people benefits or opportunities that are 
necessary for a decent life such as jobs or housing. 
 

This Act is certainly important, so changes should be carefully 
considered. Section 3 states that: 
 

3 The objects of this Act are: 
 

(a) to promote recognition of the inherent dignity and the 
equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human 
family; 

 
(b) to further public policy in Saskatchewan that every 
person is free and equal in dignity and rights and to 
discourage and eliminate discrimination. 

 
The Act outlines our Bill of Rights, the prohibition of certain 
discriminatory practices, administration of the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission, complaints, remedies, and 
enforcement. 
 
I think the changes to make this bill bilingual make good sense. 
I had a chance to review the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission’s annual report for 2016-2017. With respect to 
bilingualism, I note that their vision statement is, “To have all 
Saskatchewan residents understand human rights, value 
diversity, engage in the responsibilities of their citizenship, and 
respect the human rights of others.” 
 
So in terms of being able to understand, I think bilingualism is a 
good step in that direction. So in understanding and public 
education, adding our second official language to the legislation 
makes its more accessible. It helps individuals whose first 
language is not English. 
 
The annual report also cites that 7.8 per cent of total complaints 
relate to other ancestry besides Aboriginals, meaning the 
grounds for the complaint were colour, nationality, place of 
origin, race, and perceived race. They don’t have a breakdown 
for first language on this chart, but it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that a language barrier could exist in some of these complaints. 
One concern that I highlighted in this report was that there were 
444 new complaints to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission in 2016-2017. 
 
If you look at the trend of files opened and closed located in 
table 2 on page 35 of the annual report, you will see that there is 
a concerning trend of more complaints coming to the 
commission. For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2011-2012 
there were 218 files opened and 214 closed, so the cases have 
over doubled since then. 
 
In An Environmental Scan prepared by the office of my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre, they looked at emerging 
issues for human rights in Saskatchewan. The goal was to 
provide an environmental scan outlining the current major 
human rights issues in Saskatchewan or those affecting 
Saskatchewan, from human rights in employment to the human 
rights of the GLBTQ [gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and 
questioning], First Nations and Métis, and new Canadian 
communities. 
 
It identifies some current major issues with regard to human 
rights, including that a vast majority of human rights complaints 
occur in the category of employment. And a recent human 
rights issue relating to employment and immigration is the 



3136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

temporary foreign workers program where individuals are being 
paid less than minimum wage, sometimes charged excessive 
rent prices, and being taken advantage of. 
 
The report also identifies the human rights trends with regards 
to First Nations and Métis rights nationally: the Truth and 
Reconciliation and the 94 calls to action; the impact of the 
Sixties Scoop; missing and murdered indigenous women — and 
we had the inquiry in Saskatoon starting last week — Cindy 
Blackstock’s work which my colleague from 
Elphinstone-Centre was referring to earlier; voter suppression 
and the Fair Elections Act. 
 
Under gender identification and expression there was discussion 
about the 2014 amendment of the Human Rights Code to 
include gender identity as a prohibited ground. With regards to 
new Canadians, it notes the increase in immigration in Western 
Canada in the last few years, an increase of visible minorities. 
 
And I’ll just quote the report here with regards to new 
Canadians: 
 

Of the Western provinces, Saskatchewan has seen the 
largest jump in immigrant-related complaints, from a 
consistent 13% of complaints before 2008 to almost 30% 
in 2008-2009. This number stayed up at approximately 
24% until 2011-2012 when it dropped back down to 11%. 
 
The Human Rights Commission commented on this jump 
in complaints in their 2010-2011 annual report 
“Complaints from new Canadians accounted for one third 
of all complaints filed this year . . . The Commission has 
identified racism in employment as a growing area of 
concern for complaint processing and as a topic on which 
to focus public awareness.” 
 

The report also looked at individuals with disabilities, privacy 
issues, issues around sexual orientation, women’s issues, and 
external human rights initiatives. It concludes that Canada has 
changed, and this has implications for human rights in our 
country. 
 
It also concludes by indicating that Saskatchewan has a long 
history of leadership in human rights, and I think this is 
important to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Saskatchewan Bill 
of Rights was passed in 1947. That was a year before the UN 
[United Nations] adopted the United Nations declaration of 
human rights, and it was the first of its kind in North America. 
 
Despite this history, human rights issues are not a thing of the 
past. New concerns continue to emerge daily, Mr. Speaker, and 
we need to remain vigilant. And the people of Saskatchewan 
have already seen evidence of the Sask Party not acting in the 
best interests of working people in this province, so we need to 
be careful. 
 
In January of 2015, a Supreme Court of Canada ruling decided 
that the right to strike is a fundamental right in Canada. This 
ruling came about because of the Saskatchewan case that was 
brought forward by public sector unions challenging a law that 
was passed in 2008 by this government that limited the right to 
strike by workers deemed by government to be essential 
services. We saw the direction this government tried to take our 

human rights, and folks remain skeptical as a result. 
 
So I provide details in this report to read them into the record 
and to highlight how crucial it is to get these issues right. We 
are talking about the people of this province, and our 
rights-based framework has been an important driver in shaping 
our framework for how we view society around us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister gave his second reading speech, 
he spoke about the purpose of the Act and how this bill will 
repeal and replace the existing Act with bilingual legislation. 
He cited the fact that over the last 30 years, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has enacted 58 bilingual Acts designed to meet 
the needs of Saskatchewan’s francophone community. 
 
My colleague from Athabasca also entered into this debate. He 
spoke about the importance of this Act, the increasing number 
of complaints coming forward that have increased under the 
Sask Party’s watch. I’ll echo my colleague from Athabasca’s 
concerns about the growing number of complaints over time 
and the growing number of complaints that are dismissed. 
These are concerning trends, and we will certainly continue to 
work with the commissioner and remain engaged in the 
incredibly important issues of human rights in this province. I 
know my colleagues will have more to say on this bill, but with 
that I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill 105, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. This bill 
proposes to amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act as a 
result of Bill 104, which we just spoke about, the Human Rights 
Code, 2017. The sections of the employment Act that refer to 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code will now say the 
Human Rights Code, 2017.  
 
When the minister gave second reading on this bill, he 
identified that it accompanies The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code, 2017 and makes consequential amendments to the 
Saskatchewan employment code as a result. Since The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is being replaced by a 
bilingual Act, references to the old Act will be updated here as 
well. The minister also states that there is no change to the 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3137 

substance of this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we can again talk about ensuring the 
human rights of people in our province to make sure they are 
protected. With regards to Bill 104, I identify that there are a 
number of current concerns that exist within our province: the 
growing number of complaints and the unresolved complaints 
to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission; and the 
changing nature of Canadian society and the changing human 
rights environment, with implications for employment, First 
Nations and Métis women, gender identity and expression, new 
Canadians, individuals with disability, privacy issues, issues 
around sexual orientation, and external human rights initiatives. 
 
And we know that we have to be cautious when we talk about 
human rights and careful to any changes that we propose. We 
have a proud history of human rights in this province and, being 
leaders, we know that many do not trust the Sask Party with our 
human rights, especially when we talk about employment and 
their attempt at essential services legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know my colleagues will have more to say about this 
particular piece of legislation, but with that I move to adjourn 
debate on Bill 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 106 — The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always it’s a 
privilege to wade into discussion on bills and right now I will 
be talking about Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons and 
Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
When looking at a bill and determining what it’s about, there’s 
the bill itself, but it’s always good to look at the minister’s 
second reading comments to see from where the ministry is 
coming at with respect to a bill. It doesn’t always . . . There’s 
more work that always needs to be done to reach out to 
stakeholders and talk to folks, but it’s usually a good starting 
place to get a sense of what the bill is about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister points out that the new provisions “. . . expand the 
ability of law enforcement agencies to access information and 
obtain search orders in a missing person investigation.” He 
points out, Mr. Speaker, that when a person is reported missing 
and law enforcement starts an investigation, sometimes there’s 
no reason to suspect a crime, so law enforcement can’t rely on 

the Criminal Code, the federal Criminal Code, to obtain an 
order to compel the release of information about a missing 
person. So that can delay a missing person investigation and 
sometimes time is of the essence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
He points out that “In 2009 Saskatchewan was the first 
jurisdiction to [adopt or] incorporate access-to-records 
provisions into its missing persons legislation.” And the current 
legislation actually, at this point in time, which will be 
amended: 
 

. . . permits both family members and law enforcement 
agencies to apply to the court for an order permitting 
access to information with respect to the missing person 
. . . [including] financial information, telephone and 
communications records, health information, and 
identification information including a photograph. 

 
Which can be very helpful in trying to track someone down, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s actually rarely a day or a week that goes 
by without something coming across our Twitter feeds, I 
suspect, where not just children but folks are reported missing, 
and a picture or a photograph can be a very useful thing. 
 
But this particular bill, Bill No. 106, will be amended to, if it 
passes, to add additional types of information that can be 
accessed with a court order, including electronic information 
like cell phone records and text messages, global positioning 
system tracking records, employment information, records from 
school including attendance, and travel and accommodation 
records. In this day and age where most people have a cell 
phone, I can see how that could be extremely beneficial, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[21:00] 
 
The minister, as I had said, pointed out that Saskatchewan was 
the first jurisdiction to incorporate these access-to-records 
provisions in 2009. But the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada has adopted uniform legislation which creates the basis 
of the proposed bill and has been adopted in five jurisdictions. 
So the Uniform Law Conference of Canada is an organization. 
It was founded in 1918 to harmonize the laws of the provinces 
and territories, and where appropriate, the federal laws as well. 
The Uniform Law Conference of Canada makes 
recommendations for changes to federal criminal legislation 
based on identified deficiencies, defects, or gaps in the existing 
law or based on problems created by judicial interpretation of 
existing law. So hence the reason some of these changes are 
being proposed here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to me, this is, in reading some of the background 
notes for all the bills that come before us, the uniform . . . I 
think the government must be doing some review of bills. The 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada is mentioned here, but it’s 
mentioned in another bill. I know my colleague from 
Elphinstone mentioned the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan making recommendations in a bill being adopted. 
There’s been other pieces, well private members’ legislation 
that have come forward based on Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan recommendations. I’m thinking about a bill that I 
had around long-term care and minimum quality-of-care 
standards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



3138 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

I would have liked . . . I’m glad to see this government adopting 
some best practices and keeping up with other legislation across 
Canada and elsewhere, but there’s places where . . . And 
organizations like the Uniform Law Conference of Canada or 
the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan are very helpful 
in seeing where we could be going with legislation. And it’s 
unfortunate that they adopt and move in some direction but not 
in all cases. As I said, I had a private members’ bill on 
minimum quality-of-care standards, which came out of a report 
by the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan, that this 
government twice voted down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In thinking about this particular bill, The Missing Persons and 
Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017, it’s hard not to — 
especially with the missing and murdered indigenous women’s 
inquiry that just came through Saskatchewan on its lone 
Saskatchewan stop in Saskatoon last week — it’s hard not to 
think about the many, many women who’ve gone missing or 
have lost their lives, Mr. Speaker. I know the number that’s 
been cited in the past. I think since about 1980, the RCMP has 
pegged the number at about 1,200 missing and murdered 
indigenous women, although our current national minister of 
indigenous and northern affairs, Carolyn Bennett, thinks that 
number . . . She admits it wasn’t using data, but around 
evidence and speaking with families about their own 
experiences, that that number is quite likely higher, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think about the challenges that indigenous people face, 
sometimes with policing and sometimes with getting their . . . 
The reality is, is racism, structural racism, is a reality here in 
Saskatchewan. I represent a constituency where people 
experience it every day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know our 
Saskatoon Police Service, of which I’m very proud . . . My dad 
was a police officer for 30 years, and times have certainly 
changed since his time on the beat. And the former, recently 
retired Chief Weighill has done a great deal of work to try to 
improve relations between the indigenous communities and the 
Saskatoon Police Service. It sort of . . . It didn’t sort of. It 
culminated in an inquiry after 17-year-old Neil Stonechild was 
dropped off in 1990 and froze to death on the outskirts of the 
city. Ultimately an inquiry took place. Two police officers went 
to jail, and there was an apology from the chief of police to Mr. 
Stonechild’s mother. And there’s been some really good work 
done, but we have a long way to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also think about the time when I was a new reporter in the 
early ’90s, and John Crawford, who is a serial killer here in 
Saskatchewan, he killed three First Nations women — Eva 
Taysup, Shelley Napope, and Calinda Waterhen. And earlier 
actually in his life, he had also spent 10 years in jail for 
manslaughter. He had also sexually assaulted an indigenous 
woman. But at that time I was a reporter and my boss actually, 
Warren Goulding, ended up writing a book on this particular 
topic. It was called Just Another Indian: A Serial Killer and 
Canada’s Indifference.  
 
And that was 20 years ago, which is hard to believe, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think we’ve made great progress, but I 
think we still have a long way to come. We think about truth 
and reconciliation. You can’t have reconciliation until you have 
truth, and I have some concerns that not everybody is interested 
in the truth piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to get truth, 

and we need to all be committed to reconciliation and putting in 
place . . . actualizing the calls to action, doing what we can in 
our respective roles. 
 
So it’s very hard to not . . . to talk about a missing persons and 
presumption of death amendment Act without raising that we 
have a lot of work to do. And indigenous people still pay a huge 
price for being indigenous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that in 
2017 is unacceptable. 
 
But there are some positive changes in this bill. There’s a few 
housekeeping amendments, and I appreciate that the minister is 
keeping up with recommendations by the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada. So with that, I know that our critic 
responsible for this bill will have many questions in committee. 
But with that, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 106, The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour and a pleasure to stand here today to talk about the 
amendments to The Parks Act, Bill No. 76. 
 
So I guess I’ll first start talking about how our provincial parks 
are wonderful for our province. When I go to other provinces, 
people tell me about how they love coming to Saskatchewan 
because our parks just have such natural beauties. And it’s 
really an honour to be able to have people come from other 
provinces just to utilize our parks. So I’m happy to see that we 
prioritize our parks and we make sure that they’re well kept. 
And I hope we continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my understanding with regards to this bill, 
it contains several housekeeping amendments, which I think a 
lot of bills that we will be examining do. Because when we get 
an opportunity to open up a bill and take a look at it, that gives 
us a good opportunity to make some of those amendments with 
regards to housekeeping, because language changes and you 
want to make them applicable to other bills that might be 
pertaining to them. And there’s also a large focus on creating 
gender-neutral language with regards to the bill, which I think is 
also very important that we acknowledge. 
 
But I think the big, main part of this bill is the fact that there’s 
going to be a new provincial park established within our 
province, and my understanding that the process of establishing 
this provincial park has been happening for quite so many years 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3139 

and it’s been long standing. And it has actually at times been a 
real contentious issue with regards to some individuals having 
concerns with regards to where the provincial park is going to 
be located. 
 
And there’s some First Nations people who live and use the 
area to do a lot of their traditional healings, to do a lot of their 
traditional ceremonies. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of them 
were here on the day that this bill was established or brought 
forward in the Assembly here, and I know that they spoke to the 
media and they talked about how they have some concerns with 
regards to this being implemented. 
 
There was a gentleman, his name is Vern Friday. He’s the lands 
manager at Key First Nation, and he’s been involved with a lot 
of the discussions that have been happening from the beginning. 
And he said, “People have historically met in the area for 
traditional ceremonies and other activities.” He says, “Some of 
them will not be happy about the park, because of the potential 
influx of tourists” as well. He says, and I quote, “It has always 
been there for them for healing and spiritual help and hunting.” 
 
That’s what Mr. Friday says. And his brother Randy Friday, 
who also works at Key First Nation, said there have been 
concerns about how the park designation will affect life in the 
community. And he says, “We love our traditional lands that 
are ours. There’s graves there, there’s traditional medicine, 
there’s trap lines, so we’d still like to maintain that.” And 
according to Randy Friday, the bands rushed in to give input on 
the decision because they felt the province wasn’t going to back 
down. He says, “It was going to happen anyways. It was on the 
table, so here we are,” he says. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that quite troubling when 
individuals say openly that they feel that the province is going 
to go ahead without really addressing their concerns or looking 
into them. I don’t like knowing that that’s what people in our 
province think our government is about. 
 
And I think if there’s concerns, I don’t understand what the rush 
is. I know this has been something that’s been on the books for 
a while. What’s a little bit more time to sit and have these 
discussions and ensure that everyone is comfortable with this? I 
don’t think that’s unreasonable, and I think, and I hope that the 
minister could potentially change his mind and have more 
discussion with regards to some of the stakeholders that are 
there. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that is my biggest 
concern with regards to this bill. And I think it needs to be 
talked about a lot, is about the fact that there needs to be 
consulting with everybody, hearing everybody’s concerns. And 
we need to ensure that everyone feels that they’re included with 
regards to this decision. 
 
One of the other things that I found interesting, and the minister 
says in here, that the new provincial park will be named Great 
Blue . . . Porcupine Hills provincial park. But that’s just simply 
a temporary name, that a permanent name will be established 
later. And again, that makes me wonder why. What’s the hurry? 
Why can’t everything be established together? What’s the rush 
of doing these things if people are feeling that they’re not being 
heard, if you don’t even have a permanent name because you 
want to consult with people a little bit longer, a little bit more? 
Then do that consultation. There shouldn’t be a rush for this. Or 

what is the reason for the rush? 
 
[21:15] 
 
And if we implement the park now with the temporary name 
. . . I’ve worked for government for a while and I’ve seen 
departments have name changes and I’ve seen the costs of that 
also, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think it’s just flushing money 
down the toilet when we decide to change a logo or change the 
department name from department to ministry, ministry to 
department, and change all of our letterheads and change all of 
our name tags and change . . . You think about the monetary 
context of that, and then we think about how, you know, we’re 
in a financial crunch here. Well maybe that’s not the best plan, 
and maybe we should have the whole plan established before 
we go forward. 
 
I wanted to highlight some of the parks that we do have, and 
I’m going to talk a little bit about them. One is called the 
Athabasca Sand Dunes Provincial Park. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have always wanted to go to this provincial park . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . And same with my colleague . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, nice. Yes. So they will have to 
make a trip up there because I hear that’s like one of the most 
amazing places to see in Canada, you know. 
 
And so that’s right in our northern part of our province, and it 
stretches 100 kilometres along the south shore of Lake 
Athabasca. The Athabasca sand dunes is the largest active sand 
surface in Canada. The largest active sand surface in Canada, 
with outstanding scenery, dunes as high as 30 metres, and a 
unique ecosystem that’s rich in rare . . . and has only some 
specific plants. And scientists love going there as well. And it 
sounds like it might be a good place to go canoeing as well. 
 
And then there’s the Blackstrap Provincial Park. It’s home to 
one of the rarest geographical formations in Canada. The 
Blackstrap Provincial Park takes its name after the man-made 
mountain that rises 45 metres above the surrounding prairies. A 
40-minute drive south of Saskatoon, this park is the perfect 
place to enjoy a wide range of summer activities. And I drive by 
that oftentimes when I’m coming here for my duties. It’s a 
beautiful place. 
 
The Bronson Forest recreation site, so this one has sandy 
beaches and multi-day-use areas for the whole family. It’s the 
perfect place to enjoy your summer days. It’s secluded in 
Saskatchewan’s wooded North. Bronson is home to several 
well-stocked lakes with good populations.  
 
The Buffalo Pound Provincial Park. It’s located 20 minutes 
northeast of Moose Jaw. Buffalo Pound Provincial Park offers a 
balanced blend of nature and recreational opportunities. And it 
was once used by First Nations people with regards to corral 
bison. The park maintains a captive herd in a paddock that’s 
situated along the area’s scenic rolling hills. So that sounds 
beautiful as well. 
 
Candle Lake Provincial Park. That’s close to my home and I go 
there quite often. And so it’s really well known for its sandy 
beaches and clear water and the surrounding forests. And if you 
haven’t been there, I really suggest that you take an opportunity 
to get up there. It has lots of walleye, and it’s a beautiful place 



3140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

to bring your family. 
 
The Clarence-Steepbank Lakes Provincial Park. This is a quiet 
wilderness park. It’s within Saskatchewan’s boreal forests. It 
says it has the rustic amenities so I probably won’t go to that 
one very often because when I go camping, I don’t like rustic. 
But there’s lots of options for both, for all people of all their 
interests. 
 
The Clearwater River Provincial Park. It’s a beautiful place for 
skilled canoeists. They really enjoy going to that. It also has a 
spectacular waterfall. And the wilderness park is pack-in, 
pack-out so it’s recommended for experienced or 
non-experienced hikers. 
 
Crooked Lake Provincial Park. That’s nestled in the scenic 
Qu’Appelle Valley right close, I believe, to where your home is, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so I’m sure you know exactly where 
Crooked Lake Provincial Park is. And it has stunning valley 
views and a beautiful lake, and that sounds really beautiful as 
well. 
 
Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park. So the Cypress Hills offers 
something for every visitor. It has the lush forest. It has 
breathtaking views. And so it has a campground and lots of 
wilderness there. 
 
Danielson Provincial Park. It’s the perfect place to enjoy your 
summer with the sandy beaches, excellent fishing opportunities, 
and large campsites. It provides a variety of opportunities to fill 
your days with outdoor activities. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today was an actual really nice day 
here in our . . . I don’t know if we’re still fall or if we’ve headed 
into winter yet, but when we’re in the winter days, we can think 
of our provincial parks. And I think it starts that you could start 
booking them in February or something, so like figure out 
which provincial parks you want to go to and starting booking 
them. 
 
The Douglas Provincial Park is named after the late 
Saskatchewan premier, Tommy Douglas. This provincial park 
is situated on the southeast end of Lake Diefenbaker, and that 
also features some sandy shorelines and wooded campsites and 
massive inland sand dunes. 
 
Then there’s the Duck Lake, or the Duck Mountain Provincial 
Park. Duck Lake doesn’t have a provincial park yet, but maybe 
that might be on the list. But this is Duck Mountain Provincial 
Park, and it’s known for its rolling hills, well-stocked lakes, and 
boreal forest settings, with accommodations ranging from 
wilderness camping to electric campsites, which I would like, or 
modern cabins. So that might be one I might go check out. 
 
The Echo Valley Provincial Park, and that’s situated in the 
legendary Qu’Appelle Valley again. So it sounds like the 
Qu’Appelle Valley has a lot of options for provincial parks, so 
that’s wonderful. You get to enjoy the valleys and the lakes — 
beautiful. 
 
The Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park. This was named by 
Maclean’s magazine as home to one of the top 10 beaches in 
Canada. So that’s a wonderful thing to add to our repertoire 

because sometimes we don’t necessarily get the good news 
stories in Saskatchewan with Prince Albert and North 
Battleford being some of the most dangerous cities to live in 
and the highest rates of suicides and addictions. But we really 
need to promote the beautiful things in Saskatchewan as well, 
and the reasons why we continue to stay here because we know 
it’s so prosperous and there’s so much . . . wonderful things in 
Saskatchewan. And so one of these, like the top 10 beaches in 
Canada, that should be something we brag about all the time. So 
that’s Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park, and that’s just 30 
minutes northwest of Yorkton.  
 
So the Great Blue Heron Provincial Park. That is adjacent to the 
Prince Albert National Park. So yes, I haven’t ever checked out 
that one, but it looks like it’s close to where I go oftentimes, the 
Prince Albert National Park which is also beautiful. And this 
year since it was Canada 150, we were able to go to all the 
national parks for free and check them out and check some new 
ones, and I hope everybody was able to take advantage of that. 
 
The Greenwater Lake Provincial Park. My kids used go there 
oftentimes with their dad because he lives around that area, and 
they would always talk about it. And I know some members 
here also have property there or go there and check it out. And I 
hear it’s just beautiful. And it says here it’s stunning year round 
and it is a wonderful place to go for fishing and water sports 
and so with the beautiful beaches. 
 
I think I got the members over there thinking about beaches and 
wonderful days at the lake. And I remember the member from 
Moose Jaw North was sharing a story about how a former 
member for Melfort had a wonderful idea of turning a garage 
into an area that looked like a beach so that they could enjoy a 
winter day in a nice summery location. And just great creativity 
we have in our winter days on how we could celebrate some 
warm time. 
 
We also have the La Ronge provincial park. We have so many 
more provincial parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I could 
highlight. We have Meadow Lake Provincial Park, that’s in the 
northern part of our province. And then Moose Mountain, 
which was one of Saskatchewan’s first provincial parks, if I 
may add, yes, which I wonder how long ago that was 
established. I’m not quite sure but that would be really 
wonderful to learn the history of that also. And so we got the 
Narrow Hills and Pike Lake. And so we got quite a few 
provincial parks here — Regina Beach.  
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess why I’ve been talking 
about all these provincial parks that we have across this whole 
province and just the wide variety of them is because I want to 
highlight that. You know, I think it’s a great opportunity to have 
provincial parks in our province and we need to highlight them 
and we need to support them, and it’s a wonderful opportunity. 
But I also want again stress the fact that we don’t need to rush 
into this decision. We can take more time to consult with the 
stakeholders. We can take more time to think of a permanent 
name, you know, instead of having the temporary name. 
 
But going on with some of the aspects of this bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’s the park boundary descriptions that are in here. 
They’re talking about some of the things that they’re going to 
need to do in order to establish this park, so roadway widening 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3141 

and canal expansion, and descriptions for corrections and future 
planning. So there’s a lot of that logistics that is within there. 
 
There’s also the forestry terminology amendment. So this is 
another big aspect in this bill, and I think sometimes it kind of 
gets hidden or forgotten within the bill because a lot of people 
focus on the new provincial park that’ll be established, which is 
important but not the whole aspect of this bill. The forestry 
terminology is a big aspect as well, and so timber harvesting 
can be authorized under The Forest Resources Management Act 
and The Parks Act, so depending on the type of project. So 
they’ll look at what the project is and determine which Act that 
particular project will fall under. And I hope that doesn’t 
provide some confusion to people who are applying for timber 
harvesting and . . . or the people who are the ones that are 
administrating what is needed to be able to apply for the timber 
harvesting. So I hope it doesn’t provide some confusion. I hope 
it simplifies things, and I guess that’s something that we’ll have 
to look into by talking to some of the stakeholders, the people 
that’ll be affected by this, and see if this is something that 
they’re wanting or if this is something that it could be 
potentially more confusing for individuals. 
 
The other aspect for this bill is the authority to evict for 
alcohol-related offences. So I know that there was some advice 
from counsel with proposed minor adjustments to close the gap 
to support an enforcement officer’s ability to carry out the 
annual alcohol ban because, like you are well aware, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on May long weekends in our provincial parks 
we have an alcohol ban. 
 
[21:30] 
 
And so it sounds like with regards to some of the minister’s 
comments that some officers, enforcement officers felt that they 
didn’t have enough legislation or ability to be able to evict 
people who weren’t obeying by this ban. And so changes to this 
legislation would help provide the ability to evict individuals 
breaching the contravention of the alcohol ban. And of course 
this would be the last option. Officers would use other forms of 
providing warnings and tickets before they would think of 
evicting people. 
 
And I’ve spent many May long weekends in provincial parks 
and I’ve seen enforcement officers do a really good job with 
establishing enforcement but not being, like taking their 
abilities to the full extent that they could, you know. And 
they’re very respectful and they do a good job with ensuring 
safety for everybody who’s there. And as a parent and now a 
grandparent, it’s really nice to know that I could go to these 
locations and be in an environment that alcohol isn’t something 
that’s surrounded by my children, you know. And so I 
appreciate that and I appreciate the fact that this would be 
enforced well. 
 
And like I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of the other 
things that are in this bill, the amendments, it’s housekeeping. 
It’s improving the language. It’s clarity in its gender . . . clarity 
with regards to the gender referencing. 
 
So I know the critic that’s responsible for this bill will talk to 
the appropriate stakeholders and ensure that he does his due 
diligence with regards to making sure that there’s consultation 

with regards to our part. And I know I have other colleagues 
who would really like to participate with regards to . . . 
information with regards to this debate. So with that, I would 
like to move to adjourn debate with regards to Bill 76. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again it’s 
an honour to be able to stand here today and enter into debate 
with regards to Bill No. 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017. That’s a big 
mouthful. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a bill that was put forward 
by the Minister of Finance and she’s had a lot of bills that have 
been put forward. And the Minister of Finance used to be the 
Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Municipal 
Relations, and I had the opportunity to be the critic for both of 
those so we’ve had a good time to get to know each other. But 
now with her being the Minister of Finance, it’s not my area so 
we get to see each other in the hallway and get to chat there, but 
that has nothing to do with the bill that I’m talking right now. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill serves to amend both The 
Liquor Board Superannuation Act and The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act. And so those are two big Acts 
and both of them are being amended in this particular bill. So 
one of the main amendments and purposes for this bill is the 
change to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act, and 
that is to designate the minister the full responsible for the Act 
as the sole member of the Liquor Board Superannuation 
Commission.  
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the commission previously had three 
members and they were appointed by order of council, and one 
member needed to be an employee of the Liquor Board. And so 
I think that’s really important to have employees involved with 
a program that definitely has to do with employees. And now 
moving this to have the minister as the sole member of the 
commission, for myself I find that concerning. 
 
The commission is responsible for the admission of the Liquor 
Board superannuation plan, and I’m going to refer to the goals 
and objectives of this plan which was from the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board Superannuation Commission annual report. This 
was in the 2016 one. 



3142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2017 

And on this 2016 report here, it says the goals and objectives of 
the commission is to: 
 

. . . set operational goals and objectives for the 
administration of the Plan. 
 
Annually, a report is made to the Commission with regards 
to the accomplishment of the objectives. 
 
The Operational Goals and Objectives is comprised of 
three goals: 
 
1. Financial Management 
 

The Commission provides sound financial management 
of the Plan. 

 
2. Service Delivery and Communications 
 

The Commission provides excellent service to the 
members of the Liquor Board Superannuation Plan. 

 
3. Performance Measurement 
 

The Commission evaluates the performance of the Plan’s 
service providers.  

 
So those are important goals and objectives, and they serve a 
purpose. And so the reason the minister has given for the 
changes to this Act is the fact that the plan has been closed to 
new members since October 1st, 1977. 
 
And so this makes me think, when I first started with the 
government everyone would say, are you under the old plan or 
the new plan? And I didn’t understand what they were talking 
about. But I’m wondering if this maybe has something to do 
with it. Maybe this was the old plan. And it was a big deal 
whether you were under the old plan or the new plan. And my 
understanding, the old plan was the really good plan, if it is. 
Anyway, this one was closed to new members since October 
1st, 1977. I would have been only three. I was under the new 
plan when I started, so didn’t start that early. 
 
So the reason why the minister said was why they did these 
changes was because . . . She indicated that there’s two active 
members in the plan right now because the majority of the 
members are retired, with having 177 retired employees in the 
plan. And so one thing I don’t understand, and I know it’s just a 
matter of numbers, but in the report that was given, it said there 
was three active employees and 177 retired. But anyway, 
regardless of if there’s two or three active employees . . . And 
she indicated that these employees had close to 35 years, if not 
that many years, and so they would be close to retirement. And 
that is why they were making these changes to just have the 
minister be responsible. 
 
But my question would be, what is the rush? Obviously these 
people will be retiring soonish. And so if that’s the case, what’s 
a year or two, three, four, five, just to make sure that everybody 
has the same accountability, the same treatment as other people 
had with regards to any issues that they might have with the 
commission. 
 

And so I think it’s really important that we think about how this 
will provide the accountability and the transparency. And again 
it troubles me that there’d be no staff engagement because there 
obviously was a really important reason why they decided to 
have a staff person part of the committee to begin with. And so 
if it moves to just the minister responsible, I find that kind of 
concerning. But I know the critic will ask plenty of questions, 
and she’ll contact the stakeholders and ensure that she does her 
due diligence with regards to getting all the information when 
she gets an opportunity to speak to the minister about that 
herself. 
 
The second proposed amendment serves to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act to allow the 
restricted retirement option, which is oftentimes referred to as 
RRO. So I’ll refer to it as RRO in my context here. So the 
amendment serves to have the RRO to continue. So, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the RRO provides a means for executive 
government and the Crown Investments Corporation to offer 
early retirement to eligible employees in corporate downsizing 
or restructuring. So I know there’s times when employers will 
offer their employees early retirement options, and that’s what 
the RRO provision is for. 
 
My understanding is that the original legislation was set to 
expire in 1995. And so every time it was needed . . . an order in 
council was needed to be submitted, which again, order in 
council is a good way and a good format to ensure that 
everybody knows what is happening and what’s going on with 
regards to government decisions. But the minister’s reasoning 
for having this within this Act is to ensure that they don’t need 
to have these order in councils put in whenever they want to 
incorporate these RROs.  
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I think about that, I think about, 
is there a reason or a purpose that the minister’s wanting to 
ensure that these RROs are available and not needing to go 
through the process of having an order in council? Does that 
provide the transparency? How are people going to know, 
through government, that this is being implemented? And if it’s 
something that agencies are just allowed to do, we’re not going 
to be sure which of these agencies are providing these options 
to their employees so that they can downsize their staffing 
complement. And so I’m concerned about the transparency and 
I’m concerned about any motives that this potential government 
might have because we’ve known from other bills that have 
passed through that decisions were made that had negative 
consequences. I hope this one doesn’t as well. 
 
But like I said, I know the critic is going to analyze this and do 
her due diligence and she’ll ensure that she asks the right 
questions. And I know my other colleagues have a lot of input 
that they would like to also put forward with regards to this 
debate, so with that I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 27, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 3143 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
again to stand today and give my remarks with regards to Bill 
No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 
2017. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oftentimes the municipal 
employees’ pension is referred to as MEPP [municipal 
employees’ pension plan] and so I may refer to it in that aspect. 
So it’s the same thing that I’m talking about. 
 
The MEPP is a defined benefit pension plan administered by 
the Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission for employees 
of schools, rural municipalities, cities, towns, colleges, villages, 
libraries, and a variety of other municipal-level employers. 
Apparently there’s 25,000 MEPP plan members — that’s quite 
a few people — and there’s 737 employers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[21:45] 
 
So when the Minister of Finance gave her remarks, she 
indicated that one of the main purposes would be “. . . to 
eliminate the portability of the pension benefit . . . upon 
termination of employment.” The other amendments are more 
administrative in nature. They change from a yearly election of 
Chair and Vice-Chair to every two years. So the Chair and 
Vice-Chair could stay on for a couple of years which might 
provide a little bit more continuity. 
 
They plan to increase the commission by two members. And so 
they would be adding one member appointed by employers who 
employ firefighters and police officers. And when I look at the 
amended bill here, it says that that person would be from the 
cities of Estevan, North Battleford, Prince Albert, Swift 
Current, or Yorkton because those are areas that have 
firefighters or police officers under their mandate. 
 
And then another person would be appointed by the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees, which we call CUPE. And so that 
person would be appointed also to sit on here. So it’ll move 
from a 10-person commission that originally had five 
employers and five employees to a 12-person commission that 
now will have six employers represented, and six employees. 
So that’s one of the amendments with regards to this Act. And 
I’m not quite sure why they decided to add those two members, 
but I’m sure there’ll be a lot more discussion when the critic 
talks to the minister with regards to that. 
 
And then there’s amendment to clarify the definition of 
full-time hours and things that they are going to be changing 
within the Act that will simplify reporting to the plan for the 
employers, so make it an easier process for them. 
 

And another amendment will be, within the bill, would be to 
require all employers to remit contributions to MEPP within 15 
days after the end of a pay period. So they’re wanting to have a 
consistent period of time where they’ll get the contributions in, 
to provide some consistency is my understanding. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when you’re talking about 
pensions, you always have to take into account the control of 
the person who owns the pension, the beneficiary, with regards 
to their options, make sure that their options are appropriate and 
won’t be extremely restricting for them when they retire or if 
they terminate their position, what their options are. And also 
you want to make sure that the benefits to the recipient, or to 
the beneficiaries if that’s the case, are going to be available in 
an easy and timely fashion. 
 
And so again I know the critic with regards to this portfolio will 
contact the stakeholders and she’ll do her due diligence with 
regards to that. And I know my colleagues will have a lot more 
that they would like to add to this debate. So with that, I move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader.  
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:49.]  
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3121 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3123 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3124 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3125 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3125 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3126 
 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3128 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3130 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3130 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3131 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3134 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3138 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3141 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3143 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

 
Hon. Steven Bonk 

Minister of the Economy 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 
Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Larry Doke 
Minister of Government Relations  

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 
Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Gene Makowsky 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  
and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 


