






















































Hansard: March 20, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 60A  MONDAY, MARCH 20, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1743 
 March 20, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
group seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Women in 
the Legislature group who are here today and, I believe, 
tomorrow to both speak with members on this side, and I know 
they spoke with members on the other side as well. 
 
Myself, along with my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana and 
my other colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale, had the 
opportunity to speak with this very inspiring group this 
morning. And I understand that they also had the opportunity to 
speak with members opposite. It was a really great conversation 
that we had, and we’re looking forward to having dinner with 
you folks tomorrow evening as well. So I’d ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would also like to welcome the young women from the Women 
in the Legislature program from the University of 
Saskatchewan. There are 29 of them here today. 
 
The Minister of Advanced Education and I had the opportunity 
to sit and speak with them this morning. I have met this group 
before; there are some members of the executive who are back 
from previous years. We had a wonderful conversation about, 
not just women in politics, but politics in general and the need 
for young people in particular to get involved, Mr. Speaker. 
These individuals bring a really unique perspective to ensuring 
that young people and women are involved in our political 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is very committed to promoting 
women in achieving leadership roles, and it makes me very 
happy to see these young aspiring leaders with us today. And so 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to join with the members on both sides of the House 
and welcome guests here today. 
 
And if I may, to you and through you, I’d like to make a special 
introduction to a very dear friend, someone who has been a 
colleague, was a colleague of mine in terms of her duties as an 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] since 1999, one of 
the best classes I think of MLAs elected. She’s nodding . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. Doreen Eagles is a former member 
for Estevan, our former caucus Chair, and a leader in our 
organization who is dearly missed. 
 
She is in the company of her young wastrel of a significant 
other, Al Brigden: a gentleman in his own right, a farmer and a 
businessman from the Southeast, and also a friend to all of us. 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly 
welcome Doreen and Al to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan, a tax which will have a very 
negative impact on my constituency and on the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I could go into a long, rambling debate, but I won’t. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
These petitions come from Oxbow, Carievale, Gainsborough, 
Storthoaks, Vanscoy, Regina, and Alida. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. NORTEP-NORPAC [northern 
teacher education program-Northern Professional Access 
College] is a program of higher learning and has changed the 
classroom landscape in the North for over 40 years. A recent 
report shows that 94 per cent of NORTEP grads found 
employment in the North. NORTEP has improved teacher 
retention rates in the North. During the time of truth and 
reconciliation, the NORTEP program supports its 
recommendations, maintains culture, language goals. 
 
NORTEP has a positive economic impact in northern 
Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides high-quality, face-to-face 
instruction and service to students. The province’s financial 
deficit cannot be fixed by cutting indigenous education in the 
North. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April of 2014, the minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing 
detox facilities, hospitals and police cells, while keeping people 
safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” The petitioners 
also point out that on that same day, the minister of Health said, 
“We want to ensure that individuals with mental health and 
addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they point out this government has repeatedly 
indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. On 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. 
Unfortunately, as the petitioners point out, these same ministers 
are now trying to place the responsibility for repairing budget 
deficits on those experiencing addictions, unemployment, and 
poverty, and who are living from day to day without proper 
services, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their cuts to funding that allows extremely vulnerable 
people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016; and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place to answer the call from the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote to help represent Prince Albert in their quest 
and effort to get a second bridge for Prince Albert. So I do so 
with great honour. Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by many 
people throughout the province, and it reads as follows: 
 

That they ask the Sask Party government to stop stalling, 
hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people 
calling for action and begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And as I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, the days that we get up here 
in the Assembly, which is every day, presenting petitions from 
all throughout the land and page after page after page of people 
that are supporting Prince Albert for the second bridge, and on 
this particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed 
the petition are primarily from Saskatoon and also from Hagen. 
And I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
present to the House a petition that’s opposed to Bill 40 and the 
potential 49 per cent Crown corporation sell-off. The people 
who signed the petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that the Sask Party’s Bill 40 creates a new definition 
for privatization that allows the government to wind down, 
dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a Crown 
corporation without holding a referendum; that in 2015-16 
alone, Saskatchewan Crown corporations returned 
$297.2 million in dividends to pay for schools, roads, and 
hospitals. Those dividends should go to the people of 
Saskatchewan not private investors. 
 
Our Crown corporations employ thousands of people from 
Saskatchewan across the province, and that under section 149 
of the Income Tax Act of Canada, Crown corporations are 
exempt from a corporate income tax, provided not less than 
90 per cent of the shares are held by a government or province. 
 
The Sask Party’s proposal will allow up to 49 per cent of a 
Crown to be sold without being considered privatized, and this 
short-sighted legislation risks sending millions of Crown 
dividends to Ottawa rather than the people of Saskatchewan. I 
would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the passage of Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act 
and start protecting jobs and our Crown corporations 
instead of selling them off to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are from 
Saskatoon and Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition dealing with pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And 
the people signing this petition want to bring to your attention 
the following: that the citizens of this province believe in an 
economy powered by transparency, accountability, security, and 
equity; and that all women should be paid equitably, and that 
women are powerful drivers of economic growth and their 
economic empowerment benefits us all; that research published 
by the World Bank suggests that closing the gender wage gap 
could be worth the equivalent of 10 per cent of Canada’s GDP 
[gross domestic product]. 
 
And we know the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016 women earned on average 
63 cents for every dollar a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
and that we provide a framework under which this can be 
done within the term of this Assembly, and that the 
Saskatchewan government calls upon workplaces within 
Saskatchewan within the private sector to eliminate the 
wage gap between women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, residents across the province are 
concerned about the fact that mobile crisis has had to close its 
doors during daytime hours, but also the residents in Prince 
Albert are very concerned about this. When the funding was 
lost to mobile crisis, the answer to this loss of service was that 
other agencies in the city would be able to provide that service 
during the daytime. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, other 
services are overloaded with work, and this puts an extra burden 
on them. 
 
And so the people who struggle with the fact that the doors are 
shut for mobile crisis during the day are the citizens in Prince 
Albert that require crisis intervention services during the 
daytime hours. And an example that I heard of was a senior that 
has early onset of dementia and was lost. And so normally 
mobile crisis would be able to help assist this person and be 
able to get them to where they need to be for services. But this 
took up many hours of other services in the community, which 
we need them for other things, such as the Prince Albert Police 
Service. They try to do their best to help with this crisis 
intervention, but they’re not trained, and they’re not qualified to 
provide that. And so I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to the 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so that they may once 
again offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
So the individuals signing this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the city of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in the province. Mr. 
Speaker, those people signing this petition today wish to draw 
our attention to the following: to the fact that across 
Saskatchewan licensed non-profit child care centres are taxed 
inconsistently; that many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property tax, and this is not done in 
Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child care is essential to the economy, yet most 
centres struggle to balance their budgets, and this issue 

threatens both the number of child care spots as well as the 
quality of care. Quality child care has an enormous positive 
impact on a child’s future outcomes, and it also yields high 
rates of economic return for everyone in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools. I will read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Regina. 
I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for the reversal to cuts with the 
Aboriginal court worker program. Mr. Speaker, the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to bring to your 
attention the following: that the Government of Saskatchewan 
cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker program in the 
2016-17 provincial budget. They call out that the Aboriginal 
court workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people 
in criminal and child apprehension cases. They point out that 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres. They point out that 
Aboriginal court workers successfully help make our 
communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are well aware that this is a 
government that has pointed to the Aboriginal court worker 
program as somehow fulfilling the calls to action from the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission while, at the same time, 
cutting the budget for the program, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
reverse its short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the 
Aboriginal court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by citizens 
from Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
again today to present a petition to ensure job security for 
victims of domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the highest rate 
of domestic violence by intimate partners amongst all Canadian 
provinces. Citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are very 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

concerned at the lack of support for victims of domestic 
violence. 
 
One in three Canadian workers have experienced domestic 
violence, and for many the violence follows them to work. 
Financial stability and a supportive work environment are vital 
for any victim of domestic abuse. Employers lose $77.9 million 
annually due to the direct and indirect impacts of domestic 
violence. 
 
Manitoba has already enacted legislation, and Ontario is on its 
way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for victims 
of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all victims of domestic abuse in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Saskatoon and Regina. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Yom HaShoah Observed in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, March 19th, I had the 
great honour of attending the Saskatoon Jewish community’s 
Yom HaShoah service. Yom HaShoah is an annual day of 
Holocaust remembrance that takes place on the 27th day of the 
month of Nisan each year. 
 
This year’s Yom HaShoah was a sombre and educational event 
that was highlighted by the inspirational speech of keynote 
speaker and Holocaust survivor Bill Glied. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
Glied was just a young Jewish boy from Subotica, Yugoslavia 
when he and his family were forced by Nazi soldiers onto a 
train. He was sent to Auschwitz-Birkenau, and eventually 
Dachau concentration camp where he faced many horrors, 
including the loss of his entire family.  
 
On April 28th, 1945, Dachau was liberated by American forces 
and Bill was taken to Canada. Now at 85, Bill is a successful 
business- and family-man, but he’s still haunted by his 
memories of being robbed of his family and his youth. 
 
Since becoming a grandfather, Bill realized that he had a duty 
to speak about what he witnessed during the Holocaust. This led 
him to become a plaintiff at two trials against SS officers who 
served at Auschwitz-Birkenau, and he returns to Auschwitz 
each year for the March of the Living where he speaks to young 
people from around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me today in 
recognition of Yom HaShoah and the important contributions of 
Holocaust survivors like Bill Glied in helping us remember, lest 
history repeat itself. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Remembering Courtney Schaefer 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, every day there are 
unsung heroes that help make Saskatchewan a better place. I 
joined with other members from the community of Esterhazy, 
and family and friends from across the province, to celebrate 
the life of one of those heroes. Mr. Speaker, Courtney Schaefer 
was tragically killed while operating his tow truck during the 
blizzard on March 7th. 
 
In true Saskatchewan fashion, the Esterhazy community and 
entire province has supported the family, even setting up a trust 
fund for Courtney’s 12-year-old daughter. The family was 
overwhelmed by the tremendous support. 
 
In addition to the funeral on Saturday, fellow tow truck drivers 
from across the province came together to honour their fallen 
driver by driving a procession of tow trucks to the funeral home 
in Esterhazy. This was an amazing sight, seeing around 75 tow 
trucks of various sizes participate. In fact Courtney’s brother 
and business partner, Corey, took part in the procession. 
 
The procession was a way to honour Courtney and his legacy 
but also bring awareness to the risks that tow truck drivers and 
every other emergency services take every day to help keep 
Saskatchewan highways and roads safe. Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask all members of this Assembly to join me in honouring the 
life of Courtney Schaefer. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Social Work Week 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, March 
19th to the 25th, has been declared Social Work Week in 
Saskatchewan. As a registered social worker, I am proud of the 
work my colleagues perform every day across the province. I 
know first-hand the dedication and compassion of 
Saskatchewan’s social workers. They provide essential supports 
to families, adults, and children as well as important services 
ranging from crisis intervention, one-on-one counselling, group 
counselling, marriage and family therapy, addictions 
counselling, and child protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now many social workers are operating 
under difficult circumstances due to the callous cuts of this 
government. Saskatchewan social workers are often 
overworked and have a heavy caseload. In Prince Albert alone, 
there are numerous social work positions that remain unfilled 
because of this government’s cuts. But social workers’ 
perseverance because of their desire to help those in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme for Social Work Week is Social 
Workers — The Power To Empower. This is a very appropriate 
theme as social workers do indeed empower their clients by 
providing support and guidance that gives them the confidence 
to address life challenges and enhance their well-being. Social 
work is guided by the principles of human rights and respect 
and social justice and collective responsibility. 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in expressing 
our gratitude to social workers across Saskatchewan during this 
week and commending them of their dedication, compassion, 
and work ethic. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The Regina neonatal 
intensive care unit has been caring for babies for 40 years with 
approximately 600 babies a year using its services. The 
anticipation of a newborn baby is very exciting, but when 
families are faced with the difficulties of an early delivery, they 
often rely on the help and services of the NICU [neonatal 
intensive care unit] to care for their newest addition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the technology used to care for premature infants 
is constantly evolving. That’s why, in Saskatchewan, we’re 
very fortunate to have fundraising events for these small babies 
to help pay for the best equipment available. One such event 
took place this past week in Regina. It was once again the 30th 
annual Z99 Radiothon which raised $721,192 over its 36 
consecutive hours of fundraising. 
 
Hosts CC, Lorie, and Cassity broadcast the entire live event. 
Families from all across our province shared joyous, yet 
sometimes heartbreaking testimonials on their experiences in 
the NICU and how the equipment was critical for their 
newborns. We also heard from dozens of local businesses and 
their unique fundraising activities. 
 
In its 30 years, the Radiothon has raised over $8 million for the 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation in support of the NICU. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members join me in thanking all those who 
donated to the Z99 Radiothon for helping to support the 
technologies and services for the little miracles born in our 
province every day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Ituna is Hockeyville Finalist 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Kraft 
Hockeyville 2017 is in the final stages of finding this year’s 
most committed hockey community. The winning community 
will receive $100,000 for local arena upgrades, as well an 
opportunity to host a pre-season NHL [National Hockey 
League] game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that two farming 
communities are this year’s finalists, with O’Leary, Prince 
Edward Island representing the East; and the great community 
of Ituna, which happens to be in my constituency, representing 
the West, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ituna arena is a vital part of the community. 
Sean and Tamara Trefiak, who nominated the community said, 
and I quote, “Here it doesn’t matter your age or gender from 
pre-novice through to recreation league or just a night of 
shinny, hockey brings our community together.” Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think a community is more deserving than Ituna. Their 
current arena is way past its best-before date, Mr. Speaker, and 
$100,000 will go a long ways in helping that community build a 
new arena. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all citizens of Saskatchewan to 
vote for Ituna. The voting ends at 10 o’clock tonight, and we’ve 
all heard that phrase: vote early and vote often. This is one case 
where you can actually do that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

High School Student’s Success Story 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to share a success story about a young 
constituent of mine. His name is Jacob Stynsky, and he is a 
grade 12 student at John Paul II Collegiate in North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jacob has just signed a letter of intent to play 
football for Presentation College in Aberdeen, South Dakota. 
After looking at schools in North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Montana, Nebraska, and here in Canada, he decided to attend 
Presentation College after he visited their campus. 
 
In speaking of the signing, Jacob had this to say, and I quote, 
“When I was trying to make a decision, I was looking for a 
place where playing football would be a good fit . . . [for] my 
studies and my faith.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jacob is very excited about playing football in the 
US [United States], and his signing is quite significant since he 
is the first student from John Paul II Collegiate to play football 
for an American college. The football program at John Paul II is 
relatively new, so this talented running back is justifiably proud 
of being the first from his school to play for an American 
college. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jacob is also involved in other sports and will be 
busy until graduation helping to coach the girls’ basketball team 
at Notre Dame School as well as playing for a senior team at 
John Paul II and playing badminton and track and field. He is 
truly a busy young man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating Jacob on his accomplishments and 
wish him great success with his athletics and his studies. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Pats Enjoy Record-Breaking Season 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Regina Pats hockey team won their 52nd game of the 
season, which is a record high in the club’s history. They 
finished their regular season this weekend in first place overall 
in the Western Hockey League. Sam Steel, the WHL’s 
[Western Hockey League] leading scorer, finished with 131 
points with his captain, Adam Brooks, not far behind with 130 
points. 
 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

The team’s regular season ended with an eight-game winning 
streak, bringing the club’s 99th regular season to a close. The 
Regina Pats have done an excellent job honouring the 99 teams 
before them while bearing the Princess Patricia’s Canadian 
Light Infantry badge proudly on their jerseys. Next year during 
the centennial season, the Pats will also be hosting the 
Memorial Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though we are looking forward to the tournament 
next year, all eyes are on the playoff games starting this 
weekend against Calgary. The first game is Friday. The puck 
drops at 7 p.m. at the Brandt Centre. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the Pats in a great regular 
season. And to some of my colleagues whose teams did not 
make the playoffs, I’d ask you to join the regiment, get behind 
the Pats, and cheer them on for their Memorial Cup journey. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 
Details of Land Transactions and Regina Bypass Project 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the Premier 
released a video of himself sitting down in front of a fireplace, 
and he did his best to pretend that he was having a real 
heart-to-heart with Saskatchewan people. Let me be clear, Mr. 
Speaker: a Facebook update, as vague as it is, is never a 
replacement for a full, honest financial update. 
 
[14:00] 
 
In that pre-recorded video, though, he forgot to mention how 
sorry he is for his mismanagement of the Regina bypass or the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal. So can the Premier 
take the opportunity here today to finally tell us a bit about what 
he knows about that scandal and maybe not dodge that simple 
question that’s been put to him day after day? When did the 
Premier first learn that the original landowner is the landlord of 
the former minister of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
think it’s important that we correct the record when the interim 
leader gets the facts wrong for the House, Mr. Speaker, as he 
has over and over again with respect to the bypass. He keeps 
pointing to the original forecasted cost for the bypass of 400 
million and comparing that to the current cost, which is 
significantly higher. The reason that it’s higher is that the 
project has changed completely. The scope of the project has 
changed completely, Mr. Speaker, and moreover the project is 
now on time and on budget and creating 8,000-plus jobs, 
providing an important, Mr. Speaker, infrastructure asset — the 
largest infrastructure project we’ve seen in the province’s 
history, right in the interim leader’s hometown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the GTH, once again we have to correct the 
record, Mr. Speaker. He infers that there’s been money lost. 
Even in the deal that has been debated on the floor of this 
House and subject to a Provincial Auditor’s review, the cost is 
just over $100,000. We’re just completing a sale of land and 

have received payment that would value that land for taxpayers 
at $250,000-plus. So even when you add the servicing cost, 
taxpayers will be making money on that land sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, still no answer. That 
Premier on front after front is making a mockery of 
accountability, Mr. Speaker. You know, it hasn’t even been a 
year since the last general election when he hid the state of the 
finances. You know, they said they’d balance the budget at that 
time. They said they wouldn’t raise taxes. They said that 
everything is okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since then they’ve refused to come clean on the 
GTH. They’ve refused to come clean on the bypass, and 
they’ve refused to come clean on their budget mess. Then this 
morning in a video not three minutes long, the Premier washed 
his hands of all blame. Acted as though he and his party haven’t 
been in power for the last decade, Mr. Speaker; as though they 
didn’t blow through the record revenues while not saving a 
dime and draining the rainy day fund; as though they hadn’t 
promised that this year’s budget would be balanced, when 
everyone knows the Premier knew the facts then and there. Mr. 
Speaker, how can the Premier turn his back on his actions and 
on all of his promises? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the time of the last 
election, Mr. Speaker, I think most were forecasting some 
moderate strengthening in resource prices. Certainly those were 
the forecasts we were working off of, and so did members 
opposite when they used a similar forecast to develop their 
platform. 
 
What we know since then is even non-resource revenue taxation 
has fallen, I think by about $400 million, Mr. Speaker. That has 
weakened and has become more apparent in the months since. 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, $250 million more in crop 
insurance claims alone because of a snowstorm that happened, 
Mr. Speaker, principally because of snow in October — well 
after the election that he refers to, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
there’s still a million acres unharvested out in the field today. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, for all of those reasons and because we 
will now be entering the third year of resource revenues being 
down by over a billion dollars, it’s pretty clear that we need to 
take some decisions in this province, accountability — as I did 
take in the video — but also some decisions that will move us 
off a dependence on resource revenue, Mr. Speaker, and will 
also shift our taxes, Mr. Speaker, more towards consumption 
and away from job creation, away from investment, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ll wait . . . I’m hoping some of that’s in the 
budget on Wednesday. I think some of that . . . [inaudible] . . . 
will be there. We’ll wait for that budget to be tabled. 
 
But as for the promises he closed his question with, the 
government keeping its promises, the principal promise was to 
keep the province strong, if you remember in the campaign. In 
the last job numbers, Saskatchewan is leading the country. It’s 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

leading the country in retail sales, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding 
the price for resources we depend on, the number one 
job-creating numbers coming out of the province of 
Saskatchewan last week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier has broken 
promise after promise, offered no accountability. It’s totally 
unacceptable. And now still today, no contrition from that 
Premier. 
 
It was that Premier and that cabinet that caused the financial 
mess that we’re in. They were the ones responsible for blowing 
through the rainy day fund and not saving a dime during the 
best years. And they’re the ones here today that won’t even take 
a 20 per cent reduction on their bonus pay as ministers, and they 
won’t work with us to reduce the number of MLAs in this 
Assembly by five. 
 
Instead they’re making Saskatchewan people pay the price. 
They have consistently left the most in need behind. In the last 
budget alone they cut supports for seniors, for families, and for 
the most vulnerable. In black and white, they said that 
assistance helping victims of domestic violence will have to 
wait “until fiscal capacity allows.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and as tragedies and as lives have been lost, we’ve 
also heard them promise to move ahead with the important 
implementation of recommendations of the TRC [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] and to provide supports in the 
North to the benefit of all Saskatchewan people. Will the 
Premier finally make good on those promises or will they have 
to wait until “fiscal capacity allows”? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, much of what the member has 
just referenced is representative of current expansions and 
services since we took office. Some additional requests have 
been made for further expanding those services, Mr. Speaker, 
and all of those are weighed as a part of the budget process. 
 
And I’m happy to debate the choices that have been made on 
this side of the House over the last number of years. I’m happy 
to point out, Mr. Speaker, for example, that member asked the 
question, well where did the money go? Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
took over a situation where there was a nursing shortage, a very 
significant nursing shortage caused by members opposite. Mr. 
Speaker, there are now 3,000 more nurses in the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the leader, the interim leader, he doesn’t 
like this. He doesn’t like the facts: 3,000 more nurses of every 
designation now. 
 
Seven hundred and fifty more doctors. When we took over, they 
weren’t training enough at the University of Saskatchewan, 
point number one. And point number two, they weren’t 
recruiting. Now there are 750 more doctors practicing than 
when members opposite were sitting on about a $700 million 
fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are today 750 more teachers working in schools. 
 

With respect to seniors, Mr. Speaker, for 16 years, they 
provided zero increase to the seniors’ income assistance plan. 
That helps the lowest most . . . that helps the lowest income, 
most vulnerable seniors. For 16 years, the socialists would talk 
about seniors and did absolutely nothing. Mr. Speaker, that 
particular piece of assistance, that program’s been more than 
doubled. 
 
We can talk as well about programs for the disabled. Four 
hundred and forty people waiting on a wait-list, people with 
intellectual disabilities that wanted the dignity of a home. But 
the socialists didn’t have time to act, only time to talk. That 
wait-list was taken care of, Mr. Speaker, and investments 
continue across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about 
loss of life in the North and needed supports for kids and 
communities all across Saskatchewan. Maybe the Premier 
couldn’t hear the question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of 
course the question was heard. By the way, the question had a 
preamble that contained a number of facts that are erroneous, 
and I will take every single opportunity to stand and correct the 
interim Leader of the Opposition when he makes those 
mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, the 
Minister of Social Services, the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
have highlighted — in this House and in committee and outside 
this House — the number of increased investments the 
government has made. Mr. Speaker, there is no question that 
frankly more is needed, and it isn’t just about resources. It’s 
about engagement with the North, which is exactly what 
ministers on this side of the House were doing just before the 
session began. Of course we take this issue seriously. That’s 
why more has been funded in the North . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the leader’s still heckling. He wants 
everybody to take this whole issue seriously, but he continues to 
heckle from his seat. 
 
I’m telling him today, the record on this side of the House is 
increased resources in the North because even one more event 
as we have seen is unacceptable. For him to now question 
whether or not members on this side of the House take the 
matter seriously because I happen to be dealing with preamble 
to his questions, Mr. Speaker — that is ridiculous and it is 
wrong. Of course we all take it seriously. I know he does. We 
do on this side of the House, evidenced by investments that 
we’ve made, Mr. Speaker, and understanding that more is 
needed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Budget Legislation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last spring the Sask Party 
scrapped Saskatchewan’s balanced budget law. They even made 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

it retroactive so they could finish off their decade-long mission 
of draining the rainy day fund to zero. Just in case the Finance 
minister has forgotten, this was a law brought in by an NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government that had to clean up the 
mess after another conservative government, one for which he 
worked, racked up deficit after deficit after deficit. Does that 
sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This was an important law because it held a cabinet accountable 
for running back-to-back deficits — just two, Mr. Speaker. 
Well they’re well past that. It protected taxpayers and future 
generations from having to pay for the bad choices of a 
government plagued by mismanagement, waste, and scandal. 
So it’s a simple question for the Finance minister: when will he 
bring back a balanced budget Act? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the question from the hon. member. I think in the fall 
session I was asked about this question, and I said we’re 
working towards developing legislation on a fiscal 
accountability framework, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
currently across the country in Canada and every province that 
has a balanced budget law, they’re paper tigers, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve either been suspended by their respective provincial 
governments or they’re not being followed. 
 
Now when the member talked about a balanced budget law 
under their government, that was when we had the General 
Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, not summary financial statements. 
It’s a different scenario here in the province now. We have over 
150 different entities that report in the summary financial 
statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can have changes in evaluations on mark-to-mark valuation 
on the price of natural gas on one single day, Mr. Speaker, that 
can throw your budget out by $100 million. We can have 
changes in crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, on one single given 
day with respect to the changes on the bottom line and summary 
financial statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are developing, in consultation with the Provincial 
Auditor’s office and academics across the province and across 
the country, a fiscal accountability framework, Mr. Speaker, 
that will take all of those different factors into consideration and 
will be tabled in this House when it is ready. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Test Facility 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we now have to wonder 
then, why in the spring, last spring, the Finance minister said he 
would bring back a balanced budget law in the fall sitting. 
That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fall came and went and now the leaves are growing back on 
the trees and still no bill. And yet the deficit continues to grow 
because of the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste 
— $2 billion and beyond on the Regina bypass, and of course 
their $1.5 billion carbon capture boondoggle. They gave the 

public various stories about how well it was working and then 
refused to be upfront when it came to the true costs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear that their $70 million CCS [carbon 
capture and storage] test facility is going to add more debt to 
the books. Mitsubishi Hitachi is done with their time at the test 
facility and the Sask Party is nowhere near to pay it off. 
Saskatchewan ratepayers are on the hook for that $70 million. 
Can the Minister for SaskPower tell us how much money this 
test facility is actually bringing in and what is the plan for the 
next contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Let me say this, Mr. Speaker, about BD3 
[Boundary dam 3]. Mr. Speaker, BD3 is now the cleanest fossil 
fuel plant in this country, Mr. Speaker, and that’s something 
we’re very proud of. 
 
And in respect to the test facility, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is 
currently in negotiations with different entities, Mr. Speaker, to 
find some participants to continue to use that facility. Mr. 
Speaker, we have on fairly good authority that we will have 
further participants in respect of the use of that facility, Mr. 
Speaker. And there’ll be more to report on that when we’re 
ready. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. They 
talk a big game but they just can’t seem to close the deal. The 
Premier bragged in the throne speeches and in this House about 
SaskPower’s CCS consortium and how memberships to the 
exclusive club would spread Saskatchewan’s story around the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was a big deal — three levels of memberships with all 
kinds of kickbacks. But no one wanted to be part of their fan 
club, Mr. Speaker. In the whole world, not a single consortium 
membership was sold. No one wants in on this deal, but 
Saskatchewan people are still on the hook with a $1.5 billion 
tab. 
 
We’re also on the hook, Mr. Speaker, for a $2 billion bypass 
with profits going to a different kind of exclusive club. The 
Vinci consortium is making hundreds of millions of dollars off 
the massively overrun bypass project, and the Sask Party 
refuses to provide details on the financial overlook and 
oversight or the jobs associated with the project. Mr. Speaker, 
will the Sask Party show us the full contract? If not, Mr. 
Speaker, what is the Sask Party hiding from? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member knows 
that the contract is online, the value-for-money report is online, 
and the fairness opinion is online, Mr. Speaker. And I have 
commented in this House, Mr. Speaker, that those contracts 
have been redacted for commercially sensitive information. If 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

they don’t like the way that the contracts were redacted, Mr. 
Speaker, they can speak to the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. But before they do that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just 
read a quote. He said: 
 

. . . the severed information, if disclosed, could 
disadvantage SaskBuilds and the Government of 
Saskatchewan in its future negotiations for highway 
construction projects . . . [So] I recommend SaskBuilds . . .  
 

Recommend continuing the withholding of that information. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that member, that member was the minister 
of Highways when they were on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. He knows very well that commercially sensitive 
information is not released, Mr. Speaker, because it ends up 
prejudicing the government in its future negotiations. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we rely on the information and the comments that are 
provided from the Information and Privacy Commissioner. If he 
has some exception to that, Mr. Speaker, he can take it up with 
them. But, Mr. Speaker, these contracts are online for everyone 
in Saskatchewan to see, and the value-for-money report, Mr. 
Speaker, so we leave it at that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t buy any of those 
excuses one bit. This isn’t chump change, Mr. Speaker; it’s a 
$2 billion contract. They’re telling the Saskatchewan people to 
get ready for tax hikes, but they won’t tell us anything about 
what they spent on dirt or asphalt for a project, a Highways 
project, that is over a billion dollars over budget. And that 
doesn’t even involve the land costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know. I’ll say it 
again: they have a right to know, even more so because of who 
we are dealing with. This company that we are dealing with has 
a questionable business history to say the least. Local 
contractors and workers who feel shut out from this project are 
asking why the Sask Party would chose to deal with this foreign 
conglomerate. This is a corporation that has been investigated 
in Russia, France, and Qatar for alleged fraud and corruption. 
Mr. Speaker, why is the SaskParty shipping our scarce dollars 
overseas instead of keeping the profits, the contracts, and the 
jobs here in Saskatchewan? Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Ninety-five local Saskatchewan companies working on this 
project; 8,200 local construction jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
Seventy-one per cent of the work that’s being done on the 
bypass, Mr. Speaker, is being done by Saskatchewan companies 
— companies who have employees living in their 
constituencies, Mr. Speaker. Companies like Brandt; Broda 
Construction, Mr. Speaker; Graham Construction; International 
Road Dynamics, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatoon; Kullman 
Engineering. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, and recite all 95 of these 
names, Mr. Speaker. But these are people that work in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They pay tax in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and I can tell the member opposite that I’m sure these 

individuals are very happy to have a job in Saskatchewan 
working on the largest infrastructure project in this province’s 
history. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, school divisions’ emergency reserve 
funds are meant for emergencies. They’re not meant to be used 
as a piggy bank for the minister to dip into when his 
government is short on cash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party drained their own rainy day fund, 
the one that was left to them by the last government, the one 
with over $2 billion in it. And now that it’s all gone, they’re 
looking to the rainy day funds meant for our kids’ classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school divisions are relying on these funds more 
and more due to years of underfunding from this government. If 
this government takes away the reserve funds, schools will have 
to cut even deeper. So I’ll ask the minister again: will he admit 
that it was his government’s mismanagement that caused this 
deficit, not our kids and not our teachers? And will he commit 
to leaving school division reserve funds alone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had this 
discussion last week. Mr. Speaker, school divisions budget 
conservatively; they often come in under budget. Last year, 
including capital, they planned to draw $40 million from 
reserves, but in fact, Mr. Speaker, they ended up with a surplus 
of $10 million. This year, including capital, they budgeted to 
use $38 million in reserves — slightly better. 
 
Given the financial situation, we’ve asked school divisions to 
limit their spending and find efficiencies wherever possible, 
something we’ll never apologize for, Mr. Speaker. We’ll always 
want to work with our school divisions so they find savings, so 
they’re efficient and they commit to keeping money in the 
classrooms where it benefits the students of this province. We 
have confidence in our school divisions to manage their 
budgets, and we look to work with them to find ways to save 
costs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, still no commitment on those 
reserves. And the Premier has said time and time again that 
everything is on the table. He’s throwing our kids’ classrooms 
on the chopping block too. This government has already forced 
school divisions to make deep cuts, and some school divisions 
have even had to dig deep, dip into their reserves just to pay for 
day-to-day operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school division reserves are supposed to be for 
emergencies. They exist to ensure that our kids’ classrooms can 
be sustained through unexpected costs and enrolment increases 
that the Sask Party has simply stopped funding. 
 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

But now the Sask Party is threatening to take them away. Their 
own documents show that they are considering taking these 
reserves from school divisions to plug their massive debt hole. 
It’s inexcusable, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister finally commit 
to leaving school division reserves alone, or will he take even 
more money out of our kids’ classrooms in a sad attempt to pay 
for this government’s scandal, mismanagement, and waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the school 
division to be cognizant of the fact that using reserves comes 
. . . and affects the province’s debt and directly affects what 
deficits are in our province. We now operate under one set of 
books called summary financial accounting, which is exactly 
what the NDP asked for and is exactly what we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Education critic, in the preamble to 
one of her questions, and she said and I quote, “The minister 
himself has admitted that the government’s plan to cut their 
way out of this massive deficit runs . . . through our kids’ 
classrooms.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t ever remember saying anything like that 
whatsoever. If the member has any such statements, I would ask 
that she table them today and put them on the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you what the truth of it is, Mr. Speaker. We want to 
make sure that we do everything to stay . . . and do everything 
we can to benefit the students of our province. And we will 
continue to do that, unlike the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Responsible Gambling Unit 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last week this government 
presided over the elimination of four of the five dedicated 
responsible gambling positions at Casinos Regina and Moose 
Jaw. In response to questions about why that decision was 
made, Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible stated, 
“Responsible gaming and recognizing problem gambling, just a 
part of responsible gaming overall.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister tell us what the heck that 
means? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Sask Gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First and foremost, 
these job losses will not impact our commitment to responsible 
gaming. The corporation remains committed to providing 
casino entertainment in a socially responsible manner. It offers 
GameSense program, which is part of . . . Responsible 
gambling is part of GameSense, Mr. Speaker. It offers a number 
of tools to help guests make informed decisions. The 
GameSense advisors were just one of the many ways that the 
responsible gaming program was delivered. 
 
It’s important to note that Casinos Regina and Moose Jaw will 
continue to have a program manager going back and forth 
between two, and all of the shift managers, the people that work 

within the casinos, are also trained in what the GameSense 
advisers were trained in, Mr. Speaker. It’s just a different way 
of delivering a program, Mr. Speaker. The program is still being 
delivered. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister is saying would 
suppose that problem gaming is not a problem in Saskatchewan, 
or that it’s being managed by the different agencies that have 
been responsible for it. In terms of eliminating the four out of 
the five positions that have been tasked with this work, Mr. 
Speaker, you’d like to think that that was based on some kind of 
an analysis of what those individuals were doing. 
 
Can the minister commit today to tabling the analysis that that 
decision was based upon? And can she also provide some 
assurance to the people of Saskatchewan that those who have 
been afflicted with gambling addiction and for which the 
minister has stated that they feel very much a responsibility into 
working to address those problems, can she commit to the 
House that those problems won’t get worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Sask Gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the loss of jobs in this 
particular area does not negate our commitment to responsible 
gaming in the province. This is just a different way of 
delivering exactly the same thing. Everyone is trained in . . . 
Mr. Speaker, everyone is trained that is on the floor, that is 
working the casinos with exactly the same training that was 
received by GameSense individuals. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
business decision through Sask Gaming, Mr. Speaker, and we 
agree with it. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017/Loi de 2017 réduisant les 

traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 2017 be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Economy that Bill No. 47, An Act to Reduce Salaries of 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 be now introduced 
and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — With leave, immediately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 43 — The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my duty and 
honour to rise today to speak and join in on the debate for Bill 
No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act. Now I’ve had the 
opportunity to read the comments from quite a few of my 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker. I know quite a few of my colleagues 
have had the ability to and the opportunity to join in on this 
debate, and I’m happy to do the same. 
 
Now I know the critic will have quite more eloquent words to 
say with respect to this bill, Mr. Speaker, as I know she has a 
much stronger understanding of this area than I do. But I am 
happy to join in on the discussion and lead or add to this debate 
as much as I physically can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now to summarize, this bill will expand the regulation and 
licensing of pipelines to include 80,000 existing flow lines. I 
was surprised to see that we have 80,000 existing flow lines, 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, in the province. You often travel 
around and don’t realize that there are that many flow lines 
throughout this great province. 
 
But I was even more surprised to realize that the regulation and 
licensing of those 80,000 existing flow lines were not covered 
under legislation, and actually was not occurring, Mr. Speaker, 
until the introduction of this bill. And then I learned that this is 
something that’s been called on by my colleagues for quite a 
while, prior to my election of course. But for quite a long time 
this was a concern that we had on this side of the House, that 
there were all these flow lines existing and no real proper 
oversight or regulation for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And then I learned that it’s also been called on by the auditor in 
terms of regulating pipelines. And I’m looking right now 
actually at a 2012 auditor’s report, chapter 5, entitled regulating 

pipelines. And the auditor, who does very good work, audited 
the Ministry of Energy and Resources and came to this 
conclusion: 
 

Our audit concluded that for the year ended October 31, 
2011, the Ministry did not have effective processes to 
ensure full compliance with The Pipelines Act, 1998 and 
The Pipelines Regulations, 2000. There are requirements 
under this legislation that are not being acted upon. Failure 
to regulate pipelines effectively could harm people or the 
environment. 

 
And then the auditor further went on to say, “The law currently 
exempts Energy and Resources from regulating the construction 
of flow lines in the province,” which is quite alarming, Mr. 
Speaker. I can understand why my colleagues were calling for 
better oversight. 
 
And the auditor, Mr. Speaker, in this chapter goes even further 
to mention several different recommendations that she felt 
needed to be implemented. And I know that there’s . . . It seems 
like there’s still quite a bit of work left to do with respect to 
these recommendations. And being a member of the Public 
Accounts Committee, I know I’ll have the opportunity to, or 
hopefully have the opportunity to speak to or question officials 
with respect to the status of these recommendations at a later 
date, hopefully sooner rather than later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m a bit alarmed that this recommendation was made back in a 
2012 report and we’re just starting to address it now, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m curious to know what the status is of all of the 
other recommendations in this report, Mr. Speaker, and so I’m 
looking forward to the opportunity to ask those questions at 
Public Accounts Committee. Hopefully I’ll have that 
opportunity in the near future. 
 
It also gives the opportunity to determine how not just 
recommendations are going but also how policy or legislation is 
working within government, whether or not resources are being 
used effectively, Mr. Speaker, or alternatively whether or not 
there are even a sufficient amount of resources to be able to 
fulfill the requirements as stated in the legislation. 
 
Now the Bill No. 43 will allow pipelines moving fluids other 
than hydrocarbons, steam, and carbon dioxide to be considered 
under the definition of pipelines. I believe that might expand the 
definition of pipelines. I’m not too sure, and I’m sure the critic 
would have a better understanding of why these other fluids are 
left out and whether or not that’s consistent with legislation in 
other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the good things about the bill, and like I said, the bill is 
implementing some of the recommendations that had been 
made previously by both the auditor and my colleagues on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but it does give new powers to 
pipeline inspectors to collect information and enter property 
where . . . I think, generally speaking, I’m happy to see that the 
pipeline inspectors are being given new powers. I’m curious to 
know if they felt like they were being limited in their ability and 
they were feeling restricted under the current legislation from 
fulfilling their mandate, Mr. Speaker, and I’m hopeful that these 
new powers given to pipeline inspectors will provide a further 
level of power to the inspectors to do their work. 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

But it’s one of the concerns that I have and that we have with 
respect to this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that it’s great, and I’ve 
said this before on previous legislation, that it’s great to put this 
forward, to table this legislation, but if there’s no actual 
financial backing for this, if they’re not ensuring that the 
pipeline inspectors are as sufficient in number that they’re able 
to do their job effectively, then there’s really no point to this 
legislation. If this legislation doesn’t have any bite and it’s 
simply just bark, Mr. Speaker, then we’re no better off when 
this bill is enacted than we are currently. 
 
The legislation will also grant immunity to government from 
litigation based on the actions of pipeline inspectors as long as 
they’re carried out in good faith, which makes sense to me, Mr. 
Speaker. It allows pipeline inspectors to do their work without 
worrying about some sort of malicious prosecution, but it also 
provides that comfort to potentially — I’m just ballparking or 
spitballing who potential litigants would be against the pipeline 
inspectors — potentially landowners or pipeline owners, Mr. 
Speaker. It does allow for that ability for if something did not 
occur in good faith, then those individuals who felt need to have 
recourse could seek that recourse through the court system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it doesn’t completely shut the door, but it does allow an 
avenue for litigation should it be appropriate, Mr. Speaker. I 
know something being done in good faith is something that has 
been litigated in the past. I’m not sure if it’s been litigated in the 
past with respect to this particular issue, with respect to pipeline 
regulation, but I know that there’d be some jurisprudence that 
could help further along that case. And that’s probably the 
appropriate place for that discussion to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill also allows the minister, with the approval of cabinet, 
to create directives related to areas where he has regulatory 
authority. It also allows for pipelines previously exempted from 
regulation and licensing to eventually be covered by the Act at a 
time set out in the regulation. So that’s a bit interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. It sounds like there’s some potential for future 
expansion of this legislation, and the government wants to 
provide the ability to expand this legislation through the 
regulations instead of going through the longer process of 
moving a bill through the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m curious to know what sort of pipelines they’re thinking 
about removing from the exemptions, and when. And from 
what I understand, is that the time of when this will happen will 
be set out in the regulations. So I’m hopeful that there is enough 
. . . Or I’m curious to know if there’s enough assurance here or 
understanding here of what the actual process is going to look 
like and how long that process is going to be. I don’t believe the 
time has actually been set out yet for when this transition is 
going to occur, but I think it would be helpful to all 
stakeholders involved in this area to have a good understanding 
of when that would be. So I’m hopeful that that regulation will 
be passed by government soon and if only just to provide some 
further understanding of what this process is going to look like 
and when it’s going to happen. 
 
The bill, Mr. Speaker, also increases the penalties for breaking 
the law, regulations, or directives from 50,000 to 500,000, 
which is a fairly substantial increase, Mr. Speaker. I’m curious 
to know if they felt that the current penalty of $50,000 wasn’t 

sufficient. I don’t know if the penalty was . . . or whether the 
legislation was being violated by pipeline owners in the past 
because they made a business decision and it was more 
financially feasible for them just to eat the fine, and therefore it 
was deemed necessary to increase the fine. I’m actually more 
curious to know whether or not any fines have been imposed at 
all in the past, or how many times fines have been imposed at 
all in the past. Like I said, it’s great to have fines in legislation 
but if they’re not being enforced, if there’s no bite to this bark 
of a bill, Mr. Speaker, then there’s really no point in increasing 
the fines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also allows for prosecutions under The Pipelines Act to be, 
now must be commenced less than three years after the 
government learns of the infraction. It also sets out new criteria 
and rules for the transferring of pipeline licences from one 
person to another, including a clause stating that the transfer 
must be in the public interest. So that’s a bit interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. It leaves a bit vague what the term “public interest” 
means. I’m not too sure if the drafters of this bill are intending 
for that to be litigated. It seems like if that’s the term and it’s 
not defined in the legislation that it’s going to be potentially 
litigated in the future. 
 
Or again, if no one complains about it, then there’s not ever 
going to be any litigation. So again, if the ministry in charge of 
pipeline regulation doesn’t have the resources it needs to 
enforce their own legislation, then there’s not going to be any 
litigation because no one’s going to complain about the 
transfers not being in the public interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bill also adds new regulation-making authority. So the 
ministry can require operators to put up financial insurance for 
high-risk projects, and require operators to file emergency 
response plans. I’m very shocked that this didn’t exist in 
previous legislation. I think we’ve had some fairly major spills 
that have happened just within the past year only, Mr. Speaker, 
that indicate the desperate need for emergency response plans, 
as well as the financial assurance that’s required. Husky had 
deep pockets, but what if a breach or a spill occurred with a 
pipeline owner who doesn’t have as deep pockets as Husky, Mr. 
Speaker? So it makes sense to me to have this included, and I’m 
a bit surprised that it didn’t exist before. 
 
Now the bill does not include flow line operators in the 
expropriation provisions for pipelines. Flow line operators will 
continue to expropriate land under the outdated surface rights 
acquisition and compensation Act. So it still leaves a bit of a 
concern for dealing with landowners and how that affects . . . or 
how flow line operators and landowners interact, Mr. Speaker. 
So there’s definitely still some gaps and some need for further 
legislation and discussion there. 
 
So like I said, expanding licensing and regulation to flow lines 
is a good thing. It’s something that my colleagues have been 
calling on for the government, to the government to implement 
for quite a long time. But like I said, it doesn’t matter what sort 
of legislation gets passed if there aren’t enough financial 
resources to actually enforce that legislation, if there aren’t 
enough inspectors to do the new inspections that are going to be 
required with respect to this bill. 
 
And there’s definitely quite a . . . We have a very, very long 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

way to go in Saskatchewan in terms of having an effective 
pipeline regulation system, Mr. Speaker. Last year, from what I 
understand, Saskatchewan inspectors only did 78 inspections of 
pipelines while in Alberta they did more than 2,000. 
 
So like I said again, and I don’t think it’s trite to need to 
hammer this point home, especially to members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, but if you don’t have any financial backing to this 
legislation, then there’s no point of even having the legislation. 
You can increase the fines and the penalties. You can increase 
the powers of the inspectors. But if you don’t have enough 
inspectors, then what’s the point, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s the frustrating thing with this government who 
seems to try to find every little way they can slice and dice. I 
would not be shocked if this was up on the chopping block in 
the future. There’s been a lot of other things that have been up 
on the chopping block with this government. I know this 
government does not see environmental regulation or 
environmental protection as a priority. So we’ll be watching 
this area of funding, Mr. Speaker, closely to see whether or not 
the government is going to put their money where their mouth 
is, especially in light of the summer that we had with the oil 
spill in the North Saskatchewan and the impact that had on 
thousands, Mr. Speaker, thousands of residents. 
 
So it would be quite a disappointment to say the least, and that 
would be quite an understatement, if the government does not 
put any financial resources in this area and to not provide the 
inappropriate amount of funding for pipeline inspectors. And I 
think the government often feels, the Sask Party often feels that 
if they cut enough small things — things they deem as small 
that have actually very large impacts on a lot of people in this 
province, Mr. Speaker — that no one will really speak up and 
no one will really notice. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But we’ll be watching this one carefully, Mr. Speaker, both 
through the revenues on budget day and as well through the 
audited reports we’ve received at Public Accounts and our 
ability to question officials at those meetings, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that the people of Saskatchewan will hopefully not have 
to relive the summer that we had this past summer. And that 
hopefully the Sask Party have actually learned some lessons 
during that spell and will put funding in place to ensure that our 
pipelines are regulated appropriately so that this is a situation 
that doesn’t happen again. 
 
This is, as I said, something that’s been called on for a while. 
And I’m looking actually . . . Now here’s something that I 
found alarming actually. I’m going to talk about this a little bit 
first before I move on to this article. I was reviewing the 
comments that the minister made when he did his second 
reading speech, with respect of this bill. That’s why I think it’s 
important for me to say time and time again the importance of 
an appropriately funded regulatory system. He said specifically: 
 

The proposed amendments will not automatically trigger 
new spending on pipeline regulations. They will however 
provide the foundation for building new programs and data 
systems to strengthen our regulatory oversight of the 
industry. Any incremental spending on these programs 

beyond the ministry’s ongoing appropriation will be 
approved through the normal budgeting process. Ninety 
per cent of the ministry’s current spending on pipeline 
regulation programs is offset by the annual well levy. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he makes it very clear that there isn’t any 
automatic plans to fund these heightened regulations. So as I 
said we’re going to be watching this very closely to make sure 
that this legislation is not just a paper lion, which I think one of 
the members used in question period this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. It can be, that turn of phrase can be used quite often 
for a lot of the things that the Sask Party has done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that I have quite a few colleagues here who are going to 
be interested to join in on this debate. So with that I would like 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 
2016, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 44 — The Water 
Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand today to talk about Bill No. 44, The Water Security 
Agency Amendment Act and share some of my thoughts with 
regards to changes to this Act. Well we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have been calling for a comprehensive drainage strategy to 
help resolve drainage issues, so we welcome changes. But there 
are many concerns that were brought to my attention with 
regards to changes to this bill, and I plan on discussing this. 
 
On my drive down to Regina this lovely weekend on Sunday, I 
took the Highway No. 2 from Prince Albert to Regina. It’s a 
beautiful drive there and you see a lot of the farms, and it’s kind 
of my old stomping grounds when I was younger. And there 
was a lot of flooding already; you could see, like some of the 
streets were flooded. They were having a hard time going 
across that. 
 
So we know that having a proper drainage system is important 
because we’ve been getting more than anticipated rain, and 
that’s caused some issues in a lot of different areas of our 
province. And so this is a really important issue to discuss, and 
it’s really impacted a lot of farms and a lot of communities as 
well, you know. And so I think this is a really important 
discussion that we need to have. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was recently at the SARM [Saskatchewan 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention, and a lot of 
the municipal leaders there, they talked about how important it 
is to have this type of legislation as well. And they do realize 
that it’s time to make some changes, but they talked about some 
of the concerns that they’ve had with regards to this bill. And 
they did indicate that they’ve talked to the ministers in charge 
— both the Minister of Environment and the Minister of 
Agriculture — because they wanted to make sure that their 
voice was heard. And they at times said that they had these 
conversations with the ministers, but they don’t really 
necessarily feel that they were listened to. And they’re 
concerned about the language with regards to the changes in 
this bill and many other things. 
 
And so with regards to this bill, the Water Appeal Board is 
going to be removed. So this gives the Water Security Agency 
unlimited power, and they make the decisions. And that was an 
area that people were quite concerned about: if a certain agency 
or a certain ministry will have the ultimate power, and they 
don’t have any form of being able to repeal some of those 
decisions that they may feel that were made . . . that were the 
right decisions to be made. And they deserve to have an outlet 
to have that say as well. 
 
Also the terminology in this bill, I was told, can really impact 
agriculture by the millions of dollars per year. And I believe —
when I was listening to someone who went up to talk about a 
resolution that they put forward that I’ll discuss in a little bit 
here — that was one of their concerns, was that this bill would 
impact agriculture and by millions of dollars per year. That’s a 
great amount, Mr. Speaker. And we know that a lot of times 
farmers can be struggling to make ends meet, and that could 
really impact possibly, especially the smaller farm owners that 
may only have a certain amount of land that they rely on. 
 
And again, like I said, the wording in this bill is troubling. And 
they feel that it would have an . . . like it has effects on the land 
ownership rights. And so of course when you own land and you 
worry that the government may be able to at any time take over 
that, that’s really troubling, you know. And that’s your 
livelihood, and you need to have that reassurance that that 
won’t be . . . that would be a last-case scenario, you know. 
 
And so also another concern that was brought up when it was 
time to talk about resolutions was that adequate outlets for 
drainage should be the focus. They were hoping that that could 
be more of a focus with regards to this bill than they felt that the 
language already provided. So I think that’s important that we 
recognize that and ensure that outlets for drainage is discussed 
in this bill. 
 
Like I said, it’s time to make some changes with regards to this, 
but do we need to be so hasty and rush through this? I think it’s 
important to take what a lot of people’s concerns are, the 
stakeholders, and maybe incorporate some of those concerns 
into the changes to this. We don’t need to rush through. There’s 
no need for that at this point because the farmers are in favour 
for proper drainage. They just don’t want their rights to be 
infringed with regards to it. 
 
So we want to ensure that farmers feel that they have their 
rights and they have a way to appeal decisions. And they feel 
that this bill will put a lot of power in the ministers’ hands. And 

although a lot of people there had good faith in the current 
ministers that we have here, but they said, you know, who 
knows who the ministers could be in the future; and if they had 
that level of power, what decisions could be made? And that 
was a good point. I thought that was a very valid point that they 
addressed there. 
 
And again, communication is a two-way street. If there needs to 
be more consultation done and . . . From a lot of the people that 
I talked to at this convention and from a lot of the media that 
I’ve been reading with regards to concerns with this bill, it 
sounds like there is a need for more consultation. And I hope 
the minister considers that. This bill could be delayed until a 
workable platform is in place. So I hope he considers that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I did want to talk about the resolutions that 
were in fact passed in the SARM convention with regards to 
this bill because, like I said, this was discussed in length and the 
ministers did hear from the people there as well. So this is no 
surprise to them about the issues that were brought up. So the 
first resolution, I’ll read that: 
 

WHEREAS Bill 44 to amend The Water Security Agency 
Act was introduced and given first reading to the 
Legislative Assembly in November, 2016, with plans for 
obtaining third reading and royal assent in the spring of 
2017; and 
 
WHEREAS Bill 44 was not referred to a committee with 
the option to conduct public hearings on its subject matter; 
and 
 
WHEREAS Bill 44 is designed to help the Water Security 
Agency bring all drainage into compliance over the next 10 
years; and 
 
WHEREAS Bill 44 will grant the Water Security Agency 
significantly more power including the ability to issue 
orders to close or alter any pre-1981 drainage works 
without compensation to the owner, eliminating the 
existing requirement to work through a formal complaint 
process before making an order, the power to enforce 
drainage orders by directly closing work, and increasing 
maximum fines for offenses under the Act up to $1 million 
per day for non-compliance; and 

 
WHEREAS failure to comply to an order by the 
corporation, the corporation may register an “interest” 
based on the order against the title to or abstract . . . [order] 
for the land on which the drainage works are located and 
that shall apply to any subsequent owner of the land; and 

 
WHEREAS the appeal process is abolished under Bill 44 
to deal with disputes; 
 
BE IT RESOLVED that SARM lobby the Province on 
behalf of all rural municipalities to rescind Bill 44. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this resolution was passed by 64 per cent of the 
eligible delegates at the convention. So that was a large 
percentage of them that wanted to support this resolution to 
rescind Bill 44. 
 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

I’ll read another resolution that was brought forward. It was: 
 

WHEREAS the new Water Security Agency regulations 
may lead to a loss of land, increased cost to producers and 
loss of tax money to municipalities; and 

 
WHEREAS these consequences have an overall negative 
economic impact; 
 
BE IT RESOLVED that the Government of Saskatchewan 
repeal the Water Security Agency’s new regulations 
concerning rural land drainage as well as Bill 44. 

 
That regulation was passed by 68 per cent of the eligible voters 
at the convention. So again, really stressing the fact that they 
would like to have this bill . . . rescind and repeal it. 
 
Another resolution was brought forward as well: 
 

WHEREAS some rural municipalities are experiencing 
flooding of land and roads near lakes, due to the natural 
flow being impeded by obstructions, such as beaver dams 
and/or natural obstructions, on private lands, where the 
land owner [either] refuses to remove the obstruction or 
allow access and these obstructions are causing hardship to 
farmers due to lost acres as well as threatening the integrity 
of the RM infrastructure; and 

 
WHEREAS the Saskatchewan Water Security Agency’s 
purpose is to manage water, watersheds and related land 
resources in Saskatchewan, has been contacted to assess 
and assist municipalities in dealing with these issues, [but 
it] is only advising municipalities to deal with it, on their 
own, by enacting . . . local bylaws; and 

 
[15:00] 
 

Whereas The Water Security Agency Act states, in Section 
93(1) the corporation, (being that Agency) or any person 
acting under the corporation’s instructions, has the power 
to enter on any land, to remove or destroy any beaver dam 
or natural obstruction; 
 
Be it resolved that SARM lobby the Ministry of 
Environment to ensure the Water Security Agency fulfills 
its legislated duties by supporting the municipalities that 
are faced with the natural flow of water being impeded by 
. . . [instructions] and take the lead role . . . [in] ensuring 
obstructions are dealt with in a safe and effective manner. 

 
That was passed by 83 per cent of the delegates attending the 
convention that were able to vote. And so I think, Mr. Speaker, 
it was loud and clear that The Water Security Act is a big focus 
for the rural municipal leaders, and they’re paying attention, 
they’re watching, and they’d really appreciate to have more 
consultation before this bill is passed through. So I hope the 
ministers have second thoughts and do a little bit more 
consultation with regards to that. 
 
Also I was looking through some media, and it looks like just 
before Christmas there was a town hall meeting in Quill Lake, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s been town hall meetings across 
Saskatchewan about various issues, and we’ve been very busy 

attending a lot of them. People in the province aren’t happy 
with a lot of the decisions that are being made by this 
government. But in this particular town hall, they had over 250 
farmers who attended this one in Quill Lake on December 20th, 
and I’m just going to read one of the quotes that were made. A 
lot of people were really concerned about and they were 
watching what was going to happen with this Bill 44. But this 
particular person that attended the town hall indicated: 
 

With Bill 44, I’m all for responsible drainage and new 
regulations. I do not believe in just giving them the heavy 
hand and eliminate the appeals board. I mean we have 
nothing to fall back if that’s the case. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the importance for ensuring that people 
have an appeal process when decisions are made on a 
government level, I think was said loud and clear. Like a lot of 
people are concerned about that particular aspect in this bill of 
eliminating that Water Appeal Board. 
 
Also when I was looking through The Western Producer, I 
found an article that “All of Saskatchewan’s major crop 
organizations passed a resolution at CropSphere last week 
calling on the province to rescind or delay implementation of 
Bill 44.” 
 
So this bill was not only talked about at SARM. This was 
discussed at the CropSphere convention as well, you know, in 
early January. And so some of the issues that were brought 
there, there was a particular person that were talking . . . This 
would be the director of Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship 
Association. He was the person that was bringing attention to 
this bill. He was going and making sure all the delegates were 
aware of the impact that this bill could have on the changes of 
the regulations. 
 
So he indicated that . . . “He estimates there is non-permitted 
drainage on 150,000 quarters of land throughout the province.” 
That’s quite a bit of land. And he’s concerned, also concerned 
about the Water Appeal Board, the loss of the Water Appeal 
Board, and he’s quoted here: “It gives a very heavy hand to the 
Water Security Agency.” It’s putting a lot of power in one 
agency to make the decision and not allowing people to have 
that appeal process. He said, “Last year, the Water Security 
Agency ordered the closure of all unimproved drainage ditches 
in the two million acre basin and imposed a moratorium on any 
new projects.” 
 
So he’s quoted as saying, “When we see what Water Security 
could do to these farmers, I do not trust them to be in charge of 
the water policy for the rest of the province.” So this particular 
incident really brought some concerns to them about the 
potential power that the Water Security Agency could have and 
the decisions that they could make, and when you give one 
person or one agency so much power, you have that possibility. 
“He said the new water management policy [this is the changes 
to Bill 44] will take 20 to 25 percent of his acres out of 
production.” 
 
That could be a complete loss of profit for this particular person 
who was attending this convention indicated. And 20 to 25 per 
cent of his acres, that’s a lot of potential loss for him. He 
indicated, “It would destroy my farm.” So that’s really putting 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

people at risk. And agriculture is so important in our province 
that we need to ensure that any of the legislation that we make 
or determine aren’t going to be putting farmers at risk. 
 
So then also, Mr. Speaker, a lot of concern was with the fact 
that the fines were going up from $10,000 to 1 million, the 
maximum fine. And I’m going to read that portion there that 
used to read “not more than . . . 10,000 and not more than 
$1,000 for each day or part of a day . . .” And now it’s just 
going to change to “not exceeding $1,000,000” for each day or 
part of a day. 
 
So people were very concerned about that. And nobody wants 
to be fined but it seems a little extreme to me. This seems kind 
of similar to when you’re really angry at your child and you tell 
them that they’re grounded for the whole year. Well you know 
that they’re not going to be grounded for the whole year. That’s 
going to be quite impossible to maintain. So it seems like we’re 
going from one extreme to the other, and I think that language 
kind of concerned me, too. I was thinking $1 million per day, 
that could be. That’s quite a bit. 
 
And it seems like this is stronger fines for this than other 
offences such as drinking and driving that could kill people, or 
having oil spilled in natural water sources such as river basins. 
We’re penalizing people because of the lack of drainage. I’m 
wondering, is that even correct, like $1 million? Wow. 
 
I know you’ve got to have some hefty fines to discourage 
people from not listening to what they’re legislated to do but 
that seemed a little extreme to me. And it seemed at this 
conference too, that was discussed as well, that they thought 
that was maybe a little bit too much. 
 
So also it’s quoted here from Myles Thorpe, the president of the 
Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Association, also indicated 
that the changes to this bill could have some “massive financial 
implications.” So key people are really paying attention to this. 
He figured that “. . . 1.9 billion would be lost to the 
Saskatchewan economy if farmers weren’t allowed to properly 
drain water from their land.” So 1.9 billion — like I’m 
wondering what was the cost analysis done when the changes to 
this bill were done. Like was that brought up to the attention of 
people who were looking at these changes? Did they do a cost 
analysis of potential implications of the language and changes 
to this bill? 
 
There seems to be a lot of unanswered questions here. So also 
Mr. Thorpe here says some of the unanswered questions would 
be: “. . . what defines an adequate outlet and whether farmers 
are allowed to infill.” So again, having those conversations with 
people who are impacted and needing to answer these and be 
accountable to them. So he also says here, “The landowner 
doesn’t have a lot of power left when you read the bill.” So 
landowners aren’t feeling that they have the process to appeal. 
They’re not feeling like they have a lot of power with regards to 
the land, and how to control that. So those are concerns. 
 
So a couple of other concerns I had, Mr. Speaker. I was looking 
and I was trying to find more information, and maybe I just 
wasn’t looking at the right places, but why is it so important to 
eliminate the Water Appeal Board? I’m not understanding that 
process and I guess I need to learn more. Like who is on this 

board, and how many cases do they deal with in a year, a 
month? Like I don’t know. Is this a board that is used extremely 
a lot or maybe not so much? 
 
And how much is this costing our government for maintaining 
the appeal board if we do decide to listen to some of the people 
who are concerned with the changes that we may make with 
regards to the language here? Is this going to cost a large 
amount of money, or is this a big change that’s really not going 
to impact us a lot? You know, but it’s going to impact people to 
have their say. So I would like to learn more about that. 
 
And again I was wondering, like did they do the cost analysis of 
the potential financial impact of the changes to this bill? And it 
sounds like they’re going to be using the court, the Queen’s 
Bench, Court of Queen’s Bench a lot more for ensuring that 
they’re getting their due process done. And I would think that 
that would be a costly venture, using the court system a lot 
more and lawyers and judges and all of that that would be 
involved. 
 
So I would like to see a cost analysis possibly done to the 
impacts of the bill, and is this something that’s going to be a 
good, fair process? 
 
And if we’re going to eliminate the Water Appeal Board, how 
are we going to assure that there’s fair, due process being 
implemented so that when people don’t feel that this 
government is making the right decision that they have a way to 
voice their concerns? So it sounds like that’s one of the 
concerns that’s been brought up a lot in various places. So is 
this government going to assure that there’s going to be a way 
for people to have their voice heard? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I would seriously caution this 
government from making . . . passing this bill and going ahead 
through with it without consulting all of the people that will be 
involved, and ensuring that you’re not only just talking with 
them but listening to their concerns and possibly having to go 
back to the table and look at a way that this bill could be 
implemented. Because like I said, it’s very important that we 
ensure that we have a comprehensive drainage strategy, and 
how we could ensure that’s being done, but that people are still 
feeling that they have due process there. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of my colleagues have a lot 
to say about this and that they are going to want to have their 
turn to discuss this bill and the process for that. And so with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I will . . . Do I move to adjourn? I’ll adjourn 
this debate, yes. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
No? Oh, 44? Oh, sorry. Bill 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:15] 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 40 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I am proud to stand in my place and add to the comments 
on Bill 40 that I made previously as the result . . . that results 
from the introduction of Bill 40 which talks about the 
interpretation of the ability of the Crowns to sell up to 49 per 
cent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, an attempt to privatize the 
number of Crowns in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke at great length at the last occasion 
that I had to talk to the people of Saskatchewan about the 
specific reason why the Saskatchewan Party government is 
introducing an interpretation Act, which really the bill is all 
about. Bill 40 talks about the interpretation around 
privatization. What does that mean? There’s all kinds of 
reference to what the World Bank may consider the word 
“privatize” to mean. There’s of course other institutions and 
other organizations that have a wide-ranging interpretation of 
what privatization means. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan know 
exactly what privatization means, whether it’s 1 per cent or 49 
per cent, as being proposed in this particular bill. I think the 
people of Saskatchewan really look at the word “privatize” and 
a lot of them become very, very defensive, and they become 
very angry. And they become very disillusioned with the Sask 
Party because obviously, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of 
assurance that the word “privatize” wouldn’t be mentioned by 
anybody in the Assembly as it pertains to our Crowns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people may argue with the NDP 
opposition as it relates to the term “privatize” and the purpose 
of this particular bill. And as the minister alluded to on a few 
occasions where he simply said this is an innocuous 
interpretation of the word “privatize,” we’re not looking at any 
options, obviously we want to do our homework — that was the 
argument that the minister gave as it pertains to this particular 
bill. 
 
But as I indicated in my last foray into the debate around this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, that there was tons of examples of 
how the Saskatchewan Party government have moved their 
privatization agenda forward. I listed them at great length at the 
initial comments that I had on this particular bill, and basically 
told the people of Saskatchewan that, based on past practices, 
that the word “privatize” should be of great concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan when they are uttered by the 
Saskatchewan Party government or any of the members of the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now on this particular bill, if people don’t want to take the 
word of the official opposition as it relates to this particular bill, 
I wanted to turn the people’s attention to an article that was 
produced not more than six months ago, Mr. Speaker, when the 

bill was first introduced in the Assembly. And I’ll quote directly 
from the article. And this article was October 26th, 2016, and I 
quote: 
 

The provincial government is introducing legislation that it 
says will clarify what the term “privatization” will mean in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The current Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
protects major government-owned companies from being 
sold, including SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
The new Interpretation Amendment Act was introduced in 
the legislature Wednesday. According to a government 
news release, the proposed legislation would define the 
word “privatize,” with respect to a Crown corporation, as 
“the transfer to the private sector of all or most of the 
assets, transfer of operational control, or transfer of a 
controlling interest of the Crown corporation.” 
 
CTV News has learned that the new definition allows for 
corporate restructuring, which would make it easier to sell 
minority interests in protected Crowns. The government 
says that would provide . . . necessary flexibility while 
maintaining the government’s commitment to the Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 
If the legislation is passed, a referendum would no longer 
be necessary for the government to sell off up to 49 per 
cent of the shares in the Crown corporations. 

 
Now this is the part that’s confusing. This is, of course, is a 
media article, Mr. Speaker, what they interpreted as what this 
particular bill would allude to. And, Mr. Speaker, the last 
sentence is something that’s really, really confusing and 
concerning to a lot of people as they listen to the word 
“privatize” from the Saskatchewan Party benches. And again 
I’m going to quote that article, and this is a neutral media-based 
story, and the quote I would like to use again: 
 

If the legislation is passed, a referendum would no longer 
be necessary for the government to sell off . . . 49 per cent 
of the shares in the Crown corporations. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is kind of concerning to me that when you 
have the whole issue around SaskTel come forward in the 
Assembly, I think the Premier and the members of the cabinet 
and the entire Sask Party caucus often spoke about the fact that 
since the Manitoba telephone company was purchased, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ve openly suggested and spoke about the notion 
around privatization of SaskTel. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
discussions and comments made in particular by the Premier, 
they spoke about the whole notion of putting forward a 
referendum, when clearly this bill states that a referendum 
would not be necessary if the bill is passed in its current form, 
because the interpretation of privatization is quite clearly 
contained within the bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the confusing question that we have in 
the opposition ranks, is why would you at one hand suggest 
openly that SaskTel should be sold — as the Premier of the 
province has done — and then turn around and say, well before 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

we’ve done anything, we’d turn around and ask the 
stakeholders, and how we would ask the stakeholders is that we 
would do it through a referendum or we’d do it through a public 
vote. And then turn around and introduce legislation later on 
under Bill 40 saying that, well if this Bill 40 is passed, then we 
don’t have to do a referendum. We could just simply use the 
description of the terminology around privatization as part of 
the bill to move forward on selling 49 per cent of our Crowns, 
in particular SaskTel. 
 
So it’s a bit confusing, Mr. Speaker, as to why the Premier 
would offer that particular argument saying that before anything 
is done . . . And I don’t have the quotes directly in front of me, 
but I think the gist of what he was trying to say is that, if 
anything is done, prior to any decision being made, that he 
would go back to the people of Saskatchewan and, either 
through a referendum, that they would help make the decision 
around whether we should sell SaskTel or not. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again doing this analysis from an 
independent source, the media basically looked at the bill and 
basically said, well if this bill is passed as it is being presented, 
then, Mr. Speaker, a referendum would not be necessary. 
 
So that’s kind of the concerning argument that we would make 
in the opposition ranks that . . . what is it? We have to make up 
our mind here. Is the Premier suggesting that a referendum 
would be in the offering? Or, as the bill indicates, that a 
referendum would not be necessary? Which of the two is 
speaking to the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? Is it the Minister of Justice or is it the Premier? So 
these are some of the things that we obviously have to take into 
account. 
 
And our earlier comments that we made last week, Mr. Speaker, 
when we spoke about the interest of the minority shareholders. 
There’s people that are much more of the legal mind than I am 
in the opposition ranks and they look at all kinds of angles, as I 
indicated last time, as to the rights of minority shareholders in 
any corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, those rights are well 
defined. Those rights are very straightforward. They are also 
defended in the courts of Canada. 
 
And it’s also, I guess I mentioned, the right of any shareholder 
to make sure that they are bound by their own interest in 
ensuring that their return on the investment, of their investment 
into SaskTel, that that cannot be encumbered in any way, shape, 
or form, and that as minority shareholders they have certain 
rights and certain laws that allow them to protect their interest. 
Even if the corporation as a whole wants to go in a different 
direction, minority shareholders have a lot of influence that 
could stop that. 
 
So as you look at the whole notion around privatization, there’s 
argument from our side of the Assembly that privatization . . . 
What is meant by that? There are so many different 
interpretations, Mr. Speaker, that one has to just simply go into 
the dictionary, even go into the legal circles and into the 
international courts and really begin to research what is really 
meant by privatization. 
 
And since there are thousands and thousands of interpretations, 
Mr. Speaker, one can basically say that that’s a wide-open door 

being suggested by the Sask Party. And I think it’s really 
insulting to the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence as well 
when they say, well we’re using the word “privatize.” Well, you 
know, I think the people of Saskatchewan know very well that 
the word “privatize” could have many, many different meanings 
and different context, of course, depending on how it’s being 
used. And of course those meanings vary throughout the world. 
 
And this is where we begin the whole slippery slope around this 
whole interpretation. Who decides which interpretation of 
privatization do they use, Mr. Speaker, which official 
declaration of interest, if you will, when it comes to the word 
“privatize,” the rights and responsibility of the minority 
shareholder? And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
last time, where exactly are we going to go with the 
terminology and interpretation and definition of privatization? 
Who makes those calls? And what is the definition being used 
by the government? 
 
Now that being said, Mr. Speaker, again the statements of the 
Premier publicly, the statements of many of the Sask Party 
MLAs saying that SaskTel is not for sale, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re only looking at 49 per cent, well then, is there any 
offers? According to all the media sources, that was quoted by 
the Premier and by many members of the cabinet, that if there’s 
any offers made by SaskTel then we would entertain those 
offers through a public referendum. 
 
Well Bill 40 is quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that if this bill is being 
passed, guess what, folks? There isn’t going to be no 
referendum on the sale of SaskTel. That interpretation of what 
privatize means and the decision to sell or not to sell will rest 
entirely with the Sask Party government. And given their 
history of selling off our Crowns as they’ve seen fit and when 
they’ve seen fit, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly something that 
people of Saskatchewan ought to take into record when they 
certainly evaluate whose argument is proper in this instance. Is 
it the government or is it the opposition that are warning people 
that once these corporations are sold, our Crown corporations, 
then they’re sold forever? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a bit of time to show how the 
Sask Party really messed up on a number of fronts when it 
comes to our Crown corporations, not just SaskTel. One of the 
things that we often spoke about . . . And we hear this in the 
Assembly quite a bit when day after day the government MLAs 
get up and they present petitions around the carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. And we in the opposition have accused the 
government of putting together what we call the carbon capture 
tax, and this is around the CCS project at SaskPower. 
 
And just basically what the project is all about is really to begin 
the process of recovering some of the carbon that is being 
spewed out of our SaskPower coal-fired plants, Mr. Speaker, 
and to use the gas coming out of our plant to sell it to Cenovus, 
which is an oil and gas company. And that carbon would then 
go into the ground and force some of the oil up through the 
cracks, and so on and so forth, of the formation of land in and 
around some of the oil wells in the province, and of course not 
just in the province but other parts of Western Canada as well. 
 
So the theory of this carbon capture sequestration process 
project — CCS, Mr. Speaker — is that the power station 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

generates a certain amount of carbon gas that’s being sold to 
some of the gas companies. And as it’s being piped to the gas 
company, they inject some of this carbon gas into the ground 
and that forces some of the oil and gas up through the cracks, 
therefore making the recovery of oil and gas much more 
efficient, much more cost-efficient, and much more effective. 
 
So what happens now, Mr. Speaker, is that the government, 
through the Sask Party, put together this deal with Cenovus. 
And what they said was, we will spend the money to put this 
carbon capture process into place. We’ll spend the money. It’s a 
$1.5 billion project for the people of Saskatchewan. And then 
what happens is the people of Saskatchewan will pay that $1.5 
billion cost, but we’ll generate some gas. We’ll try and capture 
some of the gas that we said we would through this carbon 
capture storage strategy, and then we would sell you that gas so 
you’re able to transfer it to your oil fields, pump it into the 
ground, and secrete more oil and gas to your pumps. 
 
Now the company, the oil and gas company, you know, they 
kind of like that deal because it obviously does a number of 
things, Mr. Speaker. It sequesters carbon into the soil and it also 
helps generate more profits for the oil and gas company. And it 
makes the recovery of some of the harder gases and oil to 
access deep in the ground, well it makes it much more 
affordable to do it with gas overall. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So they signed an agreement with a number of companies, in 
particular one particular company, Cenovus. So the government 
got on their soapbox and they basically said what they’re going 
to do is they’re going to have a carbon capture technology at 
our power plants, and we’re going to capture a lot of the carbon 
that we generally emit in the air. We’re going to sell that to 
Cenovus, and they’re going to take it and they’re going to pump 
it into the ground where it should be pumped into, and then 
they’re going to push more oil and gas so everybody in this 
world will be happy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what happens is, if you look at some of the 
initial problems at the site and the fact that there’s some 
agreement signed by the provincial government when it came to 
the operation of our Crowns — don’t forget, this is all about the 
Crowns, interpretation of selling some of the Crowns — and, 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 alludes to that whole notion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we spent $1.5 billion on this whole 
technology, and the people of Saskatchewan, with great fanfare, 
the people of Saskatchewan were told this is going to be a great 
idea for the environment, for the economy, for the oil sector, 
and to make sure that, you know, that we support our oil and 
gas sector. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to share with you what 
happened. What happened was the current minister and the 
current government really didn’t think these things through 
properly. And what happens is that, at the end of the day, when 
they’re touting the fact that this process was working so well, 
we find out that many, many times that the carbon capture 
process, if you will, only accounted for 50 per cent of what their 
projected targets were on an annual basis. So while they’re 
bragging about the carbon that’s being taken out of the air, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re failing miserably to try and achieve those 
targets, and they didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
they were failing miserably. And what happens as a result is 
that if you have contracts with the oil and gas companies, guess 
what? You better fulfill those contracts because they expect 
those carbon, the carbon gas to arrive at their stations to be used 
for the recovery of oil and gas. 
 
So what happened now, Mr. Speaker, is that because they 
couldn’t get their act together — the current government — in 
which they really hampered SaskPower with their constant 
interference, Mr. Speaker, what happened was, in 2014 and 
2015 there was a delivery shortfall of the carbon gas to 
Cenovus. So what happened is we cut them a cheque. We cut 
them a cheque for 12 million bucks in that year. 
 
For 2015-2016 it happened again, Mr. Speaker, where the Sask 
Party couldn’t get their act together as it pertains to the 
operation of the CCS technology. So once again we cut another 
cheque to Cenovus for $7.4 million. In 2015, operating and 
maintenance and administration, the expense we had to pay 
there was 13 million. 
 
Again in 2016 we had to pay another $11.2 million around 
operating, maintenance, and administration. In 2015, Mr. 
Speaker, we spent $18.5 million on replacement for what I 
think is amine, which is a-m-i-n-e. Again the same cost in 
2016-2017 was 20-plus million dollars for the same problem 
that occurred in 2015-2016. In 2016-2017, Mr. Speaker, 
penalties for delivery of the carbon gas to Cenovus was again 
$1.2 million. 
 
So as you look at all of these things, Mr. Speaker, we’re finding 
very quickly and very clearly that this is one example of how 
the Sask Party has interfered with the Crown corporations’ 
operations, to really discredit the Crown corporations and 
interfere politically with the Crown corporations. Because quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, when that happens, when you have 
politicians driving our Crown sector and making things difficult 
for them, this is where you begin to see money being taken out 
of our Crown corporations and sent to companies that sign 
contracts with SaskPower and don’t get the carbon gas that they 
signed up for. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that when you have efforts 
to try and take carbon out of the air, which a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan overall support, when you try and make sure that 
carbon is something that doesn’t belong in the air — it’s much 
more proper it be in the ground — that obviously that affects 
the global emissions of greenhouse gases. And as we all know 
in Saskatchewan, we have coal-fired plants that really 
contribute a lot to the greenhouse gas emissions overall as a 
province. And the rate for the greenhouse gas emissions by our 
Crown corporations is quite high, in particular SaskPower. So 
we have this notion that yes, it’s a publicly owned Crown 
corporation; yes, they have to make profits, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no question about that in our minds. 
 
But by the same token, this whole environmental stewardship 
issue comes to the forefront. A lot of people in Canada and 
throughout the world in different countries and certainly even 
people in our own backyards and people in our communities, 
they want Saskatchewan to do the right thing and fulfill their 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

obligations around reducing greenhouse gases. So as we look at 
the whole notion around greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker, we 
ought to do our part as a province, and certainly the Crown 
corporations play a vital role in that regard. 
 
So that being said, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower, as they undertake 
this notion of trying to capture carbon much more effectively, 
we have to make sure that we are constant and vigilant in 
making sure that the costs are being monitored. And this is the 
folly. How did the Sask Party really interfere with this process, 
Mr. Speaker? Well first of all they pushed the SaskPower 
executives off the way so they can be on the stage and be seen 
by the media as people that are doing all of this when in fact the 
SaskPower executives had the foresight to figure out that if we 
took carbon out of the air, what can we do with it? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what happened next was the politicians 
across the way here, they decided that they better hide all this 
information from the people of Saskatchewan that in fact the 
carbon capture process wasn’t working 100 per cent, that in fact 
on many occasions it was only operating 50 per cent because 
they still were not at that stage where they’re full capacity. And 
yet they kept that information from the public. 
 
And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, we got information in the 
opposition that they’ve been doing that on numerous occasion. 
And the reason why they hit some of these shortcomings for 
this technology, Mr. Speaker, is because they didn’t want the 
people of Saskatchewan to know that they were actually paying 
money out as a result of this lack of volume of carbon gas that 
was promised to companies like Cenovus. And what the Sask 
Party didn’t want people to know is that they were actually 
paying an oil and gas company money to get rid of some of the 
carbon. And the worst part of it all, Mr. Speaker, is not that they 
as a government and as a party were paying it; it was the 
average consumer, which is you and I and the business world. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Speaker, on SaskPower as it pertains to 
our Crown corporations, this is why Bill 40 is so worrisome. 
It’s because the activity in the history of the Sask Party as it 
pertains to our Crowns is one that has a checkered history. 
 
They’ve made no bones about the fact that they have sold a 
number of our Crown corporations already. They will continue 
looking at those options, Mr. Speaker. They will play with some 
of the wording around the terminology, “privatization.” They 
have mixed messages before an election and after an election. 
They have these kind of bills that can come forward where later 
on it turns out that they don’t have to have a referendum on the 
future of SaskTel. These are some of the reasons why a lot of 
people in Saskatchewan do not trust the Saskatchewan Party 
government when it comes to our Crowns, and more and more 
and more of those issues in that statement from the people of 
Saskatchewan is coming forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the theory behind the Crowns is this: they 
create jobs; they’re good for the economy; they have good 
services; and the prices that they give to the people of 
Saskatchewan are very competitive. And so they’re good for the 
economy. They create jobs. They return dividends to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and it’s something. And I think to a certain 
extent that the Saskatchewan Party caucus is jealous of the 
Crowns because they do things for Saskatchewan that the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus will never do. And that is create 
jobs, provide good service, create dividends for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and keep the prices attractive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Saskatchewan Party to 
stop playing with the Crown corporation sector because people 
obviously are concerned about what’s going to happen to our 
Crowns, and we continue seeing that kind of activity by the 
politicians across the way. And our message to them as the 
official opposition is that if you don’t know what you’re doing 
when it comes to the Crown corporations, stop interfering with 
the processes and stop trying to be in front of the cameras every 
time there is discussion around the Crowns, to try and confuse 
the people and take credit for your politics in some way, shape, 
or form. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going back to the carbon capture 
technology, the people of Saskatchewan paid $1.5 billion for 
that project, and they continue paying to different oil companies 
each year as they fail to meet their mark. And I gave you 
various examples of what they were paying for Cenovus. Now 
the people of Saskatchewan can say, well isn’t that the right 
thing to do? The answer is yes. If we can take out more carbon 
out of the air, then we should make every effort to do so. 
 
The problem is that the people of Saskatchewan are quickly 
beginning to realize is that through mismanagement and waste, 
the Saskatchewan Party now has put that whole technology and 
has put the whole concept around the carbon capture on uneven 
footing because people are beginning to doubt that technology. 
Why? Because the Sask Party in their way of dealing with the 
Crowns is absolutely ludicrous because they continue 
interfering in things they don’t understand. 
 
So our advice from the opposition is that if you don’t know 
what you’re doing when it comes to a Crown corporation, 
maybe you should keep your hands off them and let the people 
of Saskatchewan decide through an election, as opposed to a 
bill or as opposed to a referendum that would be manipulated 
and poorly worded for, you know, for their interest and not for 
the people of Saskatchewan’s interest. 
 
So the overwhelming problem we have on this whole carbon 
capture boondoggle, as we explain on this side, is that the 
people of Saskatchewan are paying, Mr. Speaker. Every single 
resident in our province that have a power bill to their home, we 
are paying that. The farmers are paying that, Mr. Speaker. The 
business community is paying that. The university is paying 
that. So the carbon capture tax that’s being put onto our power 
bill is compliments of the Saskatchewan Party government 
because they messed up here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They interfered at critical times. They didn’t communicate to 
the people of Saskatchewan. They inked deals that they didn’t 
know what they were getting into. The net effect is that the 
people of Saskatchewan now are on the hook for a $1.5 billion 
carbon capture and storage project that the Sask Party made 
sure it didn’t work. 
 
But despite that, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower continues remaining a 
strong Crown. And I think the people of Saskatchewan should 
be very, very careful when we have the Saskatchewan Party 
representatives, MLAs, speak about privatization because 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

people of Saskatchewan do not want to see their Crowns 
privatized in any way, shape, or form. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
the Saskatchewan Party MLAs hear that and in their own 
arrogance decided not to listen to that. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
always spells trouble for the people across the way there 
because people will not be ignored when it comes to our Crown 
corporations. 
 
So I say this to the people that may be listening to this particular 
bill, the bill excludes the Premier’s offer to have a referendum. 
The bill states, that if we proceed with the interpretation as 
designed in Bill 40, that a referendum would not have to be held 
despite what the Premier has said in the past that he’d go back 
to the people of Saskatchewan. We need to make sure people 
across the province hear that loud and clear. 
 
Now the other point I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is that whether 
it’s SaskPower’s carbon capture project or whether it’s the 
smart meter fiasco, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is damaging the 
credibility of our Crowns. And they’re putting the Crowns into 
huge debt and some of that debt is because of their interference 
as a political watchdog for our Crown corporations. And the 
problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re all paying. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Every day when we hear the Sask Party get up and present their 
petition on the carbon pricing or carbon tax they talk about, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s two things we say on the opposition side. Well 
we should take a mirror and have a look at yourselves because 
you put in a carbon capture tax for all the people of 
Saskatchewan — for the farm community, for the business 
community, for the schools, the institutions, and the average 
person. The carbon capture tax put in place by the Sask Party 
government through the CCS technology is on the power bills 
as we speak. So we sit here and listen to their petitions, and we 
all kind of laugh at that because we know exactly what they’re 
doing. 
 
And the worst part about the whole process, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is you and I know when a time comes for the federal 
government to come and drop some money off on the refund of 
the carbon tax as they call it, the carbon credit, Mr. Speaker, 
well I’m pretty certain that the Premier and the cabinet will take 
that money. And they’ll probably spend it the way they want to 
see fit, the most politically way that they see fit. 
 
So from the argument perspective, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
practising what they’re preaching right now when it comes to 
carbon tax. They have put in a process in place through 
SaskPower and it’s called a carbon capture tax. And every 
single one of our people in this province are paying that tax, 
compliments of the Saskatchewan Party government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, look at your power bills. You will see that power bills 
are going up. They’re increasing, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have the 
exact percentage, but the last number of months we’ve seen the 
increase going 5 per cent, 6 per cent. 
 
And it’s going to get worse, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to get 
worse because the Saskatchewan Party continues shipping out 
dollars to companies that they made commitments for and 
taking a certain volume of gas from the process. And they 
couldn’t deliver, and now they’ve got to pay Cenovus and other 

oil companies a certain amount of money. As I mentioned, first 
year, 2014-2015, they sent them a $12 million cheque, 
compliments of you and I. 
 
Because as we pay our power bills, Mr. Speaker, as every single 
person in this province pays a power bill, that extra cost in that 
bill — that’s threatening families, that’s threatening businesses, 
that is threatening farms in our province, Mr. Speaker — that 
carbon capture tax is a direct result of Sask Party policy and no 
one else, Mr. Speaker. So look at your power bills. Look at your 
power bills and you will notice from two years, three years ago, 
you’re paying a significant amount of money, a lot more money 
on your power bill, Mr. Speaker, than you were before. Why? 
Because the Sask Party has bungled every project that the 
Crown corporations have brought forward for their own 
political purposes, Mr. Speaker, for their own political 
purposes. 
 
So the carbon capture tax is a real thing that the Sask Party put 
in place. It is a real thing. And we sit here and we smile at them 
when they get up and they present their so-called petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, about the carbon tax being implemented by the federal 
government. Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve adopted that idea three 
years ago. They’ve adopted the same idea. They have put 
together a carbon capture tax for the people of Saskatchewan 
that we are paying in our power bill each and every month, each 
and every month. So what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
we’re going to tell the people of Saskatchewan. Every time a 
Sask Party member gets up and presents a petition on the 
carbon tax, we’re going to say, look in the mirror because 
you’re the one that gave us this carbon capture tax. That’s 
exactly what you’ve done. 
 
And if you don’t think . . . If you don’t think that carbon capture 
tax put on by the Sask Party government is costing the business 
people, it’s costing the families and the farms in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask every single individual in the 
province of Saskatchewan to look at their power bill and 
compare it from two years ago and you’re paying much more. 
You’re paying much more because the Sask Party government 
has decided to put this carbon capture tax on your bill. The 
business people, look at your bill. The farm families, look at 
your bill. The average citizen, look at your bill. The institutions, 
look at your power bill and do a comparison. 
 
Has our power bills been steadily increasing under the Sask 
Party? The answer is yes, it has been, Mr. Speaker. The answer 
is absolutely yes. The power bills are going up compliments of 
the Sask Party because they decided to put a carbon capture tax 
as part of their policy. And yet they have the audacity to stand 
today to present petitions of people who want to fight like the 
opposition fight the federal government in imposing a carbon 
levy against our community and against our province. 
 
We stand with the people of Saskatchewan. But it’s hard for us 
on this side of the Assembly to stomach that kind of theatrics by 
the Saskatchewan Party bringing those petitions every day, at 
the same time they’re digging in each and every person’s 
pocket in the province of Saskatchewan to help pay for their 
carbon capture tax scheme that’s going to cost us for years and 
years and years. 
 
So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, as we sit there and listen to their 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

petitions . . . I tell people in my constituency, I’m telling people 
throughout Saskatchewan today: keep watching what they do 
because the ears and eyes of the people of Saskatchewan are 
what’s helping our opposition out because we’re getting a lot 
information on what the costs are for various families and 
businesses and people. And they’re not happy with the fact that 
the Sask Party has bungled every project that the Crown 
corporations have brought forward.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we think that that bungling is . . . I think it’s 
on purpose. Some people say it’s by design. I say, well easy. I 
don’t give them that much credit that it’s by design that they’re 
bungling up the Crown corporations. I think they’re just doing 
that because they’re so addicted to their philosophical position 
that Saskatchewan Party wants to get rid of the Crowns and this 
is their one way of doing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would point out that under Bill 40 again, Mr. Speaker, that as 
you have people paying this carbon capture tax, it has a 
profound negative effect on the overall economy of the 
province. So I tell the people whenever I get the chance to 
speak that the carbon capture tax is real. It is not going away. It 
is compliments, direct compliments of the Sask Party 
government. That carbon capture tax that’s put in place, every 
single one of us are paying that right now. Every single one of 
us are paying that carbon capture tax compliments of the Sask 
Party. 
 
And when they get up and they bemoan the federal Liberal 
government’s plan for a carbon pricing scheme, Mr. Speaker, 
they should, as I’ve mentioned, look in the mirror. Because 
between them and the federal Liberals, they’re taxing people of 
Saskatchewan a ridiculous amount; not so much for their insight 
as to how the Crowns could become a big part of our economy, 
but for the fact that they do want to, they do want to betray the 
trust of the Crowns so they can justify how they would sell 
these Crowns later on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, there is a carbon capture 
tax. It is real. It is put on your power bills. It is a direct result of 
the Sask Party’s bungling and interference in our Crown 
corporations. You, we, as taxpayers of Saskatchewan, are 
paying oil and gas companies such as Cenovus, penalties each 
and every year; and certainly the years that I’ve pointed out 
because the Saskatchewan Party tried to hide that information 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So there’s no question in my mind, as they get up and read off 
their carbon tax petition from the citizens that they’re talking to 
. . . I would suggest to each and every Sask Party MLA: tell 
them about your carbon capture scheme. Why won’t they tell 
them that they’re paying those bills? The increases that you see 
in the power bill is being paid by people from Shellbrook. 
They’re being paid by people from Big River. They’re being 
paid by people from Indian Head, from Prince Albert, from 
Saskatoon, from Regina, the business community, the family 
farms. Everyone in Saskatchewan is paying this carbon capture 
tax that the Saskatchewan Party has designed for us. And as a 
result of that, our power bills are going up and up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, pretty soon a lot of families that are losing 
their jobs, losing their homes, losing hope because the Sask 
Party government has mismanaged our economy so bad that all 

of a sudden these increased costs that are on our power bills 
may be the breaking point for many families’ budgets, and 
you’ll find that many families are indeed struggling through this 
whole process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again sticking with the CCS technology, I 
was again speaking to a number of people outside of the 
Assembly here about how the federal government’s 
implementation of the carbon pricing scheme is going to affect 
the province overall. And we in the opposition do not agree that 
implementing something on Saskatchewan from the federal 
government, when they impose things on our province, that is 
not the best strategy overall. 
 
So as an opposition, we think that perhaps there should have 
been some really solid negotiations, that if the federal 
government was insisting on putting this into place, why wasn’t 
Saskatchewan at the table negotiating and pushing hard to make 
sure that any kind of revenues that may be derived from the 
carbon surcharge put on Saskatchewan businesses, Mr. Speaker, 
that we could use it in a most intelligent and certainly in a most 
effective manner? 
 
Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan 
Party walked away from that process and then they started 
bringing these petitions to the Assembly as a government, 
saying, we don’t want the federal government imposing 
anything on us. And we in the opposition agree. We shouldn’t 
have the federal government impose tougher sanctions or 
tougher laws against us without our consultation and our 
participation. We absolutely agree. 
 
But when we see the Sask Party walk away from the table, Mr. 
Speaker, on this carbon tax as they make reference to it, Mr. 
Speaker, we tell them, well first of all you have a carbon 
capture tax you put in place already; we’re paying for that for a 
long time. And if you’re in principle against the whole concept 
around the carbon tax as you’ve indicated in your petitions, then 
you would assume that they wouldn’t take the money that was 
going to come back from the federal government in these 
negotiations that they’ve had with other provinces such as 
Saskatchewan and . . . or such as Alberta and BC and so on and 
so forth. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I bet you every dime that I 
have in my pocket today that they will take the money. They sit 
here in the Assembly. First of all they implement the carbon 
capture tax, and they moan about the federal government 
implementing something that they don’t like, but they’ll take 
the money. They’ll take the money. So the principled position 
that they stand in the Assembly on, this carbon capture tax, well 
this side of the Assembly, we don’t buy it because (a) they’ve 
put a tax in for carbon capture, and (b) they’ll take the money. 
 
So which is it? Are you opposed? Are you opposed to this plan, 
or are you not? And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
Assembly we look at the theatrics of the Saskatchewan Party of 
walking out on the federal process to try and strike a deal for 
Saskatchewan’s interests, if there is that possibility . . . And 
since you’ve implemented a carbon capture tax, well you’re 
masters at that, so why don’t you figure this out for the people 
of Saskatchewan’s future. And, Mr. Speaker, they simply 
walked out. 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

But I can tell the people of Saskatchewan this, is that they will 
take the money. And mark my words, mark my words, they will 
take that money, and they’ll make a great announcement or 
some fanfare of how they’re going to use the carbon levy that’s 
being imposed by Ottawa, on how that they’re going to use it 
under certain projects. You mark my words. And this is the 
reason why, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we 
don’t trust the Saskatchewan Party when it comes to our Crown 
corporations because they don’t practise what they preach, but 
they’ll take every cent that they can. 
 
And yet they’ll sit here each day presenting petitions for what 
purpose? Because they’re not fooling anyone, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not fooling a soul. The fact is that they’ve put their own 
tax in place already, and they’ll take the money when this credit 
comes due from the federal government. And they’ll still 
continue playing the games in the Assembly pretending to be so 
concerned around carbon, Mr. Speaker, when they can’t 
practise taking carbon out of the air. They’ve taxed us so 
heavily already, and they’ll take the money from the federal 
government all the while bemoaning this whole notion around 
carbon tax when they are exactly doing that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we look at SaskPower, there is no question 
that they have put into place a big, big problem for the people 
of Saskatchewan to deal with over the many, many years where 
every single man, woman, and child will be paying through 
their power bills for their bungling of the SaskPower carbon 
capture storage concept. And, Mr. Speaker, they also will be 
taking the cash, as I mentioned, from the federal government. 
So they’re not fooling anyone. 
 
Now I want to switch gears a bit, Mr. Speaker, from the carbon 
capture storage boondoggles that have been very apparent over 
the years. I think, I think that the people of Saskatchewan really 
are beginning to pay attention to what the Sask Party’s doing as 
it relates to our Crowns. Bill 40 is an example. They tried to 
make this an innocuous bill. It hasn’t got a whole lot of 
interpretations, a whole lot of paper to it, but rest assured, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve indicated, Bill 40 is all about interpretation. 
They want to interpret this bill for their own political purposes. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And the reason why it’s worrisome to us in Saskatchewan is . . . 
Again I go back to the history. In Saskatchewan we have three 
or four, if I could use the phrase, “assets,” Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and these assets really help us in our economy in developing 
our economy and remaining strong as a province. And the 
assets include the large corporate and the small business 
community. These giants and these worker, business 
community, investors, and so on and so forth, they come to our 
province and they invest in our province. And that’s one of the 
key components of any economy is to attract that investment as 
I’ve indicated time and time again. 
 
And some of these corporations have come, set up in 
Saskatchewan, that come develop our resources, they create a 
lot of jobs. They pay royalties to the province, and they 
certainly stimulate economies of various communities that they 
are involved with. So whether it is potash, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s oil and gas and uranium and the agricultural sector, 
these are all . . . I look at the farm communities and the farm 

families as very industrious builders of our economy, and 
strengthening of the province’s economy is one of their callings 
in life. And they’re doing a remarkable job of making things 
happen for Saskatchewan. 
 
The other important component, as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, is 
to look at the engagement of the labour movement themselves. I 
think the fact that we have a lot of people involved with the 
unions, and I’ve been, I’ve sat with many of the leaders over 
time, and they appreciate the fact that many of their members 
need to have mortgage-paying jobs and the fact that they have 
families to feed and that employment and opportunity in 
Saskatchewan cannot happen unless you have a really good, 
strong labour force. And when I say a good, strong labour force, 
that they are highly skilled and that they’re very good workers 
and that they can contribute much to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we look at the private sector involvement. We look at their 
investment. We look at the role of the labour force and the fact 
that they’re pretty important overall. And then you look at the 
Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. Having Crowns owned by the 
Saskatchewan government is an incredible asset for them to 
have. There’s a lot of services that would not be provided for 
the costs that are there now, and yet people continue not 
recognizing that from the Saskatchewan Party side. 
 
Now when I talked to a number of people within the 
conservative movement, I tell them about the taxes. And as we 
all know in Saskatchewan, we need more people in our 
province. We need many more people to come forward, as I’ve 
indicated. We need to keep our royalties and our taxes 
competitive and as low as we can. And there’s a number of 
reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. When we talk about having our 
taxes remain as competitive as they can, it’s all part of the 
process to attract more investment, and we on the NDP side 
certainly see that possibility. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you look, if you look at the role of the 
Crowns, they provide incredible opportunity for our people. 
And how do they provide that opportunity? Well as I 
mentioned, they create jobs. They subsidize the cost of 
providing services in our province. They provide services to 
people. They provide these services at a very reasonable cost. 
 
So some of the businesses that come to our province, I can 
guarantee you that part of their analysis of why they come to 
Saskatchewan incorporates this whole notion around the 
Crowns. So as they look at the insurance costs for their vehicles 
as they plan a major expansion in the province, well if the 
insurance rates are much lower than Alberta, as an example, 
then those analyses help the companies make the decision to 
come to Saskatchewan. 
 
If they look at services, they look at the fact that we have 
cellphone coverage where cellphone coverage doesn’t exist in 
other provinces, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s at the base of the 
Rocky Mountains in Alberta where you cannot get cell 
coverage. And Alberta is a province that has three times the 
population that the province has and yet they can’t have cell 
coverage in a very basic tourist area. But, Mr. Speaker, you can 
have cell coverage in Pinehouse. You can have cell coverage in 
Green Lake. You can have cell coverage in Ryerson Lake. It’s a 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

community that straddles the Alberta and Saskatchewan border. 
 
So the reason why we are able to have all these services all over 
the place, Mr. Speaker, is because SaskTel has decided that 
expansion within their boundaries and their province is always 
the important thing to do. And this is where you talk about 
corporate mentality. This is where you talk about Saskatchewan 
people’s value when it comes to the Crowns, and this is where 
you talk about improved services. 
 
So companies will look at a wide variety of issues before they 
will locate to any jurisdiction. Having affordable insurance 
rates, having good services like cellphone and technology 
available, and certainly having competitive tax rates, these all 
add, these all add to the strength of Saskatchewan overall. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the importance of the 
Crowns when it comes to our economy, I want to point out 
some of the money, some of the money that the Crown 
corporations have given to the people of Saskatchewan. And in 
particular I want to talk to the conservative population that talk 
about, you know, the Crowns overall. A lot of my friends in the 
conservative circles talk to me about the taxation rate, where 
they’re saying, well you got to be careful on not having the 
taxes going too high because it’s a disincentive for a lot of 
people to spend. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again going back to some of the 
conservatives that I speak with, they understand that the 
Crowns are really important to Saskatchewan. A lot of them are 
very strong and ardent supporters of the Crown corporations. 
They think the Crown corporations present stability, which is a 
really key word. A lot of the folks in the conservative corners 
that I speak with, they talk about having the security of the 
Crown corporations there. They know it’s pretty darn 
important. They like the fact that there’s jobs. They certainly 
like that. They like the fact that there’s services. That’s another 
added attribute of the Crowns. They like the fact that these 
prices are very, very competitive, and the fact that we own 
them.  
 
So security of the Crown corporations is something that a lot of 
people within the conservative movement really, really, truly 
appreciate. That being said, Mr. Speaker, when they ask me 
questions, what exactly . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s my pleasure to be 
joined here today by a good friend and by his son. I’m joined by 
Ted Jaleta, someone who’s no stranger to many in this 
Assembly, and his son, six-year-old son Jacob here today. I had 
a nice meeting with both of them just a few minutes ago. These 
are two, well these two hang around town and give back a 
whole bunch to our community in many, many ways. I know 
Jacob soaks up all things sport — soccer, swimming, running, 
like his dad. And certainly, Ted’s wife and partner, Mary Jo 
Jaleta, is a special individual as well in our community. 
 
Ted, as you would know, is a champion in every aspect of that 
word, someone who’s persevered through challenge that most 
of us could only ever imagine. Someone who at a young age 
was on the Ethiopian Olympic training team, the national team, 
the training team, and due to horrendous circumstances and 
crisis at that point in time made his way — a long journey, a 
long, long, journey — to Canada as a refugee. 
 
Ted is someone who has given back to our community for 
decades, who’s spent his life as a civil servant, delivering for 
the people of our province and our country, and someone who’s 
quite simply been one of Canada’s very best runners of all time. 
A champion from Saskatchewan here, and someone who has 
been a champion in his sport, but someone who has always 
given back to the community in so many other ways. 
 
He has legions of followers that he supports in the healthy 
pursuits of being active or becoming championship runners. He 
has a group called the Jaleta Pacers that you’ll often see around 
this Assembly and around the lake as they train and as they 
compete. And they go off around the world and compete in 
places like Boston. He certainly has developed some incredible 
athletes on that front. 
 
But someone who gives back time and time again. Someone 
who organizes a race — the Royal Road Race — that has given 
dollars back to most recently, Dr. Hanna School to their early 
learning program; to Chili for Children through to the Early 
Learning Centre; and many other programs. 
 
Anyways, certainly Ted Jaleta is somebody who’s a friend to 
many in this Assembly and someone I’m proud to count as a 
friend. He was our candidate for the Saskatchewan NDP in 
Coronation Park this last election and continues to maintain a 
high level of involvement on that front as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s also come on board as our training coach, so he’s the 
captain of the team for the NDP in the upcoming Regina Police 
Half Marathon where we’ve got a little gentle challenge with 
members opposite, and we’re looking forward to that. 
 
But I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome Ted Jaleta 
to his Assembly. Someone who’s . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . You know, we have a noisy member from Cannington. 
Doesn’t get up to say boo about things day after day, but he’s 
going to heckle while . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would invite 
the member to conclude his introduction. 
 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I ask all members in this Assembly to 
welcome somebody who’s a true champion and someone who’s 
been a tireless advocate and a true community builder, Mr. Ted 
Jaleta. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 
modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
too am planning on joining Mr. Jaleta on the long-distance 
circuit because I think it’s time for us to get in shape because 
we’re going to be so busy running government here in less than 
three years that we’re going to have to make sure that we stay in 
top shape, Mr. Speaker. So I welcome Mr. Jaleta to the 
Assembly as well, and his son. 
 
And obviously I think a lot of the debates around the Crown 
corporations are going to serve us well in the future as we 
certainly tell the people of Saskatchewan the folly around Bill 
40 and the importance of us paying attention to the wording and 
certainly the games that the Saskatchewan Party play with our 
Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking about the tax rate, and I 
want to go down the list of the CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] dividends that are being paid to 
the province of Saskatchewan. Now this part’s really important, 
Mr. Speaker. Every year the dividends being paid by a Crown 
corporation — SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] — every year the Sask Party 
government gets money from the Crown corporations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the important part in all of this is the fact that as they 
get this money, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations don’t tell 
them how to spend it. They simply pay it off as a dividend and 
that’s that.  
 
And this is the importance that I speak about, of how much 
value that the Crown corporations offer to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not just in the jobs and in the services, Mr. 
Speaker, but more importantly to the fact that they give us 
dividends each and every year. 
 
Now I’m sure the discouraging part of the Crown corporations 
is that as they hand over much of their hard-earned money as 
Crowns, they have no control of that money overall. And when 
you see the current government with their bypass scandal, with 
the whole notion around the carbon capture technology, Mr. 
Speaker, and the smart meters fiasco, and the fact that they 
spent millions on lean, the list goes on, Mr. Speaker, of how the 
Sask Party has squandered, has squandered a lot of money over 
the last eight, nine years, Mr. Speaker. They’ve really put 
Saskatchewan backwards in the sense of the financial growth 
and the financial stability we had not more than eight or nine 
years ago since they formed government. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the money that we get from the Crown 
corporations is handed over to the Saskatchewan Party 
government and the Saskatchewan Party government, as I said, 
have taken those dividends. And yet at the same token they 
have not done any justice to those dividends that they received 
from our Crowns by squandering that money. And through just 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. Speaker, they have 
put this province in a really bad situation, and as we’ll see 
evidence of that Wednesday. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The people of Saskatchewan had no idea just how bad it was 
prior to the last election, Mr. Speaker, but they know it now, 
and they continue seeing this kind of action by the Sask Party 
government. And we on this side of the Assembly say, shame 
on them. Shame on them for taking a booming economy, a 
growing population, money in the bank — a lot of money in the 
bank — great opportunity, great hope, Mr. Speaker, and 
dashing that because, why? Because we’ve said it time and time 
again: conservatives cannot manage government. They simply 
do not know how. They’ve done it to Saskatchewan in the ’80s, 
and they’re back again, Mr. Speaker, and they’re doing it to us 
again.  
 
So we within the NDP opposition know full well that the voters 
feel a lot of betrayal. And they’re finding that betrayal coming 
to them each and every day, as we saw witness here out in front 
on the steps of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, where 
people within the labour force movement came to show their 
strength and their desire to get to the bottom of what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s doing wrong for our province and for our 
Crowns. 
 
So I go back to the earlier comment I made with the 
conservatives, Mr. Speaker. I tell them, yes you like the 
stability of the Crowns, but do you actually know how much the 
Crown corporations are actually giving to the government? And 
they would say, well what’s that got to do with my argument 
around taxation? Well what happens is the Crown corporations 
actually subsidize the taxes that we have to charge people to 
provide the services for our province, and as people that are 
fiscally conservative, you want to keep the taxes low, the 
royalties low, so you can attract more companies. I think 
absolutely everybody understands that logic, including the 
NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the dividend for Saskatchewan, when 
the Sask Party came into power, was 200 million — $200 
million, Mr. Speaker, what the SaskTel, the SaskPower and the 
SGI paid to the province of Saskatchewan. That saved every 
taxpayer $200 each year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In 2008, 2008, the dividend paid by the Crown corporations 
was $365 million — a million dollars a day we got from the 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. That saved every taxpayer in 
the province $361.29, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2009 when they sold off Saskferco and NewGrade, that was 
the year they were sold off, Mr. Speaker, we netted from the 
Crown corporations $755 million that year. And that saves 
every taxpayer $735.90 each and every year. 
 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

In 2010, the Crowns paid a dividend to the Sask Party of $266 
million, Mr. Speaker. That saved every taxpayer $255, for each 
and every taxpayer. 
 
In 2011, it wasn’t as great a year, yet the dividend paid to the 
Sask Party government was $128.5 million — another $121.35 
less for each and every taxpayer. 
 
In 2012, Mr. Speaker, the dividend was $280.1 million, which 
saved every taxpayer in Saskatchewan $193 in taxes that year. 
 
In 2013, Mr. Speaker, $361 million was given to the Sask Party 
by the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. That saved every 
taxpayer $329.98. 
 
In 2014, another $206 million was given to the Sask Party from 
the Crown corporations. That saved every taxpayer $185 a year. 
 
In 2015-2016, last year, Mr. Speaker, $297.2 million was paid 
as a dividend from the Saskatchewan Crown corporations to the 
Sask Party. And that saved every single person in the province 
of Saskatchewan $263.52, Mr. Speaker, for every taxpayer — 
money that the taxpayer didn’t have to pay each and every year. 
 
So as you calculate since 2006 and 2016, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
huge amount of money that the Crown corporations made for 
the people of Saskatchewan. But more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, it saved a lot of taxpayers thousands of dollars, that 
these Crowns are able to subsidize the services in the province 
using our Crown corporations. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan know this. They 
appreciate that. 
 
And that’s why the whole notion of selling off our Crowns — 
even through bills of this sort, trying to identify what 
privatization is all about, Mr. Speaker — is foolish. It’s 
absolutely foolish. Because as I said, there’s services that are 
attached to this. There’s jobs that are attached to this. There are 
those costs that are really affordable for many families. But 
more so, Mr. Speaker, the dividends that we get from our 
Crown corporations is remarkable. This is money coming back 
to the province, money that we can use for our highways, we 
can use for health care, we can use for education. 
 
And what is totally beyond me, Mr. Speaker, is why doesn’t the 
Sask Party get it? Why don’t they get it? Why don’t they just 
leave our Crowns alone? Because the Crowns are highly valued 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It is absolutely, as I 
mentioned, foolish for them to think that they can make money 
off the sale of these Crowns to try and backfill the debt that they 
put the province of Saskatchewan in, Mr. Speaker. In the short 
eight years that they’ve been in power, they have squandered, as 
I said time and time again, they have squandered the future — 
our future, as people of Saskatchewan. And I say, shame on 
them for doing that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is always, always important to pay attention 
to what the Crown sector is doing. If you do an analysis right 
now overall for the people of Saskatchewan, they will simply 
say to the Sask Party, leave our Crowns alone. I think people in 
every corner of this province have pointed out time and time 
again that the Crowns are highly valued. Crown corporations 
are highly valued. 

Where is it, where is it written, Mr. Speaker, that because the 
Sask Party come along with their philosophy that they have the 
mandate and the right to sell off our Crowns without going to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well Bill 40 articulates that they do have that option, and that’s 
why Bill 40 is dangerous. I think if they were serious about not 
selling the Crowns, you wouldn’t have a bill like this before the 
Legislative Assembly. You can withdraw that bill tomorrow 
morning just like that. Withdraw this bill. Give the people of 
Saskatchewan back the right for them to have a say when it 
comes to the Crown corporations of our province. I think they 
have a right to have their say, to have their say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So pull this interpretation bill. There’s no value and there’s no 
reason for it because, as the Premier said in this Assembly, we 
have no intention of selling SaskTel. Well why does the bill 
remain? Why does the bill remain? When the Premier gets up 
and says, well we’ll have a referendum before we do anything, 
what we say, well the bill says you don’t have to have a 
referendum if it’s passed in its current state, in its current form. 
 
So guess what, if the backbenchers of the Sask Party want a 
memo, I’ll be very clear and write them a memo saying, your 
bill allows the sale of up to 49 per cent of SaskTel without 
going to a referendum. So if any Sask Party backbencher thinks 
they can go back into their constituency and have a big meeting 
around a referendum for the sale of SaskTel, guess what, folks, 
you can’t. That option doesn’t exist. 
 
So maybe it’s time that they start paying attention to their bills 
instead of blindly clapping as the Premier gets up and talks 
about the future of our Crowns because, Mr. Speaker, I think 
quickly they will realize, like we do in the opposition, we don’t 
trust the Premier when it comes to the future of the Crown 
corporations. And Bill 40, as long as it’s in the order paper, 
proves our point that there is an nefarious agenda behind our 
Crown corporations, and it’s sad to see. 
 
It’s sad to see, Mr. Speaker. It is very sad to see that, just a year 
after an election where there’s all kinds of assurances that 
Crowns wouldn’t be up for sale. Well guess what, folks, they’re 
up for sale. And once they’re gone, and once they’re gone, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ll be gone forever. 
 
And the revenues generated by these Crowns, Mr. Speaker, are 
impressive. The amount of workers that have built their careers 
around our Crown corporations is also very impressive. The 
services that they provide is impressive, Mr. Speaker, and the 
cost that they give to the customers to provide these services is 
also very impressive. So why would you want to even entertain 
the notion around interpretation of 49 per cent ownership of our 
Crowns? What is that all about? What is the purpose of this bill, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
That is the fundamental reason why we have debates in this 
Assembly: so we’re able to talk about the importance, the 
virtues of our Crowns. And Mr. Speaker, this is something that 
is very, very serious for the people of Saskatchewan to watch 
and to learn and to listen to what is being said about this bill 
because there’s a lot of worry when it comes to our Crown 
corporations. 
 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

Now I don’t have a calculator in front of me — I’m sure this 
could be done very quickly — but over the last 10 years in 
terms of what is being . . . what the value is of all the dividends 
in the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that there are 
hundreds of millions of dollars that these Crowns have given to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you look at the, as I mentioned at the outset, if you look 
at their role in the economy, the importance of our Crowns, 
when companies look to where they want to invest, yes, tax 
rates are important. Yes, royalties are also a critical factor. The 
availability of a trained labour force is also a key component in 
their assessment. But, Mr. Speaker, affordability of licensing 
services such as cellphones or having the technology at your 
fingertips, well, guess what? SaskTel provides that. So don’t 
they think in the Sask Party ranks that those offer incredible 
value to our province overall? 
 
We’re a landlocked province that has been counting on 
agriculture to be the mainstay of our economy for years. We 
need to expand beyond agriculture and become a centre for 
mining expertise, Mr. Speaker. We need to expand to become a 
centre for green technology, Mr. Speaker. We need to become a 
centre for all kinds of opportunities, Mr. Speaker, at the private 
sector. 
 
But the problem is, the problem is, is the so-called free 
enterprise party across the way just can’t figure it out. They just 
can’t figure it out, Mr. Speaker. The message the people of 
Saskatchewan have is, don’t sell our Crowns. Leave our 
Crowns alone. And if those right wingers can’t get it over there 
. . . They claim to be right wingers, Mr. Speaker. All they 
understand is they want to sell off the Crowns. It’s ingrained in 
their philosophical beliefs that everything that’s not nailed 
down to the floor, they should have a wall-to-wall sale of it. 
That’s their belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you begin to look at the practice of the Sask Party in 
the past, this is one of the reasons why on our side of the 
Assembly, we don’t buy it for one bit that they don’t have a 
plan to weaken our Crowns, to have the Crowns debt ridden so 
it’s very easy for them to be able to sell off these Crowns, 
telling the people of Saskatchewan that they’re losing money. 
And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because these Crowns have 
taken years to build and, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely shameful 
that a party that’s supposed to be promising not to do that, does 
that a year into their last election. And, Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Saskatchewan have a long memory. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, as I indicated before, 
the last 10 years . . . This is a memo to the backbenchers, the 
backbenchers of the Sask Party. Some of them should know it 
but some of them don’t want to share it. In the last 10 years, 
from 2006, we have collected over $3 billion in dividends in the 
Crown corporations — $3 billion. That’s enough to do two of 
your bypasses, you guys. You know, and the fact of the matter 
is that you need to get the memo. You need to get the memo 
that the Crown corporations should not be for sale, should not 
be for sale, but yet you’re blindly following, you’re blindly 
following the leader of your party that says that they’re not for 
sale, yet they’re entertaining offers. 
 
So if you don’t believe in the sale of these Crowns, then maybe 

tell your House Leader or the minister responsible to pull that 
bill, pull that bill, because that bill is simply something that 
allows them to do exactly what we’re saying that they shouldn’t 
be doing without even having a referendum. The bill certainly 
points that out, Mr. Speaker, and this is where I think it’s 
important that people ought to pay attention to what’s going on 
in the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn a bit of my attention towards 
the debt of the Crown corporations. Now the province itself 
overall, Mr. Speaker, we know on Wednesday next that there’s 
going to be a provincial budget. We’re seeing that now the Sask 
Party is talking about taxes. Now the Premier’s tweeting about 
taxes. That’s something that they said they would never do, Mr. 
Speaker, they would never do. And we’re asking them, well we 
think that you didn’t have to raise taxes if you would’ve 
managed the economy properly. We think you would’ve not 
had to raise taxes because of all your scandals. And we think 
you wouldn’t have to raise taxes because of all your waste. 
 
That’s where the problem is. It’s waste, scandals, and 
mismanagement that the Sask Party have been accustomed to, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s become their MO [modus operandi], Mr. 
Speaker, because obviously people of Saskatchewan watch very 
carefully what’s going on. 
 
And I want to point out here in 2008, Mr. Speaker, the debt for 
Saskatchewan was $10.5 billion. It’s the year after they . . . the 
fact that when they assumed office and then, Mr. Speaker, it 
dropped to 7.9. You know why it dropped to 7.9, Mr. Speaker? 
Because the Sask Party all of a sudden found $2 billion in the 
bank that left it in by the previous administration. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So what the Premier did, he said, hey I’ll put out these 
billboards throughout Saskatchewan and I’ll say, look we 
dropped the debt by 40 per cent after one year in office. Look 
how amazing we are. And that’s exactly what they did. They 
took out billboards saying, did you know we reduced our debt 
by 40 per cent? And yet the first few months after he became 
elected, the Premier got up and he said, I told the media, oh the 
finances are stark. That’s what he said: finances are stark, 
cupboards are bare, he said. And less than a year later he pays 
down 40 per cent of the debt. 
 
And how did he do that, Mr. Speaker? Was there some cookies 
in a cookie jar somewhere? Did they find some money 
somewhere that someone mysteriously gave us — $2 billion to 
put the debt down by 40 per cent? 
 
But see, Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem with the Sask Party is 
that they’ll do something of that sort, but what they refuse to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan is that that money was left in 
there by the previous NDP administration, alongside of the 
people of Saskatchewan’s hard work. 
 
We’ll never, ever forget the fact that the people of 
Saskatchewan stuck with us through those years, through those 
tough years, to make some of those tough choices to make sure 
that we recaptured the spirit and intent of managing all parts of 
our economy. And that includes the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, because they are an incredible, valuable asset to the 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

people of Saskatchewan. There’s a lot of history behind our 
Crowns. There’s a lot of workers that are affected by our 
Crowns. There’s a lot of good stories of how our Crown 
corporations have built Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, despite 
having governments like the conservatives across the way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, during that time, during that time when they 
included not only the provincial debt but also the Crown debt, 
Mr. Speaker, somehow the Premier found it mysteriously 
possible to reduce the debt by $2 billion without giving the 
NDP any credit. He said, well we’re going to do this. And they 
took out billboards all throughout the city. I remember those 
billboards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well here we are, Mr. Speaker, a bare eight years later and debt 
now is expected to be $16 billion very soon. And this is a party, 
Mr. Speaker, that is still bent, still bent on getting rid of the 
Crowns, the same Crowns that gave us $3 billion in revenues 
over the past 10 years. And that’s the whole crux of our 
argument across the way when it comes to Bill 40, is do not sell 
the Crowns. They help provide employment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They help provide revenue so we can keep our 
taxes low and competitive. They provide services. And they do 
this all in very reasonable cost. 
 
So what is the issue around this bill? Why is Bill 40 being 
presented? What is that about, Mr. Speaker? That is a 
fundamental question that we have around Bill 40. It just does 
not make any sense from what the Premier states on one day 
versus what this bill brings forward the following day. 
 
So the bill states very clearly that if this bill is passed, then a 
referendum is no longer required. And this is where I think the 
backbenchers of the Sask Party better wake up, because if that’s 
what you’re being told, that it’ll be a referendum, then you 
better wake up. Because there’s going to be some rude 
awakenings here if this bill is passed through, and all of a 
sudden a year from now you find out that the Sask Party is 
entitled to sell a portion of SaskTel without going to a public 
referendum. 
 
And we don’t want to hear, oh I didn’t know that, on that side, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re giving you the update now. We can 
forward to you a memo that clearly states the intent behind your 
bill. And I think some of the backbenchers should read it, Mr. 
Speaker. They should read that bill very, very closely and 
clearly to make sure they know exactly what the intent behind 
that bill is. 
 
Because history will show, history will show, Mr. Speaker, who 
was in the Sask Party benches when this was allowed to 
happen. And history will be very swift, Mr. Speaker, and it will 
be very just. And the names of the current backbenchers that are 
sitting on their hands hoping this goes away, well they’ll be part 
of the history, Mr. Speaker, as to those that led the demise of 
our Crown corporations and therefore squandered the future of 
Saskatchewan for decades to come. 
 
Now going back to the copy of the debt, Mr. Speaker, it shows 
under the Sask Party government that a lot of the debt is being 
pushed onto the Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. And this is kind of 
the reason why I think it’s really important to note, is that how 
are the Crowns managed overall? And we talk about the smart 

meter fiasco; we talk about the carbon capture technology. How 
are the Crowns managed overall? 
 
What we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party is taking 
more dividends out. As we’ve mentioned, it took out 3 billion 
the last three years, and they’re saddling the Crown 
corporations with more debt. So you look at the graph and it 
shows, quite frankly, the debt of the Crown corporations, debt 
of government business enterprises being $3.4 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, when they took over office. Now, Mr. Speaker, it is 
almost three times that, at $9.7 billion. Our Crown corporations 
owe about $10 billion as a result of the Sask Party’s record. 
 
So as you look at this whole notion . . . And I’ve gone through 
at length some of the arguments around the legal ramifications 
of inviting minority shareholders. We spoke about that. We 
spoke about the history of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We spoke 
about the value of the Crowns. We spoke about the dividends 
that the Crowns give us. We spoke about the services, Mr. 
Speaker, and now we go back to the argument. What agenda 
does the Sask Party have for our Crown corporations? What 
agenda? We on the opposition side say right now the Sask Party 
is saddling the Crown corporations with a lot of debt. They are 
saddling the Crown corporations with a lot of debt. This 
interpretation bill, the interpretation bill really is just the preface 
to what I think is going on across the way, is that there is an 
agenda to get rid of the Crowns. They want to sell the Crowns, 
make no mistake about that. 
 
And how you do it, Mr. Speaker, is that many people say, oh 
well, the NDP have their theories, but we don’t believe in 
theories. We want to see real practical advice and real tangible 
information or evidence. But, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, the 
debt, the debt for the Crown corporations under the Sask Party 
has almost tripled in the last eight, nine years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the idea that the Crown corporations is, you 
make them suffer incredible debt load, which the Crown 
corporations are facing right now. And then you put a lot of 
political interference, whether it’s the smart meter fiasco, 
whether it’s the carbon capture technology, or whether it’s the 
bypass process to P3s [public-private partnership]. All of these 
things, Mr. Speaker, are costing a lot of money. 
 
And all the Sask Party is doing is hiding some of that debt in 
the Crowns, punting that debt down the road to P3s, Mr. 
Speaker. And who’s going to pay the costs in the future? 
History will show that it was this government, this leader, this 
caucus that put Saskatchewan in a huge problem, in a huge 
deficit and huge debt. History will show that through P3s they 
have really tied the future of any projects in the province. Any 
projects in the province will be dictated by P3s. We won’t have 
any money to expand on any front in the future of our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the Crown debt, it all goes 
back to Bill 40. If you look at the public debt, it’s supposed to 
be forecasted to be rising again this year. We talked about three 
and a half billion dollars the last two years and that is 
something that is a remarkable underachievement by a 
government when they inherit, when they inherit $2 billion in 
the bank and they inherit a booming economy, when they 
inherit a growing population and they get record revenue. Never 
enjoyed in the history of Saskatchewan’s politics has any 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

government enjoyed record revenue as much as the Sask Party. 
They had money coming to them steady, Mr. Speaker, and yet a 
bare eight years later, where are we at? We’re now facing more 
debt. Where are we at? We’ve seen our Crowns being increased 
debt three times since they’ve assumed government. Where 
we’re seeing . . . We’re seeing 40,000 less people working 
when they first assumed office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the bad part of this is you cannot sell the 
Crowns to cover up your mismanagement because that’s the 
final nail in the coffin in Saskatchewan’s future if our Crowns 
are sold and we see the Sask Party get their way through Bill 
40. Mr. Speaker, we will never, ever get these Crowns back 
again. And that’s the stark message we have from the people of 
Saskatchewan and despite what the Premier may say. And 
that’s one of the reasons why we argue on this side of the 
Assembly. We argue as much as we can. We raise our points as 
much as we can. 
 
The only true way, the only true way that you can say you have 
the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan on the future of 
our Crowns is to have an election over it. And the history of 
Saskatchewan . . . Let’s not wait for a mildly worded or a 
question on a referendum form, Mr. Speaker. Let’s have an 
election on this. Let’s have an election on the future of our 
Crowns to see if the Saskatchewan people want to sell them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced in the last two elections, the 
Premier doesn’t have the courage to run against the notion of 
keeping our Crowns because the people of Saskatchewan will 
certainly speak loud and clear. And I think that the 
backbenchers across the way, Mr. Speaker, they know very 
well, they know very well what the people of Saskatchewan are 
saying, and they know very well what their constituents are 
saying. And they’re saying loud and clear: leave our Crown 
corporations alone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question around the debt, and I want to 
go to the Crown sector debt. If you look at the Crowns having 
their debt increased by three times what it was under the Sask 
Party to go from 3.6 to almost $10 billion in debt, the question I 
would have is that, how is a Crown corporation that’s put that 
deep in debt, how could you sell it for its maximum value, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s just not possible. It’s just that we have a company 
that has a lot of debt. All of a sudden the value of potential sale 
of that asset becomes highly questionable. So from the logic 
perspective, Bill 40 says we’re just having an interpretation but 
we’re not allowing no referendum. That’s what the bill says. 
 
But at the same time, when you look at the Crowns and the 
potential sale of the Crowns, as you’re increasing the debt for 
the Crowns, how could you then justify them selling the 
Crowns for top dollar if they’re laden with all this debt? So in 
many ways, a potential buyer or person might be interested in 
SaskTel or SaskPower. Well they’re going to be immediately 
turned off by the amount of debt being placed on this Crown 
corporation by the government. 
 
So is that going to reduce the value of the Crowns overall? 
Everything that the Saskatchewan Party has done to our Crowns 
has devalued the work and ethics and the commitment and 
desire that all the employees have for our Crowns. Every single 
thing that they have done has devalued and really has 

squandered the potential opportunity for the Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations in our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that there was . . . 
There’s a comment I want to use. There was a comment that I 
want to use, and this was going back to November 22nd, 2004. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out this is going back as far 
as 13 years ago and they’re still singing the same song. That’s 
why it was so funny for us. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the 
speaker at the time was a gentleman by the name of Mr. Elhard, 
and this is what he said: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party, like the majority of 
Saskatchewan people, believe the major Crowns should 
stay in public hands. We believe that the major Crowns 
and their employees do an excellent job of providing 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, we have no problem [in] supporting this bill. 

 
And that bill, Mr. Speaker, was the bill introduced by the NDP 
government saying that we would not allow our Crowns to be 
sold. So they, since 2004, have stated that, and yet today we’re 
still having the debate of what they would interpret it as sale is 
49 per cent sale of our Crown. Is that considered a sale? Well 
I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan, minority share or majority 
share, a sale is a sale is a sale. And that’s why we like using that 
phrase out here, a Tory is a Tory is a Tory, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are determined to sell our Crowns. There’s no question 
about it in our minds. How they do it, Mr. Speaker, and who 
does it for them, I think in the long run it’s going to be . . . 
Where I think they want to take the argument is going to be 
from the debates in the Assembly and the debates in our 
hometown and the discussions in some town halls. They want to 
take that argument from that particular venue, Mr. Speaker, and 
they want to put it in some foreign court somewhere that may 
interpret minority shareholder rights much more so than our 
local interests and investments in the Crown corporations. 
That’s what I predict that the Sask Party want to do. They want 
to take it from the floor of the Assembly, where these things 
should be debated, and have an international court decide 
whether this minority shareholder sale is valid or not. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why these bills should never come 
forward, simply because the people of Saskatchewan didn’t ask 
them to run on this. They didn’t give them the majority to run 
on this, and that’s why they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have to have an election on this. A referendum is not what we 
want to see. We want to have an election on this, and I don’t 
know what the Sask Party is so afraid of, of going back to the 
people on this particular front. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a number of people that have 
done really good evaluations on SaskPower and SaskTel. There 
is people that have impeccable professional achievements that 
have gone through a number of scenarios as it pertains to the 
Crown corporations because obviously this debate around the 
Crowns has been around for a long time. There are different 
organizations, there are think tanks, there are scholars, there are 
institutions, there are business people, there are large 
multinational corporations that have looked at the Crowns for 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2017 

years. They have looked at the Crowns for years, and so a lot of 
them have researched what are some of the possibilities. 
 
And I want to get a bit into that, Mr. Speaker, as the evening 
goes on, as to what some of these people have indicated as for a 
number of different important headlines. Like one of the 
arguments around rationale for divestiture or privatization, is 
there a difference there? Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, when 
you divest yourself of a particular asset and the privatization 
could have a different interpretation, we need to know what that 
means. There are options for divestiture or privatization of 
SaskTel or SaskPower, and there’s different ways that some of 
these very learned people have kind of researched for the people 
of Saskatchewan to try and understand. 
 
I’m going to share this with a couple of the backbenchers, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think they may need to read up on this stuff. 
Because little do they realize as they sit there and they applaud 
away is that: yes, to a certain extent, we understand, you’ve got 
to have faith in your leader and your message, but blind faith 
doesn’t serve you well. You’ve got to know what’s being 
planned for the corporations, for the Crown corporations, and if 
you don’t, then you become the problem. And that’s why I 
think the Sask Party backbenchers should finally find their 
backbone and start asking questions as it pertains to the Crown 
corporations and what the agenda is as the Sask Party executive 
have planned for our Crowns. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are all a lot of information that they’ve 
compiled. I want to share some of that information this evening. 
Some of it’s around SaskTel. Some of it’s around SaskPower. 
And they look at the growth rate. They look at a number of 
scenarios. They look at the cost of equity or the required rate of 
return because obviously people that are going to invest in this 
company want to be able to return dollars. It’s not going to be 
purchased at a price where they don’t see the return happen 
very quickly. 
 
And they do an average of the six highlighted best estimates, 
Mr. Speaker. And then they do a graph. There’s all kinds of 
graphs. There’s financial statements, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
balance sheet. There’s liabilities. There’s a cash flow statement 
analysis. And the list goes on. And I’m talking about a number 
of graphs that the average layperson would take at least several 
months to try and interpret, Mr. Speaker. Well these highly 
skilled people have done that for us, and they’ve given us a lot 
of scenarios of whether we should be selling off the Crowns or 
not. 
 
But I tell the people of Saskatchewan this, is that you’re going 
to have a lot of debate back and forth from a number of 
different organizations, and that’s why the interpretation of the 
word “privatization” is so, so important. What does that mean? 
The vaguely announced World Bank interpretation of 
privatization was alluded to in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
Well we need to find . . . Who made that decision to get the 
World Bank’s interpretation of privatization? Which of the Sask 
Party ministers decided to go to the World Bank and get their 
interpretation of privatization because privatization from a 
different organization or a different brain trust may be radically 
different. 
 
Again it depends on your perspective and it depends on your 

interpretation of what privatization means. Is 1 per cent 
privatization under the World Bank or is 10 per cent 
privatization? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the whole notion around what 
the Sask Party has in this particular bill, the biggest argument I 
would make is that if the Sask Party is committing to the people 
of Saskatchewan to not sell the Crowns, then they must remove 
this bill. Bill 40 has got to go. That’s the only true way that we 
believe that they’re serious about their statement. 
 
If they don’t want to withdraw Bill 40, the other option we have 
for them as an opposition is, let’s call an election on this 
particular bill. Let’s call an election on this particular issue and 
see if they have the courage, Mr. Speaker, courage to call an 
election on this particular bill because we certainly do. We have 
the conviction and courage on this side of the Assembly to run 
an election on the Crown corporations to see if Saskatchewan 
people want to keep them. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the Sask 
Party won’t do it because they hid the deficit from the people of 
Saskatchewan before the last election. And we sit there, and 
they’re all wondering, the people of Saskatchewan are 
wondering why did they call an election before the budget? 
 
Well everybody this side of the Assembly knew why. We knew 
why, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re finding evidence that not 
only the Finance minister but the Premier and a collect few in 
the front benches there knew the exact state of our finances. 
And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, they kept a lot of that information 
away from the backbenchers because if the backbenchers didn’t 
know, then, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t respond to it. 
 
So we know on this side of the Assembly that there was a 
high-level amount of manipulation that went on. They were 
very, very quiet about the process because they didn’t want the 
people of Saskatchewan to know how bad things were. And, 
Mr. Speaker, primary to them, the people that are building this 
Saskatchewan Party process, that want to build their party up, 
Mr. Speaker, they had to keep this information not only from 
the people of Saskatchewan but from the backbenchers 
themselves. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a crying shame because if 
the third term for the current Premier was so important that he 
had to not bring this information forward to the people of 
Saskatchewan, well then shame on him. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have a long 
memory. They will not forget. And I dare say today that a lot of 
the backbenchers that sat there gleefully clapping and cheering 
as some of the processes were unfolding, Mr. Speaker, they 
were privy to that. They were a party to that. But they can stand 
up today and they can argue back on the Crown corporations 
and they can finally found their own courage and their own 
backbone to stand up and tell their leader of their party to back 
off on any notion of selling off our Crowns because we have 
seen that the Crowns offer some great benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is why, this is why today as an opposition member I’m 
appealing to the backbench again to find their backbone, to 
stand up. Because once the SaskPower and SaskTel and SGI are 
sold, we can never get them back. It is a very important, pivotal 
part in the history of Saskatchewan. And this bill does some of 
that. This bill does some of that. It sets the stage. It allows 



March 20, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

different avenues and venues for the privatization of our 
Crowns. So the backbench have got to wake up. They’ve got to 
wake up. They’ve got to find their backbone, and they’ve got to 
tell the front bench to leave the Crowns alone because the 
people of Saskatchewan will not, will not simply accept that as 
something that is going to happen without their involvement. 
 
So I warned the people of Saskatchewan on a number of fronts, 
Mr. Speaker. We need the people of Saskatchewan to get active 
on this file. We need you to pay attention to what the Sask Party 
is trying to do with our Crowns. We have stood here day after 
day extolling the virtues of our Crowns, the values of our 
Crowns, what they have done to our economy, the history of the 
Crowns, the workers, the services, the pricing — it is all good 
stuff for the people of Saskatchewan. And the message we have 
for you is that once it is sold, once it is sold, it is gone forever. 
And that’s the stark message we have. 
 
And that’s why when we have Bill 40 that comes up that 
simply, according to the minister, states that we want to find a 
definition for privatization, as I said, well what’s that all about? 
What is that all about? Why would you want to find a definition 
of privatization if you have no intention of privatizing 
anything? Why would you want to get the definition in place? 
And why is it in this particular bill you have the clause that if 
you get this bill passed, a referendum wouldn’t be necessary.  
 
Now that’s not our interpretation of the bill, Mr. Speaker. That 
was the media. They pointed that out. As part of the bill process 
in the introduction of the bill, the media simply stated that this 
bill would allow the privatization agenda to proceed without a 
referendum. So why would the Premier be offering a 
referendum on the sale of any Crowns when Bill 40 says that 
you don’t have to do that? So that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. 
Speaker, we do not have any confidence, nor do we have faith 
in the Sask Party or any of the leaders of the Sask Party over 
there when they talk about privatization overall. 
 
So rest assured that we are going to have a lot more discussions 
on the myths behind the Sask Party’s agenda when it comes to 
our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to have a lot of 
compelling evidence and argument around the value of the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue challenging the 
Sask Party to an election, never mind a weakly worded 
referendum that may or may not happen. Let’s have an election 
on this. I think the people of Saskatchewan at least deserve that 
decent response, Mr. Speaker. I think they’ll speak in volumes 
saying, when it comes to our Crowns, they are not for sale, what 
the people of Saskatchewan would say, and you keep your 
hands off them because every time the Sask Party touches 
anything, Mr. Speaker, they put everything in debt. 
 
And today now they want to sell the Crowns to pay off some of 
that debt. And what’s planned for that money? I can tell you 
right now, it’s not going to be towards building a brighter future 
for the province. Because quite frankly, if our Crowns are sold, 
Mr. Speaker, then the future of our province certainly is being 
compromised, and that’s why it’s an important argument to 
have. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, as I resume debate this evening on 
this particular bill, there are many more angles that I want to 
bring forward and I will bring forward. But as I said at the 

outset, if the Sask Party has the courage to call an election on 
this particular issue, on the privatization of the Crowns, then I 
don’t think we need to go on a half-hearted argument under 
Bill 40. Let’s talk about interpretation. Let’s talk about a 
referendum. 
 
I say let’s get it on. Let’s have an election on this matter. We’re 
ready to go, Mr. Speaker, and I can say to you that the Sask 
Party, the Sask Party will not go back to the people because 
they don’t . . . They didn’t have the courage to go back to them 
on the deficit. They certainly won’t have the courage to go back 
to the public on the future of our Crowns because, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not the word that I would chose when it comes to the 
Sask Party. Courage would be the last word that I would chose 
to describe the Sask Party and its governing tactics here in the 
province in Saskatchewan. 
 
So as I said, this evening we’ve got some great information 
coming forward. I think people will be pleasantly surprised 
while the opposition . . . The backbenchers will finally get some 
of the information that they’ve been lacking for years, as we 
point out, as we point out what their agenda is all about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to get very interesting tonight 
because I think my advice to the Sask Party backbenchers is 
stay, stick around. We’ve got a lot more information coming 
your way, and that debate will resume at 7 this evening, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ll read into the record their names of those that 
didn’t get it. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll find out that quite 
frankly there is going to be 49 people across the way that 
simply just didn’t get it. And we will get rid of them the next 
election, Mr. Speaker. That’s our plan; that’s our strategy. 
 
So I’ll say before I resume at 7 tonight, leave our Crowns alone. 
The people of Saskatchewan want to keep them, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s what’s . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thankfully it is 5 o’clock. This 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1766 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1743 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1745 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1745 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1745 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1745 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom HaShoah Observed in Saskatoon 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 
 Remembering Courtney Schaefer 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 
 Social Work Week 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1746 
 Z99 Radiothon for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1747 
 Ituna is Hockeyville Finalist 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1747 
 High School Student’s Success Story 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1747 
 Regina Pats Enjoy Record-Breaking Season 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1747 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Details of Land Transactions and Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1748 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1748 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1748 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1748 
 Budget Legislation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1749 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Test Facility 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 
 Contract Details for Regina Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 
 Responsible Gambling Unit 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1752 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1752 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 47 — An Act to Reduce Salaries of Members of the Legislative Assembly, 2017 
 Loi de 2017 réduisant les traitements à verser aux membres de l’Assemblée legislative 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1752 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1753 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1755 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation  
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1759 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


