






















































Hansard: May 10, 2017


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 86A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 2017, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 

 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 

Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 

 

 

 
 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 

Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 

Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 

Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 

Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 

Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 

Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 

Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 

Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 

Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 

Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 

Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 

Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 

D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 

Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 

Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 

Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 

Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 

Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 

Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 

Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 

Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 

Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 

Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 

Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 

Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 

Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 

Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 

Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 

Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 

Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 

McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 

McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 

Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 

Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 

Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 

Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 

Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 

Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 

Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 

Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 

Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 

Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 

Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 

Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 

Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 

Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 

Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 

Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 

Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 

Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 

Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 

Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 

Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 

Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 

Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 

Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 

Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 

Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 

 

 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 11 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2447 
 May 10, 2017 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Request leave to make a personal 
statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Correction Regarding a Member’s Statement  
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
delivered a member’s statement highlighting the unveiling of a 
statue honouring missing and murdered indigenous women in 
Saskatoon. I incorrectly stated that the sculpture was inspired 
by Carol Wolfe’s daughter, Karina, who went missing over six 
years ago when it was in fact inspired by another murdered 
indigenous woman, Amber Redman, who was tragically taken 
in 2005. I want to apologize to the families of Amber and 
Karina for my mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you that our government and I 
share your concerns about the need to better address issues 
related to missing and murdered indigenous women. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave of the House for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
colleagues, for the leave. It’s an honour to be able to introduce 
some special guests that have joined us in your gallery today. 
Mr. Speaker, today is the Regina Bypass Design Builders’ 
Safety Day, Mr. Speaker, and they’re marking part of that day 
here at the legislature with recognition as a result, I hope in 
part, of this introduction to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can inform the Assembly and members of the 
Assembly that for them to mark this day is very much 
appropriate, considering that throughout the life of this project, 
the largest infrastructure project in the province’s history, 

throughout the 2 million hours there have been no accidents, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is a remarkable achievement, given again 
the scale of the project and the hundreds of people that have 
been involved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in no particular order I’m going to introduce 
the companies and the representatives that have joined us today. 
And maybe they could give us a bit of a wave as they do. But 
while they’re waving they can accept our appreciation for the 
leadership that’s been shown by Saskatchewan companies on 
this project and the leadership that’s been shown on the 
important issue of workplace safety, as evidenced by the results 
I’ve just referenced. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again in no particular order we’re joined today 
by Blair Butler, Traditional Contracting Inc., Saskatoon; by 
Wayne Clifton and Jason Gasmo, Clifton Associates, Regina; 
by Cole Raiwet, Mike Silvernagle, Brent Lee of Core Industrial 
Services, Esterhazy, Saskatchewan. We’re joined as well by 
Gord Broda of the Broda Group, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan; 
by Russ Clunie Sr. of Clunie Consulting Engineers, Prince 
Albert; Potzus Construction Ltd., Linton has joined us, Linton 
Potzus from Yorkton, Saskatchewan; Tony Playter from Fraser 
Strategy, who is from Regina. Also joining us today: Alisdair 
Dickinson and Chinh Chu from the Regina Bypass Design 
Builders, and Alan Shopland from the Regina Bypass Partners, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again we want to welcome all . . . Oh, and I’m sorry, and Mike 
Donnelly from Graham Construction as well. There’s Mike. I 
just want to say to all of these individuals again to thank them 
for their leadership and the emphasis they’ve put on safety and 
for representing this project so very well from the 
Saskatchewan perspective, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming these individuals to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my pleasure to join with the Premier and 
welcome these important guests to the Saskatchewan Assembly 
here today, important partners in building the Regina bypass. 
And very importantly, you’re identifying this day around 
Regina bypass Safety Day and a record that’s been shared here 
today that’s very, very important for the people of the province. 
 
Of course, this project and the response to these incredibly 
dangerous intersections out on Highway 1 East are such an 
important project. Ensuring the safe flow of traffic, ensuring 
safety at those intersections is something we’ve long advocated 
for. 
 
And to each and every one of you, and particularly you as 
Saskatchewan businesses, I want to say thank you for your 
leadership and your work on this project. Your commitment to 
safety throughout the project is important, valued, critical. But 
the actual response that we need to bring to ensure safety along 
Highway 1 East where we’ve lost far too many — far too many 
— within our province is very, very important. 
 
And to note, we have members opposite making a bit of noise, 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Mr. Speaker. I want to be clear to these Saskatchewan 
businesses, we value what you do. We value your contributions 
to this project. And when we question and if we question, if we 
question where the full dollars of this bypass are going, we will 
always . . . what we’ll always push for is making sure that it’s 
Saskatchewan companies engaged to deliver value for all of us. 
 
So thank you to these business leaders and those involved in 
this project, and thank you for the commitment to safety. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming Blair Butler from Traditional 
Contracting Inc. in Saskatoon. I would ask all members to 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
like to join the Premier and the member from Saskatoon and 
thank the people from the Regina bypass. And I’d like to thank 
Wayne Clifton, Jason Gasmo, and their 40 employees for doing 
the wonderful work on Regina bypass, making our roads safer. 
 
I’d also like to join and say greetings to my friend Tony Playter. 
He’s a good friend of mine, and he’s done a lot of work with 
Regina bypass. And you guys do great work for the people of 
the province, and I just want to say thank you. And I’d like all 
members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like 
to welcome constituents who are currently working on the 
Regina bypass. From Esterhazy we have, with Core Industrial 
Services, Cole Raiwet, Mike Silvernagle and Brent Lee. I’d like 
all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to join the Premier and other members in welcoming 
some of our guests to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I’d like to introduce a friend of mine, 
Mr. Gord Broda. He’s the head of Broda Group, Mr. Speaker. 
His father, Cas Broda, started the company in 1957 with one 
truck, and now Broda Group is one of the largest, most 
experienced companies in Western Canada. He operates out of 
Prince Albert and enjoys operating out of this province, out of 
Saskatchewan, finding jobs for Saskatchewan people. And 
we’re very, very grateful for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And joining him, Mr. Speaker, another solid Prince Albert 
resident and a valued, valued constituent, is Russ Clunie Sr. of 
Clunie Consulting Engineers. 
 
Clunie Consulting employs 20 employees on the project, and 

Broda employs 200 employees on the bypass project, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to thank them both, and I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming them to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
Premier and other colleagues on this side of the House 
welcoming these individuals, specifically Linton Potzus from 
Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, I’ve known Linton since he was a small 
boy working in the family business, Potzus Construction, 
started by his dad. Again I think one truck and one backhoe is 
what he started with. And he took over after his father passed 
away, as a very young man and has grown that company 
extraordinarily well, Mr. Speaker, employs I think about 150 
people or so out of the Yorkton area and around the province. 
And just an amazing man, building this business and employee 
base and also very community oriented, giving back to the 
community at every turn, Mr. Speaker. So I ask that all 
members welcome Linton Potzus to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the other members of the House that have already welcomed 
Gord Broda of the Broda Group, who happens to live in the 
beautiful constituency of Batoche. So thank you for being here 
and thank you for all you do for Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and to all members, a 
group of 28 public servants seated in the Speaker’s gallery and 
on the floor of the Chamber as well. They are here today as part 
of the parliamentary program for the public service. The 
participants are employees from the following ministries: 
Advanced Education, Agriculture, Central Services, Economy, 
Education, Finance, Health, Highways and Infrastructure, 
Municipal Affairs, Public Service Commission, Social Services, 
as well as employees from the Office of the Provincial Auditor 
and the Legislative Assembly Service. 
 
The program includes an in-depth history and tour of the 
Legislative Building, briefings by the Legislative Library, 
Legislative Assembly committees branch and Executive 
Council, an opportunity to sit in the public galleries to observe 
question period and other House business, and briefings with 
members of the Legislative Assembly. I’d ask all members to 
help me welcome these fine individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming these public 
servants to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly some of them 
know the way around this building very well indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, and indeed would have a lot to offer to us as 
legislators in terms of ways that we can better inform our work. 
And of course I’m speaking of the fine folks in the library, in 
particular, Mr. Speaker. 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

But certainly I want to commend these public servants for 
coming to the Legislative Assembly to participate in the 
parliamentary program to gain that understanding of the 
political side of the process so as to better serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which is something that these men 
and women do every day of the year, and we are grateful for 
that. So on behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I too 
want to join in welcoming these important people, these 
important public servants to their Legislative Assembly. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to introduce a school group sitting in the 
west gallery from the Eston Composite School. There are 32 
grade 4 and 5 students. They are accompanied by Ms. Jodi 
Bjornerud, who happens to be the former member from 
Melville-Saltcoats’s daughter. Also a teacher is Tawna Hansen, 
and their chaperones are Erin Simpson, Jamie Hallborg, April 
MacDonald, and Greg Cooper. 
 
It’s kind of a rare occasion when a group from as far away as 
Eston comes down to the Legislature, so we’re very pleased. 
And I want to add one thing — that I really am thankful for the 
fact that the member from Rosetown-Elrose has agreed to buy 
ice cream for all of them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to welcome the contractors that are working on the bypass, 
and to point out that the excellent work and certainly the safety 
track record that you’ve shown through the project thus far is 
something to be admired, and to assure you that we want to see 
as many contractors benefit as often and as to as much value as 
possible on any contracts in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously the half a billion dollars we’re sending overseas as 
the financing fee for the P3 [public-private partnership] could 
be used to build many roads, many bridges, and many other 
engineering projects in the province delivered by these fine 
people. So I want to point out, we want to see these contractors 
continue working, continue visiting their Assembly, and may 
their numbers double, Mr. Speaker, over the next number of 
years. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
an individual seated behind me actually. It’s Bob Ivanochko. 
He’s a constituent of Regina Douglas Park and a friend, a 
writer, and a strong activist in the community. He’s heavily 
involved with Making Peace Vigil in Regina, doing and 
advocating for many social justice issues in our province and in 
our city including things like homelessness and the poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s interested in legislative proceedings, and I’m 
very happy to have him here with us all this afternoon. So I’d 
ask all members join me in welcoming Bob to his Legislative 
Assembly. 

Hon. Mr. Tochor: — I too would like to join the members and 
introduce a special person seated in my gallery: Wayne Smith, 
if you could give us a wave. Wayne lives in Eastview. He’s 
been a good friend of mine for many years. His public service 
in education is outstanding, and now in retirement he spends his 
time helping out also with Meals on Wheels. And he’s just a 
great resident of Saskatoon Eastview, and it’s an honour to have 
him as a friend. 
 
Would everyone please join with me in welcoming him to his 
Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who have signed this petition are opposed 
to the Sask Party’s plan to scrap and sell off the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They would like us all to know that 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] provides a vital 
service to many seniors, workers, and families throughout the 
province; and that by scrapping STC out of the blue and without 
asking permission of the owners, the Saskatchewan people, the 
Sask Party is sending a clear sign about how little it cares about 
protecting our Crowns, like SaskTel; and that STC helps to 
drive the economy with the parcel service that serves farms and 
other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately stop 
the plans to scrap and sell off Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, and to resume transportation services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
It is supported by many leaders and thousands and thousands of 
citizens. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Englefeld, 
Naicam, St. Gregor, Muenster, Humboldt, Melfort. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition opposing the Sask Party’s cuts 
to spiritual care. Mr. Speaker, just a short while ago in 
committee, the minister told me in a discussion about this 
important program that there was an inequity of services, that 
we didn’t offer spiritual care everywhere, Mr. Speaker. So 
instead of enhancing those services, Mr. Speaker, the 
government chose to cut them. 
 
The petitioners point out that this budget eliminates funding for 
spiritual care facilities within our Saskatchewan health 
facilities. They point out that Saskatchewan will be the only 
province within Canada to not fund the support for patients, 
residents, and their families seeking wellness. They point out 
that the government, the Sask Party, did not tell anybody last 
year in last year’s election that they had a plan to scrap spiritual 
care within our health region facilities. They point out, the 
petitioners point out that spiritual care responds to the spiritual 
and emotional needs of patients and residents, and provides a 
compassionate listening presence in times of crisis. 
 
They point out that spiritual care supports families, patients, and 
residents in making difficult decisions. And the petitioners want 
to draw the Assembly’s attention to the fact that spiritual care 
can provide support for all families, patients, and residents in 
obtaining comfort and support regardless of faith or belief, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
immediately reinstate the funding for spiritual care services 
in this province’s health region facilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Elbow, Loreburn, Strongfield, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand in my place at the request and order of the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote for anyone in the Assembly to help her 
in her battle for a second bridge for Prince Albert. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I present a petition today in answering that call from 
the city of bridge. 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
Prince Albert and all the communities north of Prince Albert, 
and businesses that send people and products through Prince 
Albert require a solution. So the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Ask the Sask Party government to stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we do day after day, week after week, 
month after month, we stand in our place in the Assembly to 
present this petition. And people have signed this petition from 

all throughout Saskatchewanland. And on this particular page, 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
Regina, Prince Albert. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition about pay equity here in Saskatchewan. And the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to our attention the following: that the citizens of this 
province believe in an economy powered by transparency, 
accountability, security, and equity; and that all women should 
be paid equitably; and that women are powerful drivers of 
economic growth and their economic empowerment benefits us 
all. 
 
And we know that the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
found that in Saskatoon in 2016, women earned on average 63 
cents for every dollar a man makes, and in Regina women 
earned on average 73 cents for every dollar a man makes. 
According to the most recent StatsCan data, the national gender 
wage gap for full-time workers is 72 cents for every dollar a 
man makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan eliminate 
the wage gap between women and men across all sectors 
where the Government of Saskatchewan has jurisdiction, 
provide a framework under which this can be done within 
this term of this Assembly, and that the Saskatchewan 
government call upon workplaces within Saskatchewan 
within the private sector to eliminate the wage gap between 
women and men. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 
from Hubbard, Ituna, and Aylesbury, Saskatchewan. I do so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
present a petition to increase the funding to Prince Albert 
mobile crisis. Due to a cut in funding, Prince Albert mobile 
crisis has had to close its door during daytime hours, resulting 
in a loss of resource to people in distress. The daytime closure 
of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on Prince Albert Police 
Service, Victoria Hospital, and other agencies who may not be 
trained and/or qualified to provide counselling and intervention 
services to clients. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so it may once again offer 
24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the city of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to ensure job security for victims of domestic 
violence. Saskatchewan has the very dubious distinction of 
having the highest rate of domestic violence by intimate 
partners amongst all Canadian provinces. One in three Canadian 
workers have been impacted by domestic violence, and for 
many of them the violence will follow them to their workplace. 
 
Employers lose $77.9 million annually due to the direct and 
indirect impacts of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba 
has already enacted a legislation very similar to the private 
member’s bill we tabled several weeks ago, and we’re hoping 
that the government will take it on and pass it. And Ontario is 
on its way to enacting legislation that ensures job security for 
victims of domestic violence. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact 
legislation that requires all employers to provide a 
minimum of five paid workdays and a minimum of 17 
weeks unpaid work leave with the assurance of job security 
upon return for all survivors of domestic violence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Saskatoon, Wadena, and Nipawin. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame Induction Banquet 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, April 
29th, I had the pleasure of attending and bringing greetings to 
the induction banquet for the Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame has been 
celebrating sports excellence in the city since 1988. The walls 
of the Art Hauser Centre, where the Prince Albert Sports Hall 
of Fame is located, are lined with the pictures and stories of 
those who have been inducted. Since its beginnings, there have 
been 182 inductees to the Hall of Fame in the following 
categories: athlete, builder, team, meritorious service, and 
organization of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s inductees included the late Douglas 
Primeau in the athlete category, Ken Morrison in the 
athlete/builder category, and Deanna Rindal in the builder 
category. In the team category, the 2017 inductees were the 
2005 and 2006, and the 2006-2007 AAA Mintos hockey team. 
And the meritorious services inductee was Chris Lair. The sport 
organization of the year was Prince Albert Minor Hockey 
Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these Prince Albert athletes, builders, and 
organizations have put in many hours of hard work and 
achieved their levels of success through determination and 
dedication. They are all deserving of this special recognition. I 

ask that all members join with me in congratulating the 2017 
Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame inductees, and to commend 
the board of directors for organizing this event and ensuring 
that sports history of Prince Albert is celebrated and well 
documented. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Legacy of the Battle of the Atlantic 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not a day goes by 
that we shouldn’t look back and thank those who fought for the 
freedom that allows us all to be here. This week is no different, 
and during this past week we saw the anniversary of VE 
[Victory in Europe] day and the end of the Battle of the Atlantic 
where the Allies defeated the Axis in Europe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to honour those who fought for 
liberty for all. The story, however, does not end there. During 
the war, we lost thousands of men defending the shipping lanes 
that allowed the war effort to continue. Today, like then, 
transportation corridors are vitally important in our world. And 
like then, the Royal Canadian Navy and our sailors are making 
sure that the seas and oceans of our world remain free. 
 
I had the pleasure of attending an event last weekend with 
Captain Jason Boyd of the Royal Canadian Navy where he had 
this to say, and I quote: “Today, more than 90 per cent of all 
global commerce travels by sea . . . Your navy strives to 
guarantee that the ocean remains free for all to lawfully use.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in acknowledging VE day and the end of the Battle of the 
Atlantic, and to pay tribute to all those who have fought for our 
values, past and present, and recognize the great work of 
Canada’s navy today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Caring for our Watersheds Competition 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House 
today to highlight Caring for our Watersheds, an environmental 
education competition which rewards students for their 
creativity in identifying solutions to local watershed issues. 
 
Each year Agrium, in partnership with Partners for the 
Saskatchewan River Basin, invites students to submit proposals 
that answer the question, what can you do to improve your 
watershed? The program recognizes students and schools who 
come up with the most thought-provoking and innovative ideas 
to promote stewardship and sustainability for the Saskatchewan 
River Basin. 
 
The contest, open to students who live in the Saskatchewan 
borders within the South Saskatchewan River Basin, allows 
students to compete for $6,000 in rewards. Participating schools 
are also eligible for $11,000 in rewards, and students who 
implement their ideas are eligible for additional funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I was pleased to once again 
serve as a judge for the competition. Since it was introduced to 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

students in 2007, the competition has grown significantly. This 
past year in Saskatchewan we had a record number of 
participants in the program all from Saskatoon and area. The 
competition is open to all students grades 7 to 12. I would like 
to recognize this year’s first-place contestants: Jinny Kim, 
Heather Grove, and Kassie Tan from Greystone Heights School 
for getting two low-flow toilets installed in their school. 
 
I would like to ask my colleagues to please join with me in 
congratulating the participants, teachers, community volunteers, 
partners, and finalists for engaging in this very worthwhile 
competition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Kenneth Levene Graduate School of Business Dinner 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to 
join the Premier and the Lieutenant Governor in attending the 
Kenneth Levene Graduate School of Business dinner on May 
2nd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this dinner was a time to celebrate the inspiring 
Levene legacy, bringing together a wide range of influential 
businesses, professionals, and educational leaders in our 
community. 
 
Kenneth Levene was born into a family of hard-working 
individuals that immigrated from Russia to find a better life in 
Saskatchewan in the early 1900s. His grandfather opened 
Crescent Furniture in Regina which was family operated for 55 
successful years. 
 
In ’05, in response to the great opportunities and freedoms his 
family received in Saskatchewan, Mr. Levene made the largest 
gift contribution in the history of the University of Regina. This 
enabled the launch of a new graduate school of business that is 
named in his honour. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the keynote speaker for the Levene dinner was 
Brett Wilson. He shared inspiring stories of hardship, successful 
ventures, and his key steps to ensuring a healthy balance 
between life and work while keeping true to personal principles 
and morals. His passion for marketing, education, and 
philanthropy projected through the room, and I’m confident that 
each and every person in attendance learned some very valuable 
lessons from Mr. Wilson that evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the Kenneth Levene school of business on hosting yet another 
successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Opening of Newly Renovated Martensville High School 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, happy to rise to talk 
about even more schools that are being built in my 
constituency. On May 5th I was honoured to attend the opening 

and ribbon cutting for the expanded and renovated Martensville 
High School. The school is state of the art, and I thank this 
government for its commitment of more than $27 million 
towards this project. Martensville High School now has more 
than doubled in size, allowing for over 750 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Martensville is one of the fastest growing cities in 
Saskatchewan, making the timing of this project so very 
important for this expanding community. Twenty new 
classrooms have been added as well as a new music room, 
science and computer lab, and support spaces for special needs 
and learning assistance programs. The new performing arts area 
which houses a 300-seat theatre will not only be utilized by 
students but by the community as well. The project also 
includes renovations to the original classrooms, library resource 
centre, gym, practical and applied arts, home ec, and industrial 
arts rooms. 
 
I want to thank the Prairie Spirit School Division, the Ministry 
of Education, and the city of Martensville for their collaboration 
and partnership to make this project possible. I also want to 
thank the Minister of Education for attending the event, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know he’ll be coming back to my communities a 
few more times before the fall as we cut ribbons on four new 
elementary schools in my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Martensville on their new school. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Regina Surgical Centre Celebrates Fifth Anniversary 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce the fifth anniversary of the Surgical Centres Inc., 
operating here in Regina. The publicly funded, privately run, 
multi-specialty facility for day surgeries was first opened in 
2012 as part of the Saskatchewan surgical initiatives plan to 
reduce wait times. The surgical process at the centre is similar 
to what’s offered in a hospital setting, with all the surgeries 
being scheduled by the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
Over the past five years the backlog, the long backlog of 
patients waiting for surgery has dropped significantly. Close to 
22,000 surgeries have been performed at the Regina surgery 
centre and more than 33,000 surgeries have been done at 
Prairieview in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to the surgical initiative, patients waited for 
— get this — up to 24 months for some procedures. When the 
members opposite were in government, Saskatchewan had the 
longest wait times in Canada, and maybe even worse, they did 
nothing about it. Their former leader even said they’d shut 
down these privately run clinics if his party formed government 
in the recent provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s going to continue pursuing 
innovation in health care that puts Saskatchewan patients first, 
way before rigid and outdated ideology. I’d ask all members 
please to join me in congratulating Regina Surgical Centre and 
wish them all the best as they continue to serve Saskatchewan 
residents. Thank you. 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Regina Bypass Design Builders’ Safety Record 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was already mentioned today a number of reps are here from 
the Regina Bypass Design Builders or RBDB, and actually just 
a very few of all the Saskatchewan companies that are working 
on that bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the first portion of the bypass opens in 
October of this year it will improve the safety of motorists, 
reduce congestion, and help producers and shippers get 
Saskatchewan products to and from market efficiently. 
 
Today I’d like to recognize the RBDB for their safety record, 
during North American Occupational Safety and Health Week. 
To date, over 4,300 employees working on the project have 
taken the 90-minute safety orientation. And the bypass builders 
and its subcontractors have worked more than two million hours 
on the bypass project without a single lost-time incident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable feat considering the largest 
transportation infrastructure project this province has ever seen 
and the nature of the work that they’re in. 
 
Mr. Alisdair Dickinson, the project coordinator for the bypass, 
had this to say: “While we are proud that we have reached over 
two million work hours with zero lost-time incidents, this is 
[just] a milestone in our journey and not our end goal,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to congratulate RBDB 
and all of the companies, especially all the Saskatchewan 
companies, that are working on this bypass project for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Carrot River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Ask for leave to make an introduction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to all members of the House, I would like to 
introduce a group of 10 grade 6 to 9 students from Pasquia Hills 
Christian School up in Carrot River. They’re accompanied by 
their teacher, Mr. Doug Reimer, and chaperones Carmen 
Reimer, Kimberly Isaac, David and Meaghen Schmidt, and 
Mike and Heidi Isaac. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — When the Sask Party decided to spring 
their surprise STC sell-off on Saskatchewan people, they shut 
everything down and gave us a sneak peak of how the Sask 
Party wants people to get around once STC is gone.  
 
Some of the costs the Sask party racked up for their reckless 
announcement have already been discussed by the media, but 
on top of the customers who were forced to cancel their plans 
— medical appointments, job interviews, training, family visits, 
and meetings — we know that the cost of getting just those that 
were stranded around for that one day . . . Mr. Speaker, on top 
of those other costs, 105 people were put in taxis at a cost of 
$21,380, Mr. Speaker. That was the cost just to taxi around 
those that were stranded for this ill-conceived sell-off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could the Sask Party be so irresponsible on 
day one, and how are the people of Saskatchewan supposed to 
have any faith in this desperate sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the decision to wind down STC was a difficult 
decision to make, understanding there would be the lives of 
those who worked at STC impacted in a very real way and there 
would also be those who were relying and who had already 
booked trips on STC. Mr. Speaker, the government in making 
this decision had to pick transition times and means to provide 
for some sort of interim service for trips that had been booked, 
Mr. Speaker. We have budgeted into this the fact that in the first 
year there would be a cost to a wind-down . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the Deputy Leader is saying, heckling, to 
tell the people. Mr. Speaker, I’m endeavouring, I’m 
endeavouring to answer the question right now for all members 
of the House. Mr. Speaker, and so these transition plans were 
put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that as of right now, the 
per-passenger subsidy from the taxpayers for STC passengers is 
around $90, $90 per passenger, Mr. Speaker. When the member 
who is heckling, the one who is heckling, when he was the 
minister responsible and he faced a passenger subsidy of around 
$5, he decided to close routes.  
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t shut it down. You shut it down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So instead . . . Well no, actually he shut the 
routes down. When he was the . . . He’s still heckling. If he 
checks his own history and his own Hansard, he will know, as a 
minister of the Crown, he closed routes for STC, and that’s 
when the subsidy was only about five bucks a passenger, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve grown to $90. So I would ask that member 
who’s heckling from his seat, why doesn’t he stand up and 
explain why it was okay for them to shut down routes at $5 but 
not appropriate for the government to make a decision at a $90 
subsidy? 
 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier, of course he 
wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan people, has already admitted 
that they needed their privatization bill to scrap STC, but that 
was of course contradicting what his members had said 
throughout debate and after the bill had passed. 
 
You know, the Sask Party’s fumbled this sell-off every step of 
the way, and they’re making Saskatchewan people pay the 
price. And it appears they’re costing Saskatchewan people their 
privacy as well. A private company wrote to STC freight 
customers, and I quote: “Carpe Diem Express Inc. will be 
seamlessly transferring your account and pricing with little or 
no . . . [charges].” 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC has been quick to deny any affiliation, but 
the question needs to be answered. First, we still don’t know 
why this company, the company was so confident enough to 
advertise to hire drivers to take over STC freight routes. And 
second, how did this private company get the private 
information of STC’s customers? Why won’t the Premier come 
clean on these questions? Most importantly, why won’t he scrap 
this desperate sell-off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this company that the Leader of the Opposition is mentioning, 
Mr. Speaker, I have had no conversations with that company, 
Mr. Speaker, other than they have been told to stop using STC’s 
name in any of their advertising, in any of their literature. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they have received a letter from our solicitor 
advising them of the same thing. 
 
We have no idea of how they would’ve obtained any 
information, Mr. Speaker, other then maybe somebody from the 
ATU [Amalgamated Transit Union] or somewhere else, Mr. 
Speaker, that may have got that. Mr. Speaker, they did not get 
that from us. 
 
These companies have applied to the Highway Traffic Board, 
Mr. Speaker, for operating certificates, Mr. Speaker. This 
company here, Mr. Speaker, we have had no conversations with 
and my officials have had no conversations with about anything 
to do with the routes of STC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s answers like that that has 
Saskatchewan people rightfully concerned about this sell-off 
and the general management of that government. On front after 
front, the Sask Party hides the facts and refuses to come clean. 
 
At the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] we now know that the 
Ministry of Highways serves as a holding company for land. So 
even though the minister responsible doesn’t, I guess, like 
answering questions in committee about it, but there’s no doubt 
that the scandalous happenings at the GTH are hurting 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. You see, when the GTH sells land, 

they’re actually selling land owned by the Ministry of 
Highways. But, Mr. Speaker, even though the GTH takes the 
full cash value on the sale, they only pay the Ministry of 
Highways back the price that they paid for it, which of course 
could be much, much less than the current value of the land. 
 
You know, instead of refusing to answer another GTH question, 
can the Premier simply tell us if the Sask Party has the Ministry 
of Highways or any other ministry or Crown, ultimately 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, bankrolling any other enterprises or 
deals in the same way that they are the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
address one of the elements in the premise of the member’s 
question which I’m confused about. I don’t think he was at 
estimates. He wasn’t at estimates last night, but there were 
questions which I responded to at Economy estimates with 
regard to the GTH, despite the fact that they weren’t relevant to 
the Economy ministry, as the GTH is a treasury board Crown, 
as members well know. That being said, I committed to the 
member for Nutana . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well, the 
member for, the Deputy Leader doesn’t want to listen to the 
answer. He seems to have a lot to say from his seat, Mr. 
Speaker, and very, very little from his feet. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the undertaking, I provided an 
undertaking that we will, with the Economy Committee, review 
the GTH annual report in the near future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that the 
minister has come around to talk about the GTH, but that 
wasn’t an answer to the question. 
 
SaskPower gave the GTH $25 million for land that was still in 
the name of the Ministry of Highways. The GTH only paid 
Highways about $3 million for the deal. It makes no sense, Mr. 
Speaker, and taxpayers are getting hosed. They lose out when 
the GTH shortchanges the ministry, and they lose out when the 
Sask Party approves SaskPower to pay the ridiculously 
exorbitant price for the land. 
 
So who wins, Mr. Speaker? Who wins? Well the GTH wins 
twice, and let’s not forget that ultimately this gave GTH the 
cash needed to help those two Sask Party supporters make $11 
million. Mr. Speaker, how can the Sask Party continue to 
defend their GTH scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the member opposite well knows that the 
auditor went into these matters. The auditor provided a report to 
the Public Accounts Committee which was discussed at Public 
Accounts, reviewed by Public Accounts. The auditor had access 
to all of the information which she saw. 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

[14:15] 
 
And I would like to underline some good news which we were 
able to announce last week at the GTH, a $45 million 
investment made by a company, Brightenview, with regard to a 
global trade and exhibition centre at the GTH. Over seven and a 
half million dollars has been paid for the property at the GTH.  
 
We’re looking forward to that construction beginning, Mr. 
Speaker, and we look forward to a new business out at the 
GTH. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, sometimes I wonder if that 
minister has even read the auditor’s report. The auditor’s report 
had nothing to do with the purchase of land at the GTH by 
SaskPower. If he recalls, it was about the east parcels in the 
bypass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now here we have a minister who refused to answer questions 
on the GTH last night because he didn’t think they impacted the 
budget. But the Ministry of Highways — and that means you 
and me — is continuously losing money on these so-called 
deals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party handed 300 acres of land to CP Rail [Canadian 
Pacific Railway] for free. SaskPower didn’t get this treatment; 
less than half of the land and they paid $25 million. All the 
while power rates continue to skyrocket and the Ministry of 
Highways is getting railroaded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the GTH collecting all the profits, none of 
the money makes it back to the Saskatchewan people. Well, not 
to those who aren’t well-connected, anyways. So why did the 
Sask Party set up the system this way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as is the par for the 
course for the members opposite, the premise of their question 
is nonsense. The transfer of land to Canadian Pacific, as the 
deputy leader — who has a lot to say from his seat and 
continues to, from his seat, very little from his feet — as that 
member well knows, as the minister responsible at that time, 
this was the NDP [New Democratic Party] plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP were very aware that in order for the Global 
Transportation Hub to be successful and go forward there was a 
necessity for CP to relocate from downtown Regina to the 
Global Transportation Hub. That was something that was 
supported by the city of Regina, by the national government, 
and by the government of the day, represented by the minister 
who is now the deputy leader of the NDP. 
 
Those members opposite approved $33 million in order to set 
up the GTH, a major component of which was relocating CP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it was the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money that the Sask Party wasted on the GTH 
scandal, and they have the right to transparency. Now given the 
Premier’s complaints about redacted federal documents, I 
would hope that he would agree. 
 
In fact yesterday the Minister of Energy finally provided a little 
transparency of his own. He admitted that the Sask Party has 
already created their own price on carbon. In fact despite 
denying it here before, that’s now the message they’re trying to 
send to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have all had to bear witness to the Premier and the minister 
grandstanding and having Twitter tantrums about the potential 
of putting a price on carbon. So my question to the minister is, 
will he please tell the Premier what he told the public yesterday, 
that the Sask Party is already taxing Saskatchewan people on 
carbon through their $1.5 billion carbon capture tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for the question. And the fact of the 
matter is and the investment that she refers to is the highest 
public investment in any carbon mitigation scheme in the 
nation, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has a great story when it 
comes to talking about our environmental footprint and our 
efforts with respect to climate change, Mr. Speaker, and carbon 
capture and storage is most definitely part of that, Mr. Speaker, 
with that plant up and fully operational as we speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a great message on action that has been 
taken in agriculture and sequestration through our zero till 
agriculture and some of the genetic and agronomic efforts that 
have been made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a great, a great story, Mr. Speaker, in our energy 
power generation mix, moving to 50 per cent renewables here 
in the province of Saskatchewan by the year 2030, Mr. Speaker, 
resulting in a 40 per cent reduction in our emissions in that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a great effort and initiatives that have 
taken place already in the province of Saskatchewan in private 
industry, in our public Crown corporations, in our carbon 
mitigation, in our carbon sequestration here, Mr. Speaker, and 
we look forward to more in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I really had hoped that we had 
turned a new corner towards a more realistic view of reality, but 
here we are again. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we are opposed to 
the federal government imposing their scheme on us, of course. 
 
Now let’s be clear: these are the minister’s words, Mr. Speaker, 
not mine. He said, and quote, “The people of Saskatchewan are 
paying for the price of mitigating carbon and that should be 
recognized.” 
 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Hypocritical tantrums aren’t getting us anywhere except closer 
to having Ottawa impose their carbon tax. Now that they’ve 
admitted it, how can the Sask Party still stand there and deny 
that they’ve already slapped on a $1.5 billion job-killing carbon 
capture tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, only the member 
opposite who wants to kill the coal industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, who’s on the record as wanting to kill the coal 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan, could equate a 
one-time technological investment of $1.5 billion with a forever 
$2.5-billion-annual, federally imposed carbon tax. That’s the 
difference between investing in technology and a tax, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the member says, of course we’re against the federally 
imposed carbon tax. By the way, now we find out that if we 
don’t impose our own tax, the threat from the Trudeau 
government is that we’re going to get the Notley, a federally 
imposed Notley carbon tax, an NDP carbon tax next door.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if her position is that the NDP in our province 
are all on the same page now and they don’t agree with, they 
don’t agree with Premier Notley, they might want to tell the 
potential leader that’s sitting in the back row. Because the day 
after Trudeau made his announcement, what did he say — and 
he’s clearly a potential leadership candidate — he said it’s 
about time we did carbon pricing, the likes of which the Prime 
Minister announced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So don’t leave it to the critic. I’d ask the Leader of the NDP, the 
interim Leader of the NDP, to stand up and answer a couple of 
questions. One, how is a one-time technological investment a 
tax forever? And secondly, what is his actual position on a 
federally imposed carbon tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Grants-in-Lieu Program 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, everywhere you turn, the Sask 
Party is making . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, everywhere you turn, the Sask 
Party is making Saskatchewan people pay for the Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. SaskEnergy collected 
surcharges from over 100 cities and towns with their 
grants-in-lieu. They collected these surcharges from those 
specific communities and then paid them directly back to those 
specific communities. 
 
Now that money is going to the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. 
It’s a Sask Party tax, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what the minister said 
about it, and I quote, “It was a special tax prior for the 
municipalities, but that special tax, if that’s you want to call it, 

is now going to the GRF.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s not downloading, I don’t know what is. 
The minister admitted that this was yet another tax to help make 
up for their deficit. How can the minister justify this tax on 
families that she has turned into a cut to their hometowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For three 
years, as that member well knows that the resource revenues 
have been declining in this province. And in two of those years, 
the municipalities have received increased dollars from this 
government as support for our municipalities. 
 
In this year however, we were asking them to help share in the 
challenges that we are experiencing, Mr. Speaker, and we did it 
through a very confusing, inequitable, and not-transparent 
program of grants-in-lieu in SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
 
As the member opposite knows, in SaskPower, everybody pays 
for that. Only the cities were recipients of that program. But for 
SaskEnergy, the residents within the communities, there’s only 
about a quarter of the urban communities that had this program, 
and those residents pay a charge that went to the municipality 
this year. While we are in transition, it will be going to the 
General Revenue Fund. It makes absolutely no difference to 
their bill. And we will be correcting this anomaly, as well, in 
the transition year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For my property in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, it’s between 3 and 
$4, and instead of going to the municipality this year, it’s going 
to the GRF. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The quote speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
yet another tax hike from the Sask Party. Some communities, 
through their energy bills, will pay this tax, while others will 
not. The minister herself acknowledged that this is unfair. She 
said, “. . . I absolutely agree with where you’re going, that those 
residents shouldn’t be the only contributors to a shortfall on the 
General Revenue Fund.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes to the grants-in-lieu program that they 
want to pass today make the system less fair, not more. The 
people that live in these cities and towns will pay even more for 
the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. The 
minister admitted it’s unfair and that it needs to be fixed. So 
will she fix it today and scrap Bill 64, or will she endorse 
legislation that she has admitted is flawed and unfair? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know from time to time 
the member opposite has struggled, and I have never said the 
legislation is flawed and unfair. I said the programs are flawed 
and unfair and need to be fixed, and we’re in a transition year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

This does not change my energy bill in the city of Humboldt. It 
doesn’t change it one little bit. I was always paying this charge, 
Mr. Speaker. It changes where that charge goes. In my case, in 
Humboldt, it’s between 3 and $4. I talked to the Minister of 
Energy and Resources. Apparently for his property in Regina, 
it’s the same amount, Mr. Speaker. So we are redirecting where 
that charge went. It’s not a new charge that I haven’t been 
paying all these years while I’ve been residing in Humboldt, 
Mr. Speaker. And so, that is what we’re going to be working on 
as we’re in the transition year. It wasn’t fair before, quite 
frankly, because only a handful of communities could access 
that program, and the majority of them could not. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management and Reporting of 
Political Donations 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, talk about arrogance and out of 
touch, out of touch. You know, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
have targeted families with deep cuts and tax hikes, and yet 
corporations walk away with tax giveaways. They weren’t even 
asking for them. Mr. Speaker, understandably Saskatchewan 
people are asking why. Why is the Sask Party doing so much to 
help the wealthy and well connected, while cutting everyone 
else? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, allowing big and out-of-province money 
into Saskatchewan politics invites those questions. The Sask 
Party wants to point fingers. They want to say, what about you? 
They want to say, what about then? Well here we are, Mr. 
Speaker, here and now. If the Sask Party passes our bill with us, 
big money — corporate, wealthy, well-connected, and yes, yes 
even union money — will be gone for everyone. So why, why, 
Mr. Speaker, won’t the Sask Party join us in getting big money 
out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the hon. member’s preamble to his question, he talks about 
corporate income tax in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And they 
keep asking questions during this session as to why would a 
government on this side of the House reduce corporate income 
taxes at a time like this when there are, perhaps, some 
challenges in our economy and trying to stimulate our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I went back to take a look at what previous budgets might 
have come down under the previous NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker. And in 2006, this member might remember this 
because I have a quote for him, in 2006 when the economy was 
doing relatively better than it is doing today — I will admit that 
— that NDP government, Mr. Speaker, cut corporate income 
taxes by 29 per cent over three years, over the ensuing three 
years. And why, Mr. Speaker? Well, let’s listen to the member 
from Saskatoon Centre, who said this: “But I want to highlight 
some of those of particular . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Whoa. Whoa. It’s getting increasingly more 
difficult to hear the question and the response. Would we please 
be respectful and listen to the response from the Finance 

minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — This government reduced, has reduced 
corporate income taxes by 8 per cent over the course of the next 
three years. Twenty-nine per cent over the course of three years 
in their last budget before they went to the polls in 2007. The 
member from Saskatoon Centre said: 
 

But I want to highlight some of those of particular interest 
to my neighbours and the community downtown. The first 
of course would be the business tax cuts. These are 
significant, but I believe the plan as laid out by Jack Vicq 
and his commission is sound, and clearly the time is right 
for us to make this investment. It is clear that businesses 
see this initiative as an opportunity to invest here in our 
province, creating jobs and opportunities and as well 
ensuring that wages and benefits are competitive. The time 
is now, and this is very essential. 

 
That’s what he said on corporate income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to tell you, 
this government . . . especially that minister who says, perhaps 
there’s some challenges with our budget, perhaps there’s some 
challenges. But I appreciate the great research. 
 
But that was then, and here we are today. Here we are today. 
And it’s clear from their actions, it’s clear from their actions 
they have totally forgotten who they’re working for, who 
they’re working for, Mr. Speaker. Sixty million dollars in 
corporate tax cuts while taking $60 million out of our kids’ 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker, and a $38 million tax cut for the 
wealthy and well connected while everyday families are asked 
to pay a billion dollars more in PST [provincial sales tax]. 
 
They’re taking money hand over fist from lobbyists who 
represent the phone companies that have been circling SaskTel 
like sharks. And instead of working for Saskatchewan families 
and defending our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, they’re churning up 
the waters. 
 
Hasn’t the Sask Party heard enough? Why, Mr. Speaker, why 
won’t they join us and get big money out of Saskatchewan 
politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday there was a general election in the province of British 
Columbia, and that election will impact the province of 
Saskatchewan in real ways. If it stands, for example, that an 
NDP-led coalition becomes the elected government of British 
Columbia for any reason, we know that jobs at Evraz are in 
danger. Jobs at Evraz will be in danger. I think the member, the 
Leader of the NDP has agreed that the NDP position in BC 
[British Columbia] is wrong. 
 
The member just asked a question impugning, I guess, the 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

motives of this side of the House, depending on who may have 
contributed to the Saskatchewan Party. Here are the returns for 
the Saskatchewan NDP from the last election. Schedule A, Mr. 
Speaker, canvasses the associations that give money to the NDP 
for the last election. The number one contributor to the 
Saskatchewan NDP was the British Columbia NDP — $7,519 
from the BC NDP to those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we would like to know on this side of the House, what was 
the BC NDP’s expectation for this money? We would believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the motives on that side of the House are 
quite right in this regard, that it was simply a donation, because 
that’s typically what happens in politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But maybe the member wants to answer now or tomorrow in 
question period or later, why is the number one associate donor 
to the NDP the same party in that province, the NDP, that 
would kill jobs in Regina, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental  
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
that it’s considered certain estimates, to present its third report. 
I move: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 64, The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills for Bill No. 
64 and that the bill and its amendments be now read a third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall this amendment be read 
the first time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF  
AMENDMENTS 

 
Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the Bill 
No. 64 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:37 until 14:39.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

[Yeas — 45] 
 
Wall Moe Wyant 
Reiter Morgan Harpauer 
Doherty Duncan Beaudry-Mellor 
Hargrave D’Autremont Heppner 
Boyd Cheveldayoff Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Weekes 
Brkich Hart Kirsch 
Steinley Makowsky Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Campeau 
Docherty Michelson Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 45; those opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I 
move: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
50, The Provincial Capital Commission Act, with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister of 
central agencies. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills for Bill No. 
50 and the bill and its amendments be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 
a first time? I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF 
AMENDMENTS 

 
Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — I move that the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 50 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:44 until 14:45.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 45] 
 
Wall Moe Wyant 
Reiter Morgan Harpauer 
Doherty Duncan Beaudry-Mellor 
Hargrave D’Autremont Heppner 
Boyd Cheveldayoff Marit 
Tell Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Weekes 
Brkich Hart Kirsch 
Steinley Makowsky Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Campeau 
Docherty Michelson Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis McMorris 
Bonk Carr Nerlien 
Lambert Buckingham Kaeding 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 11] 
 
Wotherspoon Vermette Chartier 
Belanger Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Beck McCall 
Sarauer Meili  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 45; those opposed, 11. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I 
move: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the third report on the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Orders of the day. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House recess until 3 o’clock. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House recess. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands recessed until 
3 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 14:48 until 15:00.] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for Committee of 
Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

The Chair: — Members, I’ll call the Committee of Finance to 
order. The item before the committee today is Executive 
Council, vote 10. Before I call on the Premier to introduce his 
officials, I would just like to make a couple of comments. I 
believe I do this every year for the benefit of new members, and 
particularly for those people that may be watching our 
proceedings here this afternoon. 
 
Committee of Finance operates somewhat differently than the 
standing committees. All the members of the Assembly are 
members of Committee of Finance, and so with that only 
members may participate in Committee of Finance, which is 
different than the standing committees where ministers may call 
upon their officials to provide answers. In Committee of 
Finance, only members may participate. 
 
I would just remind members that they are not to interact with 
officials, and officials also are not to interact with members. 
And the other difference that people may notice is that when 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

members are speaking, they stand in their place. 
 
So with that, I would ask the Premier to introduce the officials 
that he has with him today. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank 
you for those introductory remarks. Mr. Chair, I just want to say 
I’m looking forward to the proceedings this afternoon. 
Whenever possible, I’m going to endeavour to provide 
immediate answers to the Leader of the Opposition and if there 
are critics as well that have questions. If we’re unable to 
provide immediate answers, Mr. Chair, we’ll undertake to 
provide that information at the earliest opportunity to members 
of the House. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’m very pleased to be able to introduce some senior 
advisers who have joined me here to better assist me in 
providing those answers to the opposition and, through the 
opposition, to the public and to the public record. 
 
To my immediate left, Mr. Chair, is Alanna Koch. She is the 
deputy minister to the Premier and the cabinet secretary, Mr. 
Speaker. On my right is Reg Downs. Reg is a senior adviser in 
my office, senior adviser to the Premier. Kent Campbell is the 
deputy minister for Intergovernmental Affairs for the province 
of Saskatchewan. Immediately behind him is James Saunders 
who’s the associate deputy minister in cabinet planning; and 
then just to James’s right is Bonita Cairns who is the executive 
director of corporate services; and then Jarret Coels who is the 
manager, the chief of staff, if you will, I guess, for House 
business for the government. And I think I’ve got them all. 
 
So I just want to thank all of these folks in advance for the work 
that has gone into preparing for today and also what’s about to 
take place over the next little while. I also thank members 
opposite and the Leader of the Opposition in advance for the 
questions that he and others might be asking today. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. I will now call Executive 
Council, vote 10, subvote (EX01), central management and 
services. The Premier may proceed to make his opening 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, there’s not a lot to add 
perhaps that might take away from the questions and answers, 
save to say, I guess, I mean the biggest issue that has unfolded 
in the province over the last while has been the provincial 
budget. And the Executive Council or, I guess, the Premier’s 
department of government or ministry of government if you 
will, has taken part in the austerity of the government. There 
have been reductions. We can get into the specifics of those. 
 
I would also say that the political side of government, I guess, 
for which I would certainly be responsible, has continued to see 
reductions. Mr. Chairman, we’ve reduced the size of cabinet an 
additional seat. That’s over and above the reductions in the size 
of cabinet when we first took office in 2007. 

Mr. Chair, members will know that we also led the effort, that 
now all members have engaged in, to reduce our salaries by 3.5 
per cent in an exemplary way as we head towards what will 
hopefully be a reduction of 3.5 per cent as well across the 
government in terms of public sector compensation. 
 
We have significantly reduced travel, Mr. Chair. We’ve 
significantly reduced travel on the part of ministers. In fact 
2016-17, the number of out-of-province trips was down 66 per 
cent compared to ’06-07. We don’t expect a major increase in 
that. In fact, as you will know, we took steps to wind down 
executive air, the government planes, as a part of the budget 
initiative. So our travel versus who preceded us in government 
is down and will continue to stay down as a result of this 
particular budget. 
 
Mr. Chair, the same will be true for political staff. There are 26 
fewer staff in the Executive Council, or the Premier’s office, 
today then there were when we took over. Mr. Chairman, 
salaries are 200,000 less per month for those staff in the 
Premier’s office, Executive Council, and that trend will also 
continue. Mr. Chair, the same could be said of advertising as 
well and those kinds of expenses that sometimes Premiers do 
and must answer for. They’re down, and they’ll continue to stay 
down as a result of the budget. 
 
So I know that we’ll get into a wide-ranging debate and 
discussion about other issues, and I want to make time for that. 
But those would be, respecting my own area of government, the 
Executive Council, those would be a few opening remarks. 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
engage in the estimates here today on behalf of the official 
opposition but, more importantly, the people of Saskatchewan. I 
thank the Premier for his time here today, and I’d really want to 
thank the officials that have joined us and certainly civil 
servants across the province that help administer the program of 
government. 
 
I’m not going to get into long remarks here right now because I 
really want to get to the questions. But we’re facing 
unprecedented times in Saskatchewan and a betrayal by a 
government of Saskatchewan people that’s rare, that’s unique. 
And the fight for Saskatchewan people is real because of the 
choices of this government. And we’re going to enter into this 
discussion here today thinking of all of Saskatchewan, from the 
North to the South, from every corner and points in between, 
and to stand strong for the people of our province. 
 
Certainly, you know, this is on the heels of an election about a 
year ago. And even in that election, of course this is a Premier 
and a Sask Party that wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan people. 
The very few promises that they did offer up, many of them 
already broken, and we can canvass those here today. 
 
But a critical area where this government wasn’t straight was 
the state of the finances. And we’ll get into some other remarks, 
but we don’t just have a deficit of dollars, as we’ll speak about 
right now. But there’s a deficit of decency in the choices that 
are being made and being imposed on Saskatchewan people. 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

As it relates to not being straight with Saskatchewan people, I 
guess, my question to the Premier is, he went before people a 
year ago and sort of said one thing about the state of the 
finances that wasn’t in line with the reality at all. My question 
is, why was that the case? Why did he chose to do that? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, thanks very much. You know, 
we’re going to have a debate here, and that’s how it should be 
in Premier’s estimates. And I certainly make this commitment 
to the hon. member, even though I may just fundamentally 
disagree with what him and his party espouse in terms of their 
economic policies, which we know the result of those economic 
policies that were visited on this province for 16 years, well 
actually for much longer than that.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with those policies. I don’t agree 
with even what they were campaigning on in the last election 
with respect to what their environmental policies would have 
been and the seeming dissonance that exists between today’s, I 
would say, very urban NDP and the realities of this province as 
one that has an increasingly diversified economy that does rely 
though, however, on agriculture and the resource sector. 
 
So while I may not agree at all with their policies to the extent I 
know what they are, and that’s sometimes hard to discern, I 
won’t ever question the member’s decency. I fundamentally 
think he’s a decent fellow and that his colleagues are also 
decent. I believe that they want what’s best for Saskatchewan. I 
don’t necessarily agree with their plan to get us to that point, 
and that’s why we have this place, I guess. 
 
And neither do I agree with his characterization about the 
election campaign, the central . . . There weren’t many promises 
in the election campaign precisely because we said the 
province’s finances were not healthy. We in fact campaigned on 
the same finances that the leader, well that the NDP 
campaigned on. That was the Q3 [third quarter] report prepared 
by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the interim leader of the NDP was aware 
that we would get snow on October the 8th that would never 
leave, that would cause another $230 million of deficit pressure 
on top of the deficit that we did campaign on. I mean, maybe he 
knew that. I didn’t know that when we were campaigning. I 
didn’t expect a $230 million additional crop insurance liability. 
 
We did budget for crop insurance claims for that year, to be 
sure. We would have budgeted in sort of an average way, I’m 
assuming. But, Mr. Chairman, we didn’t budget for a snow in 
October that wouldn’t go away. Neither did we budget for what 
the analysts, what the forecasters were saying would not 
happen, which was stubbornly low and continuingly low 
resource commodity prices. But that is what happened. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, when those numbers were becoming 
obvious, the impact of that late harvest, a quarter billion dollars 
in additional crop insurance exposure to the province’s budgets, 
which are now summary as the member knows, and the ongoing 
lagging commodity prices, Mr. Chair, we disclosed those 
numbers in the quarterly reports. And then, frankly, we shared 
them with groups like SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] in the run-up to the 
budget. It highlighted just how serious this was. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we also campaigned in the election on balancing 
the budget. We thought it would take us another year. Mr. 
Chairman, because of these circumstances, because of what 
happened with respect to those crop insurance claims and 
continuing softness in resource prices, we listened to 
Saskatchewan people who said to go to balance in the timeline 
that we had campaigned on would visit undue harm on the 
programs. The very programs that he doesn’t want to see cut in 
this budget would’ve been cut much more if we would’ve 
maintained that commitment that we did make in the campaign. 
 
It’s also true that we’d have to increase taxes significantly, 
much, much more than the shift that we did, would’ve 
prescribed if we would have tried to get to balance in one year. 
And so we listened to Saskatchewan people who are saying, 
let’s have a longer term plan than the one-year plan we 
campaigned on. And that’s what was introduced by the Minister 
of Finance in this session; it is a three-year plan to get to 
balance. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as a part of that plan, we’re going to see real tax 
advantages for our economy going forward, and I’m sure we’re 
going to get into a debate about that. But again I would just say 
to the hon. member, I don’t agree with his characterization of 
the character of people on this side of the House or the level of 
decency that may exist on this side of the House. I would not do 
that.  
 
I know we’re going to have a vigorous debate and 
disagreement. That is meet and it’s right, and it is as it should 
be but, Mr. Speaker, I would defend the intent and the motives 
of the women and the men on this side of the House to keep the 
major promise of that election campaign, which was to keep 
this province strong. We think we need to do that with a 
long-term plan to get to balance and a plan to keep our taxes 
competitive, a plan to shift away from the dependency of 
resource revenue and, Mr. Chairman, that’s what this budget 
does. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier may not like 
being challenged on this front, and you know, I believe him to 
be a decent person. But this budget and the choices made by 
him and that cabinet are clearly not decent. It’s not decent to 
give breaks to the most wealthy and well connected, giveaways 
and breaks at the same time as the most vulnerable are being 
hurt in a significant way. And we see attack after attack, cut 
after cut that hurt the most vulnerable. 
 
My question though is on the finances where the Sask Party 
clearly wasn’t straight with Saskatchewan people and that 
Premier wasn’t straight. Last year during the election, he was 
claiming that the current fiscal year that he was involved in had 
a deficit, he was saying at the time 400-and-some million 
dollars. That wasn’t the case. That wasn’t the fact. 
 
He came forward just a couple months later with a budget — 
after about a month and a half, maybe later — had a budget and 
shared that number. And then just a few weeks later after that, 
the public accounts rolled in, sort of the real accounting for this. 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

And of course it wasn’t $400 million in that year; it was $1.5 
billion of deficit, Mr. Speaker. No excuse from the Premier not 
to have those numbers, the ink would’ve been dried on the 
public accounts, but clearly didn’t present those to 
Saskatchewan people.  
 
And further to that, the Sask Party’s plan, if you can call it that, 
is in my hands here, Mr. Speaker. And in 2016-17, the year 
that’s just closed, the Sask Party was saying they were going to 
run a deficit around $200 million. Of course the reality is more 
than snow in October, Mr. Speaker, it was $1.3 billion deficit, 
Mr. Speaker. All hidden from Saskatchewan people throughout 
the year, and then how the government would deal with this. 
 
And I could move forward to 2017-18, Mr. Speaker. Just a year 
ago we had the Premier saying that there was going to be a $50 
million surplus in this fiscal year. Well the reality, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re dealing with, you know, a deficit somewhere from $600 
million to a billion bucks. Who really knows with this 
government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Back to the Premier. He’s laid out these numbers. This is what 
he’s ran on. Why wasn’t he straight with Saskatchewan people 
about the financial mess that he’s presided over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s preamble is full 
of . . . Mr. Chair, the member’s preamble is full of things that 
once again need to be corrected and were corrected. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the situation that happened in Saskatchewan 
with respect to deteriorating revenues happened next door in the 
province of Alberta, where his party of favour, the New 
Democratic Party, are in place. What did the NDP party report 
in terms of their own mid-term versus actual budgets 
throughout these last number of years? Well they reported 
ballooning deficits. 
 
The numbers changed. The numbers change when oil prices 
remain stubbornly low when all the forecasters are saying they 
won’t do that. You see, they do that regardless of whether it’s 
NDP, Alberta or Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan.  
 
And so I wonder if he would characterize Premier Notley’s 
government as having not been straight with the people of 
Alberta. I don’t think he would. I think there he would probably 
recognize, I hope that he would recognize the fact that 
commodity prices have stayed lower longer. I think for him to 
just dismiss the fact that there was a quarter billion dollar crop 
insurance claim that we didn’t budget for, over and above 
average claims, that he would dismiss that as somehow the fault 
of government and management practice, I think, is pretty 
transparent as well. 
 
But it’s interesting in his preamble, my friend, the interim 
Leader of the NDP, took another run at corporate income tax 
reductions in this budget. And we have made reductions in 
business income taxes in Saskatchewan. Business income taxes 
were reduced in this province by the members opposite when 
they were in government, and they did that to keep pace with 
what was going on in neighbouring provinces in part. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can share with members of the House that 
since then in the province of Alberta and the province of BC 

have moved to lower. Now the NDP next door have moved 
higher, but not in British Columbia. And you know, it’s 
interesting: the Finance minister read quotes from . . . The 
member from Saskatoon Centre asked this very question, railed 
against the government’s budget for reducing corporate income 
taxes. And the Minister of Finance was able to quote from just 
2006, when the NDP reduced corporate income taxes and said, 
“But I want to highlight . . .” This is what the member said then, 
Saskatoon Centre: 
 

But I want to highlight some of those of particular interest 
to my neighbours and the community downtown. The first 
of course would be the business tax cuts. These are 
significant, but I believe the plan as laid out by Jack Vicq 
and his commission is sound, and clearly the time is right 
for us to make this investment. It is clear that businesses 
see this initiative as an opportunity to invest here in our 
province, creating jobs and opportunities and as well 
ensuring that wages and benefits are competitive. 

 
That’s what he said then, when it was the NDP that reduced 
corporate income taxes in their plan. That’s what the member 
who asked the question of the Finance minister said. 
 
But there’s more, Mr. Chair. The current House Leader for the 
NDP, who was also a minister of the Crown in the NDP 
government, here’s what he had to say about the same corporate 
income taxes that he just took a broadside at — and you did. 
You do that in preambles all the time. You take a run at tax cuts 
for the rich, tax cuts for the big companies. Well Mr. Chair, my 
friend across the way should remember what he and his party 
said in 2006. Here’s what then NDP member of the 
government, now NDP Opposition House Leader, said about 
corporate income tax cuts: 
 

Now one of the main planks in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
was cutting business taxes and other measures to stimulate 
the economy, to sharpen our competitive edge. Business 
tax cuts will grow the economy . . . 

 
This is what the NDP said, just a few years ago when they were 
doing it: 
  

Business tax cuts will grow the economy by attracting and 
stimulating capital investment and creating jobs and job 
opportunities for young people . . . In 2006-07 these cuts 
will result in a $95.3 million business tax cut to improve 
Saskatchewan’s competitiveness. 

 
Ninety-five million dollars in cuts for the big multinationals and 
the rich that you always decry in this House. That’s what you 
did when you were in government. That’s what they did. This 
particular plan is three years and $60 million, I think. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eighteen million this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Eighteen million dollars. So, Mr. Chairman, 
I mean it’s a good debate. I don’t think you can have it both 
ways though. I don’t think you can say in government that 
when you cut business taxes, it creates jobs, when you’re the 
government and you want to cut business taxes. But then when 
in you’re in opposition you think, well we’ll make a little 
politics. We’ll do a little class politicking now. We’ll split 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

companies from employees, and maybe middle from lower 
classes. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t use 
business taxes that way: on one hand, when in government, that 
it’s good; and on the other hand that it’s discriminatory against 
working people or poor people, Mr. Chairman. 
 
You know, I know members opposite have . . . Because maybe 
because of their numbers there’s not perhaps been a great 
expectation that they would come up with policies, but I know 
the member from Saskatoon Centre in committee has been 
asking ministers if they’ve seen the latest polls. I’m sure he’s 
referencing the fact that, you know, even though they’re not 
even . . . well that the NDP have made some improvements in 
the polls, to their credit. 
 
So you know what I think, Mr. Chair? There should be an 
expectation then on the part of the people of this province that 
we would get more than just criticism and more than just sort of 
flip-flopping, but arguing both sides of the same question from 
a party that purports to be one that’s going to be campaigning in 
about three and a half years to form the government, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I invite the member opposite to clarify his position on business 
tax cuts, and I look forward to his answer. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d appreciate more direct responses to 
the questions so we don’t have someone ragging the puck 
throughout this time here today. 
 
I guess just to that, you know, to the tax commission that spoke 
to those changes, this has to be done within fiscal capacity and 
within balance. And those changes were brought forward to, 
certainly as part of a package, to grow an economy but done so 
with surpluses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll just quote from the actual business tax review 
committee. A common message was that any recommendations 
must remain within the province’s fiscal capacity. This is 
important for the Premier who runs deficit after deficit after 
deficit: should the province’s fiscal capacity improve, business 
tax competitiveness should not be achieved through a return to 
deficits. 
 
My question to the Premier is, when did he decide that he was 
going to increase taxes on people and families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well this is very interesting, Mr. Chair, 
because now the NDPs say, well of course we supported 
corporate income tax reductions when there was financial 
capacity to do it. The next year, here it is, the NDP budget the 
next year after their corporate income taxes: summary financial 
deficit, $701 million. 
 
Why didn’t they go back then and increase corporate income 
taxes? I mean this is their whole argument: well we did it then 
because the province could afford to do it. And then the next 
year — and he’s talking about deficit — the next year in ’07 
when things are actually starting to improve, that year they ran 
a $700 million deficit. They were, the year before, sitting on a 
mountain of money. And in that budget, by the way, I think 

there was layoffs. There was program cuts. And even despite 
that, there’s a $700 million deficit. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Chair, with respect to the direct . . . It’s interesting to watch 
members opposite when they were presented with some of the 
facts where the rhetoric doesn’t jibe, Mr. Chairman. But I 
would just say this as to the direct question. There was so many 
decision points in this budget that were obviously very, very 
difficult, that were not taken lightly by members on this side of 
the House. And one of them was the changes in taxes that were 
needed. We knew that after several years, now three years of 
reduced resource revenue, that we simply couldn’t wait any 
longer to begin to do what governments in the past in this 
province, including ours, should have been doing — well, since 
oil was found — and that is to move off of a dependence on 
resource revenue, to move off of royalties, a dependence on 
royalties that this province has relied on, notwithstanding who 
the government happens to be. 
 
And to do that, Mr. Chair, when royalties are low meant 
shifting towards other taxes. We did what economists would 
advise and what they have lauded since the budget, which was 
to make the difficult choice to move in part to consumption and 
away from taxes on productivity — taxes on investment like the 
member decried or supported when he was in government, 
business taxes, and also taxes on Saskatchewan families — 
towards taxes on consumption. And there is a request for more 
money here from Saskatchewan people. And you know, Mr. 
Chair, that’s not easy. It’s not something that we wanted to do 
at all, obviously. 
 
But here’s where we were at least somewhat reinforced, I think, 
in the decision to do it, and that is that even after . . . We’ve 
been cutting taxes for eight years, Mr. Chair, almost every tax 
you can think of. You know, members opposite often ask where 
were did all the money go? Well 6 billion of it went to reducing 
taxes for Saskatchewan families and farmers and businesses. 
Six billion dollars is the cumulative number and, by the way, 
that’s still the number today, even after the taxes have increased 
in this budget. 
 
So there are 6 billion fewer tax dollars being collected by our 
government than yours, than members opposite when they were 
in power, even with this year’s budget. Mr. Chair, I want to 
point out that a single person with a 40,000 . . . Yes, without 
equalization payments which members opposite used often in 
their budgeting. A single person with a $40,000 income will 
still pay 749 less than they did in 2007, combining both income 
and PST. A family of four . . . Well they laugh at that. They 
laugh at that. 
 
You know, the member for Saskatoon Centre, I think he’s been 
an articulate advocate for low-income people in this province, 
to his credit. Well, Mr. Chairman, he should know then that 
because of our tax reductions, 112,000 low-income people, they 
don’t pay income tax at all in Saskatchewan anymore. They pay 
zero income tax. You, when you were in office you taxed them 
— same speeches, but you taxed them. Now they’re off the tax 
roll completely. A family of four with $75,000 income will pay 
$1,886 less than they did in ’07. That’s a 31 per cent reduction, 
even with the increases. 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

The member asked about when did we decide to increase taxes. 
Well I tell you what, Mr. Chairman, had we not made all of this 
progress on taxes, dropped low-income people off the tax rolls, 
reduced taxes for families and farms through the EPT 
[education property tax] and businesses through the small 
business rate, I don’t think we could have possibly made that 
decision. 
 
We want there to be lower taxes now than when we started — 
significantly lower taxes now than when we began. We want 
the story for Saskatchewan’s economy to be built on 
competitiveness. And it still is, Mr. Chairman, because when 
this budget’s fully implemented we’ll have the lowest 
manufacturing tax rate in the country by far. We’ll have the 
lowest business income tax rate in the country, Mr. Chairman. 
We’ll have among the lowest income taxes in Canada. And 
even with the PST changes we’ve made we will have the lowest 
PST of any province that has one in Canada. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Chair, he certainly 
didn’t answer the question. The question was, when did he learn 
he was going to hike taxes on families and people? And why 
children’s clothes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — All of those decisions were made at budget 
finalization. All the options were canvassed through the process 
as they are with respect to a process the members will know 
well, called a call for estimates. Begins about mid-year, prior to 
the budgeting year, and every option’s considered even as 
targets are set. Final decisions, though, are made at cabinet 
finalization which occurs in February. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s not believable, of course, that the 
financial picture wasn’t known long before. Why wasn’t the 
Premier of Saskatchewan straight with Saskatchewan people? 
Why didn’t he run on the kinds of tax changes and tax hikes 
that he’s brought to the people of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, he’s talking about two different 
budget years. If he’s trying to say that we campaigned knowing 
that we would increase taxes, that’s just absolutely wrong. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yes, there was a by-election in there too 
that would have provided a chance point to clarify. Just going 
back to sort of being, you know, correct by way of the facts 
with the finances, last year the Premier of course, as I say, ran 
through an election saying that the deficit was $400 million for 
that year. Then he went into budget on June 1 of last year. 
Presented a budget, making claims at that point. But at that 
point the fiscal year would have closed on March 31st. The ink 
was dried. The reality for government would have been known. 
 
It was in the dead of summer, just about six weeks later I think, 
on July, maybe July 14th or so, that it was revealed by the 
Public Accounts that this government clearly wasn’t straight 
with Saskatchewan people, not just in the election but in the 
budget that they presented on the floor of this Assembly just six 
weeks prior. And not often, in some small way . . . that instead 
of $400-and-some million of deficit, that it was a deficit of $1.5 
billion. How does the Premier explain that? How can he defend 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, first of all, the member 

commented on the by-election. I’m not sure where he was, but 
during the by-election, I indicated that everything was on the 
table, including tax changes. Well he just shook his head. I 
mean, it was in the SUMA speech, and then it was in the SARM 
speech. 
 
And I’m pretty sure my comments probably helped the guy 
behind him get elected in the first place because I don’t think 
they were very helpful to our candidate because we were being 
very transparent with the people of the province. We were 
talking about how serious it was, and how . . . And I remember, 
by the way, grants-in-lieu being part of that discussion as well. 
They like to point out that it wasn’t. Well it’s certainly . . . He’s 
shaking his head. Mr. Chairman, I get quite a kick out of that. I 
can share with him the speech transcript. Well but I don’t think 
he’d believe that either because it doesn’t fit his narrative, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
But the truth is that, unfortunately, we had to share with 
Saskatchewan people, and did want to at SUMA and SARM 
and at the press conferences that followed, that things were very 
serious and that we were prepared to consider everything, 
including tax measures, including tax measures as a result of the 
budget, including grants-in-lieu specifically mentioned at 
SUMA as well. I’ve heard the . . . and seen the transcript. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, with respect to his question on the Public 
Accounts report, I’m assuming he’s referring to the audited 
financial statements that Public Accounts Committee considers 
because they’re two different things. So if he’s referring to the 
audited financial statements, I think it’s fair to say that in the 
number, and he’s asking about why the number changed, we 
were noting the $800 million change in reporting pension, 845 
million. Here’s the press release from July 22nd, 2016. 
 
And now the member is trying to portray this as some sort of, 
well you didn’t . . . you weren’t straight with people about the 
state of the finances. Mr. Chairman, it talks about the $675 
million deficit when combined with a ’15-16 pension 
adjustment of 845 million results in a $1.52 billion total deficit. 
That’s in the press release. So I don’t know how you could 
characterize that as being hidden. 
 
And would also point this out, Mr. Chair. The budget 
adjustment, I’d ask members opposite to consider: has that 
actually affected delivery of government services, money in and 
money out, the old General Revenue Fund, for example, we 
used to use? 
 
We use summary financial statements now in the province. 
Auditors have asked us to do it. When we were in opposition 
we wanted the government to do it. When they were in 
opposition they wanted our government to move towards it. 
Auditors across the country have told their governments to do 
it. 
 
And it’s interesting what we have now in Canada. I hope we 
have a debate about it sometime again in Canada with the 
auditing community because I’m not sure it’s as transparent as 
it could be for people to know, well what’s going on actually in 
the General Revenue Fund of government, the operating money 
for government, money in and money out. 
 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

But with summaries, which we have — and we will continue to 
have that one set of books — we note every change, even an 
investment change, a pension change. That doesn’t affect 
government programming at all. It doesn’t affect the general 
revenues of government at all. In fact that pension change could 
turn around on an interest rate. Couple of basis points on Bay 
Street or Wall Street and we could be looking at a surplus even 
though the actual GRF of the budget didn’t change, or didn’t 
change materially. 
 
But he asked the question, what’s the difference? Why the 
discrepancy? It’s right here in a press release we issued. There’s 
a huge pension adjustment. It reflects an entry, an important 
entry to record a change in status that wasn’t necessarily 
material unless everyone retired at the same time or the 
government became insolvent and had to pay out all its 
pensions. 
 
It was 800-and-some million dollars. There’s noted here, 845 on 
top of what we reported, the 675 deficit at the time, to get us to 
the number the member’s referring to. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with the 
kind of utter nonsense that Saskatchewan people are starting to 
recognize, and for that Premier to pretend somehow that he was 
straight with Saskatchewan people, whether in the last budget 
or the last election or even this last by-election — and somehow 
he references our cities and our towns and our villages for 
which he ripped up agreements with, Mr. Speaker — just isn’t 
on. 
 
And he can make all the noise that he wants, but I’d urge him to 
listen to some of his members, his MLAs, that I suspect are 
listening to mayors throughout their respective communities on 
that one. 
 
As for his comments around the public accounts that rolled out, 
the whole point is the public accounts comes out through the 
Provincial Comptroller. What we should be able to expect and 
trust is a real portrayal of the finances from the Premier and the 
Finance minister on the floor of this Assembly. And it’s beyond 
belief that this government somehow didn’t know the picture 
when they presented things on June 1 in this Assembly last 
year, all knowing that the ink had dried on the fiscal year by 
March 31st already at that point. And of course they were 
busted when the Provincial Auditor or the provincial 
comptroller released the true picture. 
 
But I want to move along because the Premier’s not answering 
much here. And my question to the Premier is, why would he 
tax children’s clothes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is one of those 
difficult decisions that I referenced earlier we made when we’ve 
expanded the PST in two areas where it didn’t previously apply. 
It was difficult for us because we had actually improved the tax 
exemption from what members opposite had in place by 
expanding the age limit. I think it ended at 14 years with 
members opposite, and we had extended it to 18. 
 
We looked at what some other provinces are doing. There is 
about four other provinces, I think, who’ve moved away or do 
not have such an exemption, Mr. Chair. We also wanted to 

make sure there was protection for people, families at the 
low-income level who would now potentially face this tax on 
children’s clothing. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, we moved to increase the low-income 
tax credit, which is especially meant to offset increases in the 
PST. And I think we increased it by over a third . . . by 41 per 
cent, such that there needs to be now 6,000 . . . $5,800 worth of 
taxable purchases bought by a low-income person before their 
low-income tax credit would be used up, which I think is still a 
significant support, effectively a tax exemption for those 
purchases that are PST applicable. We have significantly 
increased the low-income tax credit, but certainly this was not 
an easy decision to take. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It might not have been easy, Mr. Chair, 
but he made it. He made the choice at the same time as he’s 
giving a break of $60 million with full commitment to the 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, that he’s going to hike taxes on 
clothing by $7 million which every single family pays. The 
low-income tax credit changes that he references come nowhere 
close to covering those increases, Mr. Speaker. To the corporate 
tax cut, who called for that tax cut? 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there he went again in 
his preamble with a little drive-by of people that paid a business 
income tax saying that that’s a giveaway to corporations, but 
when the NDP do it, it’s good economic policy. When the NDP 
do it, it’s good for jobs and good for the investment community. 
And their business income tax cuts were $95 million fully 
implemented on a much smaller economy, much smaller than 
the $52 million fully implemented in this plan which will keep 
us competitive and will keep this province strong. 
 
I would highlight for everybody watching today to count every 
single time that member takes a run at people in the business 
sector who create jobs; talks about the $60 million giveaway to 
them, basically disparaging what they do, the jobs they create; 
and remember when they count each time he does it, when they 
were in office, when they were government, they called those 
same measures job creating. They said they were good for an 
economy. 
 
I hope anybody watching — I’m not sure how many there 
might be, but anybody watching — will count each moment 
like that when members opposite take their little drive-by. They 
don’t when they’re in the gallery, when they’re here for the 
bypass safety day. They don’t take their shots then, but when 
they’re here without the galleries full, the situation changes. 
And I think that’s . . . I don’t know why. I’ll let them debate it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, governments from time to time take difficult 
decisions. We certainly did in this budget, and sometimes it’s a 
decision to increase the PST base. I remember as an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] in 2000 when the budget 
was tabled by the NDP, Mr. Chairman, they took some difficult 
choices. They decided to expand the PST to include repair 
services, computer services, non-prescription drugs, bedding 
plants, trees, shrubs, pet food, dry cleaning, vet fees, security 
and investigative services, collection services, telephone 
answering services, Mr. Chairman. I don’t expect those would 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

have been easy decisions as this one was not, but sometimes 
you decide to . . . You make the decisions to expand the PST 
base. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve made other decisions. Other 
decisions that we didn’t mention in an election campaign. We 
didn’t say in the 2007 election campaign that we would increase 
the basic exemption and cut taxes for low-income families to 
such a great extent that 114,000 low-income people in this 
province wouldn’t pay any taxes at all. And that’s the status 
today. 
 
We didn’t campaign on massive increases to the personal basic 
exemptions in this province and the per-child exemptions that 
exist to ensure that a family of four in Saskatchewan can earn 
more in this province, before paying dime one in provincial tax, 
than any other province in Canada. We didn’t campaign on that 
either, but circumstances allowed for this government to make 
fundamental changes in how we treat low-income families and 
families from a tax perspective. 
 
We didn’t campaign on increasing the seniors’ income 
assistance program. This is a program that exists for 
low-income seniors, and it’s germane to the question because 
those seniors would be facing the implications of the PST 
changes the minister is criticizing. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, when we took office we decided to 
increase that seniors’ income assistance plan. And then in the 
next year we decided to increase it again. And then when we 
could afford to, we increased it again and I think now it’s up 
threefold from what it was. When members opposite, our social 
democratic friends who always talk about low-income people 
and seniors, but when they have a chance in government 
including when they’re sitting on some significant surpluses, 
they don’t act. Sixteen years without an increase to the seniors’ 
income assistance plan. Well we didn’t campaign on changes to 
that either, but we did them. We did them because we knew it 
was the right thing to do, and by the way, those changes, those 
increases in that support for seniors were protected in this very, 
very difficult budget. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I would end by saying that the PST changes 
are offset for low-income people by a 41 per cent increase in the 
low-income tax credit, which those families can apply for to 
offset increased costs they might have, Mr. Chair. And the 
Minister of Finance has pointed out that almost $5,800 in 
purchases would be required before you even use up that kind 
of support. Mr. Chairman, it doesn’t make the decision any 
easier, but we wanted to make sure that those who are most 
vulnerable would be protected. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard at 
times to stand here and kind of listen to the portrayal that we 
hear from the Premier. Saskatchewan families know the reality, 
and economists have crunched the numbers. It’s been published 
that this budget itself it gives breaks for the wealthiest, the most 
well-connected, the very wealthiest, highest-wage earners in 
society and breaks for the corporations. 
 
And in fact, the top 10 per cent in Saskatchewan see a zero per 
cent increase in their taxation. The 50th percentile, right in the 
middle, see 1 per cent. The bottom 10 per cent though see twice 

that, see 100 per cent higher than what the 50th percentile does. 
And of course, as I say, the richest don’t get impacted at all. 
Those are the changes, those are the choices of this government. 
 
As for the nonsense from the Premier around businesses, this is 
a Premier who’s selling out Saskatchewan businesses on front 
after front and who’s making the very choices in this budget 
here that will prolong economic recovery and hurt that 
recovery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question was simple. I hope we have a short answer from 
the Premier. Who urged him to lower the corporate tax rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I guess former Premier 
Calvert would’ve urged the lower corporate income tax. I guess 
the member for Saskatoon Centre urged reducing corporate 
income tax. I guess his House Leader, the member for 
Elphinstone, when he was in government, urged that this was 
sound government policy. In fact I’ll just repeat what they said. 
He said, who urged, incredibly, who urged corporate income 
tax cuts? 
 
Here’s what his own member said when they did it: “Now one 
of the main planks . . . [of] this budget, Mr. Speaker, was 
cutting business taxes and other . . .” They call it business taxes 
when they’re in government, not corporate taxes, because 
corporations need to be vilified. They call it business taxes. 
He’s pretty careful about that. So did the member for Centre. 
 
Here’s what he said. He wanted to know, who gave us advice 
on this? Well Lorne Calvert said, this is a good way to create 
jobs. And the member for Regina Elphinstone said, “Now one 
of the main planks . . . [of] this budget, Mr. Speaker . . .” That’s 
the NDP budget that cut business taxes. He said, “. . . was 
cutting business taxes and other measures to stimulate the 
economy, to sharpen our competitive edge.” 
 
See when the NDP do it . . . Well the member for Nutana’s 
chatting. When the NDP do it, Mr. Speaker, it’s sharpening our 
competitive edge. When anyone else does it, it’s a giveaway to 
someone’s friend, Mr. Chairman. That’s why my hon. friends 
across the way have lacked credibility in election campaign 
after election campaign. Because it took a few decades, but 
we’ve all kind of seen through the two sides of that coin 
depending on where they sit in the House. 
 
But let’s carry on with . . . He asked me the question, who gave 
me advice to lower corporate income taxes? Well here’s what 
the member, his House Leader, said when he was in 
government: “Business tax cuts will grow the economy by 
attracting and stimulating . . .” I mean, I read this already. It 
should not be lost on my hon. friend. “Business tax cuts will 
grow the economy by attracting and stimulating capital 
investment and creating jobs and job opportunities for young 
people.” 
 
And they go on to say in the bottom line, in their actual budget 
document: “The significance of this reform should have an 
immediate impact on investor and business attitudes towards 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Now I don’t think that’s time limited. The new member for 
Meewasin said, I think, well that was then. Is there a statute on 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

limitations on this as efficacious economic policy or something 
salutary you’d want to do for your economy? 
 
They said in their NDP budget that reducing business taxes . . . 
the same taxes he’s decrying now, asking who urged us to do it: 
 

The significance of this reform should have an immediate 
impact on investor and business attitudes towards 
Saskatchewan. Statutory tax rates are the most transparent 
means of demonstrating the investment “friendliness” of a 
jurisdiction. 

 
The same guy that he said gave them all that good advice is the 
guy that gave us the good advice about the corp. 
 
But it’s different, you see, because that was when they were in 
government, and then it’s a business tax cut to create jobs. But 
if someone else does the same thing, why then there’s some 
nefarious motive; then it’s all about our friends and vilifying the 
same businesses that sat up in the gallery a few hours ago. 
 
It’s so transparent. It’s why, even with this very difficult 
budget, members have a hard time getting traction politically, 
because that’s not believable. It’s just not believable when you 
say one thing when you’re in government and decry the very 
thing later. 
 
And he would ask, well who else would give us that advice? 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we had some comments after the budget 
of economists who would have given us that very same advice. 
Trevor Tombe is an assistant professor at the University of 
Calgary and he’s a research fellow at The School of Public 
Policy there. And his partner in work, Blake Shaffer, is a C.D. 
Howe Institute Fellow-in-Residence. And he noted that, 
“Saskatchewan swallows . . .” This is what they said: 
 

Saskatchewan swallows the fiscal pill Alberta refuses: 
Through restraint and strategic tax hikes, Saskatchewan 
shows how to get off the royalty rollercoaster. 

 
Partially offsetting these tax increases are lower personal 
and corporate income taxes. Across the board, income tax 
rates will fall by a half point for all brackets. In 2019, they 
are set to drop by another half a point. 

 
This is what they say. These are economists. The shift in 
taxation away from income and towards consumption is what 
many economists recommend . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well the member from Meewasin . . . I hope the member from 
Meewasin, the next leader, gets up and joins the debate, because 
he wants to comment from his seat. He asked me, he just said to 
me, who gave you this advice? I just gave a quote from two 
economists: one at the C.D. Howe Institute, a reasonably well 
reputed research institute, and another at the University of 
Calgary School of Public Policy. 
 
And here’s what they say again: the shift in taxation away — to 
my hon. friend from Meewasin — the shift in taxation away 
from income towards consumption is what many economists 
recommend. The question then, the answer to my hon. friend’s 
question, where did we get this advice? Well first we heard it 
from Mr. Calvert and Jack Vicq. Then we heard it from the 
NDP member for Saskatoon Centre. Then we heard it for the 

current NDP member for Regina Elphinstone. But even more 
importantly, we heard it from bone fide, qualified economists 
before, during, and after the budget presentation. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So the report that the Premier’s 
speaking from is the very report that we cited that shows that 
there’s no impact on the wealthiest and that those that get hit 
hardest are the poorest, Mr. Speaker. And I can assure the 
Premier of Saskatchewan this, that Premier Calvert would have 
never advised him to give a break to the corporations at the 
expense of the poor and the most vulnerable among us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I guess the question back to the Premier: before hiking taxes 
and cutting services for the most vulnerable and for families, all 
so that he could fund his corporate giveaway, what analysis did 
he do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I think my hon. friend needs to 
remember his political history of his own party a little bit better. 
He just got up with a little bit of bravado and said what Mr. 
Calvert would never do. He said he would never cut corporate 
taxes at the expense of someone else. He cut corporate taxes at 
a way higher level than this budget does without a single dime 
of relief in income tax. Does he understand that, Mr. Chair? 
Does my hon. friend understand that the very corporate income 
tax cuts that his members supported when they were the 
government happened without a dime in income tax relief for 
Saskatchewan families? 
 
This takes a different approach, this budget, Mr. Chairman. This 
takes the difficult decision to increase the PST, but at the same 
time, we’ve increased the low-income tax credit for low-income 
families. And at the same time, we’ve decreased income tax for 
Saskatchewan families — low-, middle-, and high-income 
families — and we’ve reduced the taxes on business that NDP 
members thought was a pretty good idea when they did it. So 
he’s absolutely wrong again. 
 
See, I think there becomes this romanticized, revisionist view of 
the history of their own party. I think he’s quite convinced 
when he says Lorne Calvert never would have cut corporate 
taxes at the expense of anyone else. It’s exactly what they did in 
their budget where they did finally do the right thing and reduce 
business taxes. There was no attendant relief on income tax. 
There was no increase in the low-income tax credit when the 
social democrats did it just a few years ago in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve taken a different approach. We made this difficult choice 
to expand the base and increase the rate of the PST, but we’ve 
increased the low-income tax credit and we’re cutting taxes for 
Saskatchewan families and the Saskatchewan businesses that 
sustain jobs for those Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, you know, the Premier, 
shortly after introducing this betrayal of a budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and on this very point around the corporate giveaway, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier engaged across the floor and sort of tried 
to suggest . . . I guess he shared his understanding of the 
corporate tax cut. And he said, well this is a cut for restaurants 
and it’s a cut for farms, and was saying that in a very, sort of in 
a broad way. And it was pretty clear on the floor at that point 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

that the Premier didn’t even understand the very measure he 
had brought forward. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I guess to the Premier: why would he bring forward a budget 
with a measure like a corporate giveaway when he didn’t even 
understand it? Does he understand it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, what the member just said is 
categorically wrong, and I would reference the fact that he 
again called it a corporate giveaway. And I’ll just track back to 
the last question, when he asked, who advised you to cut the 
corporate income tax? Well, Mr. Chairman, I was in a debate 
just like this with Mr. Calvert when he was the premier and I 
was the leader of the opposition, and here’s what Mr. Calvert 
said to me: 
 

Well the . . . matter [of the fact] is, Mr. Chair, in this 
budget [the NDP budget] you will see the largest single cut 
to business taxation in this province’s history. That’s what 
you see in this budget [I’m quoting], to create the 
competitive environment that we know will draw 
investment, that we know will create jobs, that we know 
will create a future for the people of Saskatchewan and the 
young people of Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s what Premier Calvert said to me when I was in that chair 
and he was in this chair, and that’s probably . . . It wouldn’t 
have been the first time I heard that advice, but it was pretty 
compelling coming from the premier of Saskatchewan. I note 
for the record though, Mr. Chair, that what Premier Calvert 
called wise policy — to create the competitive environment that 
we know will draw investment and create jobs — what he 
called a policy that will do those things, this leader, interim 
Leader of the NDP, calls a giveaway. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s about balance, about decency. And 
certainly right now to be giving this break, that’s bad fiscal 
policy, at the expense of everyone else in the province, and at 
the great expense of the most marginalized and the most 
vulnerable and families across the province is wrong. 
 
Just back to the point though around the corporate tax rate and 
the Premier’s understanding of the corporate tax change after 
the budget. At that point he was trying to suggest that this was a 
change that would impact all farms or small businesses. Has the 
Premier come to the, I guess the understanding, of course 
there’s a threshold, that it’s only those with earnings exceeding 
$500,000 that would benefit from the corporate tax rate? 
 
So I’m wondering if he now has an understanding that no, the 
restaurants that he’s hiked the taxes on, that that hit is real for 
the vast majority of them. Most aren’t corporations with 
earnings beyond 500,000. Same for the vast majority of farms 
— 80 per cent of farms in Saskatchewan have earnings below 
$500,000. So I guess I’m just asking the Premier here at this 
point in time if he’s come to that understanding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to note for the 
record that this side of the House also reduced the small 
business tax rate for the people that would be under that 
$500,000 threshold. 

And I want to share with my hon. member some good news. 
Mr. Chairman, the economy of the province of Saskatchewan 
has changed markedly since they were in power. It’s different 
now, today, and I don’t think any government should take 
credit. I think government can get in the way of it. We saw 
lessons in that from members opposite when they were in 
power. And I think governments can also get out of the way of 
economic growth when it’s coming, create the right 
environment for growth. 
 
But things have changed now, and so there’s more businesses 
than ever in this province that they would have considered 
small that might be making $500,000 in taxable income. And 
some of them might be restaurant chains and other of them 
might be involved in agriculture, and I don’t think . . . It’s a 
challenge and a problem with the NDP’s vision of things that 
they would just assume that there isn’t a Saskatchewan-grown 
business perhaps — maybe in the food business, maybe with a 
number of outlets, maybe in agriculture — that might not make 
$500,000 in taxable income . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
he’s asked the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the good news is, the good news is that our 
government in 2011 or ’12 reduced the small business tax rate 
that applies for all. We’ve also taken measures to reduce the 
corporate income tax rate. And I would point out again that in 
my hon. friend’s preamble to his question he said, it’s all a 
question of balance. Well when the NDP were in power and 
they cut the corporate income taxes, when they engaged in a 
corporate giveaway, as the member just called it now, there was 
no reduction in personal income taxes. You didn’t increase the 
low-income tax credit to people. It was just the businesses that 
got that deal, just corporations that got that deal. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if what the member, if what the member is 
advocating is balance when you cut corporate income taxes, he 
ought to support the budget because this budget said we are 
going to reduce those taxes. But we’re also going to reduce 
taxes for families through the income tax, and we’re going to 
significantly increase the low-income tax credit. And we’re 
going to keep whole . . . seniors who have now seen their 
seniors’ income assistance program increase threefold after the 
NDP sat on that thing for 16 years without so much of a dime as 
an increase. Yes, I agree. We need balance, Mr. Chairman. 
We’ve learned our lesson. We watched the NDP in the past. We 
didn’t see the balance I think that was required that the member 
says he would advocate. We’ve tried. We’ve worked hard to 
make difficult decisions, but strike that balance with this 
budget. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when you hear the words 
“balance” from the Premier, this Premier, the Sask Party, it’s 
difficult not to take a bit of bait. This is a Premier and the Sask 
Party that couldn’t balance during the best days in 
Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker, balance the budget, nor 
the priorities of Saskatchewan people, I should say. And the 
Premier again shared here that he thinks somehow that there 
should be a break to the biggest corporations, Mr. Speaker, at 
the expense of everyone else. And it’s just not the right thing to 
do at this time, Mr. Chair. It’s bad fiscal policy. 
 
But as it relates to many, many small businesses within our 
province, this is a Premier who’s imposed a surprise hike on 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

construction labour, Mr. Speaker, a brand new tax, a brand new 
tax on something that we need — jobs and investment, really 
the epitome of a job-killing tax. And so at the same time as 
there’s breaks for some of the biggest corporations, for 
Saskatchewan small businesses, Mr. Speaker, what it is is a 
massive hike in their taxes. 
 
And on that front, they look specifically at the job-killing 
construction tax that the Premier’s added. What analysis did he 
go into on this front? Why wasn’t he straight with 
Saskatchewan people that he was going to impose this tax that 
will prolong our economic recovery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, when we first 
indicated to the people of the province in very public manners 
that the financial situation was obviously worsening as a result 
of the quarter billion dollars in unanticipated crop insurance 
claims and as a result of continued depressed revenues, we 
indicated in a public forum that everything would be on the 
table, including not just the PST rate, but what it might be 
applied to. So that would be the direct answer to the member’s 
question. 
 
It’s interesting though. I just want . . . Again you’ve always got 
to watch the preamble because he’s trying to . . . he’ll make 
some sort of point in the preamble and quickly move away so 
they don’t have to answer for it. We’re not going to let him do 
that today, Mr. Chairman. He’s going to have to be accountable 
for everything he says, not just the questions he asks. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, he’s trying to characterize several 
budgets on this side of the House as deficits. And you know, 
Mr. Chair . . . And you know, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting 
because the last budget that they were responsible for was 
2007-2008. Now that’s before we moved to summary financial 
budgeting in the province. That’s when we had a GRF budget 
only. And actually when we were in government we went with 
both; we had both for a while. We had GRF and summary. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, here’s what happened. They heralded the 
2007-2008 budget as the 14th consecutive balanced budget. 
That’s what they said. It was a $701 million summary financial 
statement deficit. But it was . . . They said in the press . . . You 
know, this is their briefing notes — 14th consecutive balanced 
budget, but they note a $700 million summary deficit. 
 
But you took credit for the balanced budget and you got 
covered as such in terms of the media. Now in the first few 
years of office, we also went with the GRF. We had a summary 
financial budget. And in those years — every one of those years 
— it was balanced on that same reporting basis that the NDP 
used. Well he’s rolling his eyes. It’s just . . . It’s a problem 
when they’re confronted with the truth, and the truth is right 
here in black and white. What they call a balanced budget was a 
700 — by their own account — a $700 million summary 
deficit, Mr. Chairman. 
 
With respect to the changes on the tax side, Mr. Chairman, a 
couple of points. One, it is also why we balanced off the PST 
expansion with the income tax, the balance the member was 
asking for, the income tax changes and the corporate income tax 
changes. And you know, Mr. Chairman, it’s also why we’re 
working hard with respect to the growth plan, which is about 

more than just taxes, to ensure that this is the right business 
environment, that we can create and attract jobs here in 
Saskatchewan so that we can see the kind of activity incented 
that would obviously use local contractors. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what would be a real service for construction 
companies in the province is that if we could get the 
full-throated support of members opposite for things like the 
Regina bypass and the 70 per cent of local companies, 
contractors that are working on that project without kind of the 
drive-by rhetoric that we hear on that project every single day. 
 
There’s more than one way for a government to provide 
construction job incentives and one of them is through 
infrastructure. And, Mr. Chair, I can tell members of the House 
that since 2007, we’ve invested about $20 billion in 
infrastructure builds, a huge increase over what was here, as we 
have worked through the Crowns to improve the Crown 
corporation infrastructure, as we have implemented record 
highways budgets and a big highways budget again this year, 
and as we have worked with the local municipalities on major 
infrastructure expansion. We’re going to continue to do that. 
It’s part of our growth plan and it’s another way to assist the 
construction industry to be sustainable and healthy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, again it’s . . . I guess this is 
why we’re in this mess. We have a Premier who’s 
silver-tongued, no doubt, but balancing the books or delivering 
for Saskatchewan people is a different story. 
 
And you know, if you look . . . I mean at the end of the day we 
have a Premier that’s presided over massive debt increase in the 
province. So I’m not going to belabour his record. Actually 
Saskatchewan people, who are pretty common sense, who come 
from the farm, who operate businesses, who operate 
households, see the kind of budgets that this Premier’s 
presented for what they are. But just as a point, this Premier 
here, from just 2011, so . . . Or actually let’s take a look here 
and make sure we’re doing this . . . 2013. I can go back further, 
and it makes the picture worse for him. But in 2013 until now 
has actually doubled the debt, doubled the debt in the province 
of Saskatchewan from $9.4 billion to $18.2 billion, and it just 
continues to climb. Of course, didn’t save a dime. 
 
And even the, you know, the Premier’s attempt to sort of 
portray what he inherited as something different than what it 
was is really actually sad, Mr. Speaker. And it’s sad that he 
wouldn’t be more humble and more respectful of what he 
actually received, and that was surpluses that were in place, 
rainy day funds that were in place, all of course spent and 
exhausted by this Premier. 
 
Just back to the construction, the change here, the job-killing 
tax on construction in the province, I guess the question is, how 
much does he plan to generate from it? We know of course it’s 
going to slow investment, slow job creation, slow economic 
recovery, but how much in this short-sighted sort of economic 
way that he’s going at this does he think he’s going to increase? 
What analysis does he have and will he table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, he’s trying to say that I’m 
trying to, you know, that I wasn’t being forthcoming about the 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

state of the last NDP budget. I was reading from the NDP 
backgrounder and it goes to say this, “The Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund.” He mentioned the rainy day fund in his question. The 
NDP Fiscal Stabilization Fund, here’s what their budget notes 
say about their last budget, “There’s a $510 million draw from 
the FSF [that’s the rainy day fund] to help balance the budget.” 
 
In 2007-08 when things are pretty robust, that’s a half a billion 
dollar drawdown on the rainy day fund when it wasn’t raining. 
There weren’t forest fires. There weren’t floods, Mr. Chairman. 
There weren’t three sustained years of dramatically lower 
commodity prices, 50 per cent off of their highs, Mr. Chairman. 
So I would make, you know, I would make that point. 
 
I would also point out with respect to the finances of the budget 
and the debt issue that he again quickly referenced in his 
preamble, Mr. Chairman, the Crown corporations continue to 
borrow for long-term infrastructure and we have . . . [inaudible] 
. . . sanctioned that. Because when we came to power, we 
recognized the huge infrastructure deficit in our Crowns, the 
Crowns that members opposite purport to defend, huge 
infrastructure deficits at SaskPower, huge infrastructure deficits 
at SaskEnergy and SaskTel, and then generally the 
infrastructure deficit around the province. 
 
And so like a business or a family when you’re making 20-, 
30-, 40-year investments, typically you don’t cash flow it. 
Those companies, if they were in the private sector, they’d 
finance them as they did when members opposite were in 
power, but the members opposite just wouldn’t sanction the 
infrastructure investments that the Crowns would have, I’m 
sure, been . . . [inaudible] . . . them they needed. 
 
Now there’s another kind of debt that government has and 
that’s operating debt. And that’s the kind of debt that 
unfortunately is being impacted by this budget. That’s the kind 
of, let’s say, sort of a credit card debt in a family. You could 
have a mortgage. That’s the debt I’ve just referred to that most 
families are going to have for a long-term asset. That’s the debt 
that’s been increasing in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
member says debt’s gone up. That is the debt that’s gone up. 
 
[16:15] 
 
As we build major infrastructure projects — bridges and 
bypasses and the Saskatchewan hospital and a long-term care 
facility — and tried to fill the infrastructure deficit hole that 
members left at SaskPower, those long-term capital investments 
have been made through financing and the Crowns and in 
government, as families and businesses would do with 
long-term costs. 
 
But there’s another kind of debt. That’s the operating debt, Mr. 
Chairman. That’s when you’re having to borrow just to cover 
monthly costs, and you know, I’ve referred to it in the past as 
sort of a credit card. Well, Mr. Chairman, even with these last 
two budgets where we have seen deficits, I can report to the 
House that the member is wrong. Operating debt in the province 
is still down 15 per cent over what members left behind. 
 
So the operating debt of Saskatchewan, the credit card left 
behind by members opposite, is still 15 per cent less. Well they 
don’t like this much. It’s 15 per cent less than what it was when 

they left it, even though, even though they took a half a billion 
dollars from the rainy day fund, when it wasn’t rainy, to balance 
their budget. It might have been because it was an election year, 
but I think the people of the province saw through that. 
 
Mr. Chair, the specific answer to the question is 344 this year, 
498 annualized. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, I mean it’s rather outrageous. 
This is the Premier of Saskatchewan asserting certain portrayals 
that just are anything but accurate. And I guess it’s why the 
Premier just doesn’t have any credibility on these files 
anymore, Mr. Chair. You know, this is a . . . And so he’s talking 
about a document that would have maybe been presented on 
budget day, but what he’s failing to talk about is the reality and 
what actually happened that year. And I guess that makes sense 
because this is a Premier who gets up year after year in budget 
time and pretends somehow that he’s got a balanced budget. 
And of course as the ink rolls in and the mismanagement grows 
and they do a few deals with some buddies, the reality is they’re 
in deficit again, Mr. Speaker, and the debt continues to grow. 
 
Now there’s a reason why, when the Sask Party came into 
power, that there was a healthy financial position. I guess I’d 
just go back to the Premier . . . I’m not going to spend a whole 
bunch of time on 2007 and ’08, but the budget that he speaks 
here, that was presented at the end of the day, the reality that 
year was that it left a surplus in the summary financial 
statements — which I know we took some time to explain to 
the Premier — of $1.8 billion. So there’s the presentation on 
budget day, and then there’s the reality. That’s what this 
Premier inherited, Mr. Speaker. Why would the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, at this stage of his career, at this stage of his 
tenure, try to pretend otherwise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to thank my hon. 
friend. He helps make my point because the budget that was 
tabled, their NDP budget, showed a $700 million deficit. And 
then what happened throughout the year to change things so 
dramatically? Did oil prices go up? Yes. Did potash prices go 
through the roof? Yes. Did the government know that was 
going to happen when they tabled their budget? No. 
 
Mr. Chairman, does the hon. member not believe that the 
opposite can happen? For three years, for a sustained period of 
time, even though forecasters aren’t predicting it, that if it can 
go up without prediction or forecast, it might do the same or at 
least stay down without a supporting forecast. Does he not 
understand that the opposite could be true as well? That when a 
budget is presented, you use the best forecast from the private 
sector that you have. That they had, that were way off in ’07-08, 
to the benefit of the province later on, but were way off. Does 
he not believe the same can happen? Or does he want to ascribe 
all of this to some sort of nefarious intent on the part of the 
government, on part of members here? 
 
Mr. Chairman, the truth of the matter is, as I have highlighted, 
we built budget forecasts based on what private forecasters tell 
us to say. It’s accumulated and aggregated by the Ministry of 
the Economy, the Energy and Resources folks, just as it was 
when members opposite were in power and missed the numbers 
so badly in ’07 and ’08. Missed it, not their fault . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well, well yes. He’s saying, well that’s . . . 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Well he’s finally listening. He goes, yes, but the other way. 
That’s exactly the point. So if he’s saying it can happen that 
way, I wonder if he would agree that it might happen the other 
way too? Except this one’s for three years, when no forecasters 
are predicting it’s going to strengthen. It’s going to strengthen, 
and it doesn’t. 
 
And so we’ve said, how about we just set aside, move away 
from royalty revenues in the province of Saskatchewan. How 
about we move away from a reliance on those resources. It will 
take tough decisions to do it on the expenditure side and on the 
revenue side, but it will be worth it. It’ll be worth it for future 
generations who will thank members of this House. I hope 
they’ll thank all members of this House for making the tough 
decisions to get us off that roller coaster. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So two different scenarios there. One, 
when you’re setting a budget, you sort of set a realistic and a 
safe assumption, and then you have a better performance. 
That’s sort of what Saskatchewan people do. That’s what they 
do on the farm. That’s what they do on the farm. That’s what 
they do in business if you’re going to have some success in the 
business. That’s what you’re going to do as a household. Of 
course the opposite is what this Premier’s always done. 
 
To the broken promise, the ripped-up contracts with our cities 
and towns and villages, that came as a complete surprise that 
blindsided our cities and towns. And of course this happening at 
the same time as the biggest corporations are getting a $60 
million break when fully implemented. My question to the 
Premier: how does he think it’s fair or right? These are 
contracts that have been in place with our cities, our towns, and 
our villages. The impacts are real. They’re hard on those 
municipalities, those that have put those budgets together, and 
they’re hard on people and families through property taxes. 
How does he think it’s right or fair to rip up those contracts, let 
alone with no warning and no consultation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the budget had a number of 
difficult decisions to make. We decided that the municipal 
sector should share in about 3 per cent of the overall resource 
revenue decline. The minister corrects me — it’s two and a half 
per cent. 
 
We indicated to SUMA and SARM that we wanted to preserve 
the overall municipal revenue-sharing arrangement, which has 
been greatly improved over the last number of years since the 
government implemented that new formula together with those 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Chair, I said at SUMA and SARM that everything would be 
on the table, including grants-in-lieu. We have undertaken this 
difficult decision. Grants-in-lieu do not affect every 
municipality, as members well know. There are more contracts 
at SaskPower than there are at SaskEnergy. They all had 
termination clauses . . . most of them, sorry, had termination 
clauses. And Mr. Chairman, this decision was taken. 
 
And even after that, even after that decision, it’s important to 
note that our cities today are getting 158 per cent more in 
revenue sharing than they did when members opposite had the 
chance to do more than just talk about something. 
Municipalities, rural municipalities are getting 72.7 million, or 

54 per cent more than they did in 2007. And I remember going 
to SARM and SUMA both when they simply wanted not just 
clarity and the ability to plan, but they wanted a bit more 
support. And it was falling on deaf ears, even though members 
opposite like to talk about their management and their support 
for the municipal sector. 
 
Well, that changed when a new formula was implemented, and 
so the GIL [grant-in-lieu] issue is a difficult one, but it needs to 
be also considered in the overall context, and that is that cities 
are getting 158 per cent more money today than they did before, 
even with this change. And RMs [rural municipality] are getting 
54.5 per cent more than they did in 2007, even with this change. 
And the North is getting almost 100 per cent increase in 
funding, even with the changes that have been referenced, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So anyways, the Premier, for him to 
pretend somehow that he levelled with cities and towns and 
villages across the province is just not on, and they know that. 
We don’t have to pretend otherwise. It’s been covered in every 
front page of the papers all across the province, and our locally 
elected councils have communicated very clearly how outraged 
and surprised they were with this cut that’s unfair, that’s 
damaging, and has big costs for people and families. 
 
It also has a cost for our Crown corporations. Of course this 
Premier, he’s not somehow cancelling these and keeping these 
dollars back in our Crowns and somehow trying to keep rates 
low. He’s actually just flowing them through to pay for 
whatever is a priority in his budget. I guess what are priorities 
are the wealthy and well connected, Mr. Speaker, and again at 
the expense of our cities and towns. 
 
I just want to be clear with the Premier on this point. Is he 
actually suggesting though that . . . I mean this cut is wrong. 
Ripping up contracts is wrong. The impacts are harsh, and the 
choice is wrong. But does he actually feel that he was straight 
with our cities and towns on this front? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we wanted to make 
sure that municipalities knew that everything was on the table. 
Twice grants-in-lieu were mentioned, but consider this: that 
message was delivered November 18th, 2016 at a meeting with 
the City Mayors’ Caucus; December 14th, 2016, a meeting with 
the SUMA executive; January 13th with the mayor of Regina; 
later that month with a caucus meeting with the Saskatoon 
mayor and council, Mr. Chair; February 6th, and when I spoke 
to SUMA February 7th. As a result of that comment, ministers 
were echoing the same thing. Mr. Chair, the same happened in 
March with SARM. We signalled as early as November that 
everything was on the table. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess that’s why SUMA, the 
representation of our towns and our cities and our villages, said 
that they’re outraged. That’s why they said they’re surprised. 
That’s why as we sat down with mayors in, you know, Melville, 
Yorkton, North Battleford, all across the province, why they 
shared the devastating impacts on their budgets. 
 
But moving along to another area where this Premier certainly 
hasn’t been straight to Saskatchewan people, an area that 
represents a major betrayal is his privatization schemes of our 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

Crown corporations. He brought forward Bill 40 in this 
legislative . . . well I guess in this session, and he’s forced it 
through Royal Assent. My question to the Premier is, what 
sparked this idea? What was the genesis for this bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the NDP passed the 
Crown protection Act without defining what privatization was. 
That Act was supposedly all about privatization and preventing 
it from happening. And so we decided that we should probably 
have a definition for privatization, as is the case and the practice 
with most pieces of legislation where the most material 
elements of it also are accompanied by a definition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It doesn’t hold water. The Premier stood 
in this Assembly and voted for that very bill, the Crown 
protection Act in 2004. Then he pledged and swore to not sell 
off the Crowns in 2007 and did the same in 2011, and of course 
did the same thing in 2016. And you know, Saskatchewan 
people still expect and value and deserve someone to be straight 
with them. So my question to the Premier stands. What was the 
genesis? What caused them to act to create this bill that will 
allow for the privatization of up to 49 per cent of all of our 
Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just answered the 
question, and moreover the bill prevents privatization, which is 
what we campaigned on. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, these might be cute answers, 
semantic games with the few that sit with them over there, Mr. 
Speaker, but they’re not. They’re not cute for the people of 
Saskatchewan who understand the value in these Crown 
corporations, who took that Premier at his word. This is a 
dramatic change and a betrayal of Saskatchewan people that 
allows the sell-off of up to 49 per cent of all of our Crown 
corporations from a Premier who promised to protect and 
certainly not to privatize our Crowns. To the Premier: where 
does he get this mandate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I answered the question. 
We’ve campaigned on a position of not privatizing the Crowns 
that are listed in the Crown protection Act save for the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, those liquor 
stores that we campaigned that we would move into the private 
sector, Mr. Chairman. And that’s exactly what Bill 40 will do. 
Bill 40 protects in perpetuity the Crown corporations that are 
listed in the Act. There are no other changes to the Crown 
corporation protection Act, which is also what we campaigned 
on. 
 
And I find it more than passing curious that what the hon. 
member calls semantics now weren’t semantics when the NDP 
ascribed to the same things when they were in government. You 
see because, Mr. Chairman, I ran in the elections since ’99 and I 
remember the NDP campaigning on not privatizing any 
Crowns. But we know that they were thinking about 
partnerships where equity would change — not a majority 
perhaps, but equity would change. 
 
Not long in this House, I mentioned the fact that in 2000, then 
Premier Romanow said, “We believe SaskTel must expand its 
business and look at partnering where it makes sense for the 
provision of improved services.” The headline of that article in 

the Leader-Post, by the way, was, “SaskTel may start looking 
for a partner.” 
 
Well why is the House Leader shaking his head? He was here 
then. Did he support that? Did he support that? You know what, 
Mr. Chairman? What’s also getting frustrating is that members 
would say one thing when they’re in government and another 
thing when they’re in . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he’s 
pretty upset because he supported partnerships when he was on 
the government side, and now because he thinks he can score 
political points he’s going to talk from his seat, Mr. Chairman. I 
encourage him to get up in the debate if the interim leader will 
help him because we have a few quotes from him about this 
very issue and things like corporate income taxes as well. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Here’s what the NDP premier said: “We believe SaskTel must 
expand its business and look at partnering where it makes sense 
for the provision of improved services.” 
 
Oh, but he goes on. He says more: “But he said the government 
would consider a swap of shares with a partner under the right 
circumstances.” He goes on in his quote, “Supposing that they 
had some great Internet scheme or idea which would be both a 
good thing for the people of Saskatchewan and profitable for 
SaskTel.” 
 
But I guess when the NDP premier says that, that a partnership 
that doesn’t lose more than 50 per cent control of the Crown, 
that’s not privatization. But when anyone else wants to do it, 
then it’s privatization. Is that right? Is that why there is such a 
dearth in credibility for members opposite on this issue and on 
so many other issues? 
 
What about SaskEnergy? What about SaskEnergy? What year 
was this? Oh, February 2003. Well the member for Saskatoon 
Centre was here, I think, in 2003. Or maybe not. Not sure. 
Certainly the member for Regina Elphinstone was here, and we 
know the member for Athabasca was here because he was 
mostly talking from his seat then too as he does now. 
 
In 2003 these are the speaking points for SaskEnergy, the NDP 
talking points entitled “Is the government planning to sell 
TransGas?” “Is the government planning to sell TransGas?” 
Here are the talking points: 
 

TransGas is a strong, well-run, profitable business that 
delivers competitive rates to customers. We’re always 
ready and willing to listen to anyone who is interested in 
partnering with us . . . 

 
You know, the member for Elphinstone, he might want to stop 
yipping from his seat and listen to this because the question is, 
the question is why, for example, why is it true that when the 
NDP were planning a partnership that it wasn’t privatization, 
but now it is privatization? Oh, it’s quite a chorus over there, 
Mr. Chairman. Here’s what the NDP talking points go on to say 
on SaskEnergy, on TransGas. This is the NDP: 
 

We’re always ready and willing to listen to anyone who is 
interested in partnering with us in growing Saskatchewan’s 
energy industry. If and when such a business arrangement 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

is finalized, we will announce it. 
 
By the way, not before. They wouldn’t disclose that they were 
meeting with TransCanada Pipelines, which they were. Who 
were the other companies that they were meeting with? . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . What’s that? Atco, Enbridge. They 
wouldn’t disclose they were meeting with them because it says 
in the talking points, “If and when such a business arrangement 
is finalized, then we will announce it.” And then he says, and 
then the NDP talking points go on to say: 
 

Any business arrangement we undertake will have two 
conditions. [This is the good part.] First, it will grow this 
company and keep jobs in Saskatchewan. Secondly, it will 
keep control of TransGas in the hands of its owner, the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Yes or no to the NDP leader, the interim leader: is what I just 
read privatization? Is what I just read privatizing TransGas? 
You need to answer this question because if your answer is no, 
it’s not privatizing TransGas, then your whole argument of Bill 
40 falls apart, you see, because Bill 40 allows us as a 
government to do exactly what the NDP were doing when they 
called it anything but privatization. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So, Mr. Chair, speaking of a dearth of 
credibility? Mr. Speaker, that sort of bizarre display from the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. And you know, observing the 
devolution of this Premier over the last number of years has 
really been something, someone who used to work pretty hard 
to sort of portray himself as a statesman, who’s day after day 
nothing more than a stuntman in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Chair: — I would . . . Order. I would caution the Leader of 
the Opposition to choose his words carefully. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’ll remind the Premier as well that 
Premier Romanow and the government of the time were 
cleaning up the incredible mess and the betrayal of, well, the 
government that he carried the calculator for, Mr. Speaker: the 
Devine conservatives of the ’80s. And that they protected, they 
protected our Crowns and that Premier Calvert and the 
government of that time protected our Crown corporations, 
expanded our Crown corporations, and that in 2004, of course, 
this Premier voted for the Crown protection Act. 
 
This Premier has no mandate to bring forward this bill. He did 
run on his bill around the changes to the liquor stores. He didn’t 
run on selling off up to 49 per cent of all of our Crown 
corporations. To the Premier: does he recognize that he doesn’t 
have a mandate? Does he not have the decency or the backbone 
to give a vote to Saskatchewan people on our Crown 
corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we campaigned on not 
allowing the Crowns to be privatized. That’s exactly what 
we’ve moved to protect, Mr. Chairman. As a result of Bill 40, 
they cannot be privatized. What can happen, though, is there 
could be a partnership perhaps. 
 
Now, now the Deputy Leader of the NDP is, he’s kind of 
chirping from his seat again. He’ll love this. He might 
remember it because he was sitting over there when Enbridge 

was talking to SaskEnergy about buying into the company. This 
briefing note from SaskEnergy, again under the NDP, is called 
“SaskEnergy and Enbridge: potential opportunities.”  
 
Here’s an interesting paragraph under the NDP’s briefing note. 
Here’s an interesting paragraph. It’s called “Enbridge as an 
equity partner.” “Enbridge and SaskEnergy have discussed 
possible synergies between our respective companies that 
would bring benefits to SaskEnergy and its subsidiaries. 
Enbridge has indicated a willingness . . .” Oh now I’m going to 
wait till the Deputy Leader’s done heckling because he’ll want 
to hear this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Go ahead. You’ll 
want to hear this. 
 
Here we go. “Enbridge has indicated a willingness to consider a 
minority investment up to 40 per cent of SaskEnergy’s assets.” 
That’s the NDP plan. Now would that have been privatization? 
Would that have been privatization? Would it have been . . . I’m 
asking members opposite. They don’t want to chat anymore, 
Mr. Chair. They want to chat from their seats. I’m asking the 
Deputy Leader, when you sell 40 per cent of SaskEnergy, is that 
privatization? Is it? Because if it isn’t, then what are you saying 
about Bill 40, which would limit the government from selling 
more than a controlling interest, exactly what you planned? 
 
In fact the NDP even had a . . . This is good. The NDP even had 
a project name for it. Their plan to sell SaskEnergy was called 
Project Rainmaker. And in that plan . . . And moreover, it gets 
even better. Here’s how far the plan went. CIBC World Markets 
and KPMG Corporate Finance conducted a review for CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] for the 
NDP, for the Crown Investments Corporation, for their energy 
Crowns, SaskEnergy and SaskPower, which was apparently 
open to these equity partnerships as well. Their review of 
SaskEnergy focused on two primary business units: gas 
distribution and gas transmission. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, it’s a very good debate to have. I’m glad 
we’re having it. But how in the world is allowing a partnership 
of less than 50 per cent for SaskEnergy when the NDP are in 
power, how is that not privatization, but when any other party 
does it, it is privatization? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course that never happened, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a Premier that has no mandate. It’s been 
clear. I’ve asked him time and time again to at last have the 
decency and the backbone to run on this, to Saskatchewan 
people, and to earn that mandate if that’s what he’d like. What 
we have right now is a betrayal to Saskatchewan people. 
 
We know of at least 11 entities that have engaged government 
as it relates to SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
Have there been other entities or any further update the Premier 
can bring us here as it relates to SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, as the minister has 
testified in committee, those meetings occurred. We’re certainly 
not going to be disclosing names of companies on the floor of 
the House. Mr. Chairman, we’ll take our cue from the NDP 
who said, if and when such a business arrangement is finalized, 
we will announce it. 
 
Actually we’ll do better than that, Mr. Chairman. Long before 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

that, there’ll be a public discussion about any partnership . . . 
that the NDP used to call a partnership but now they call 
privatization or Project Rainmaker. But we will, Mr. Chair, we 
will do much better than what you were going to do for 
Saskatchewan people. Because, you know, I ran in the election 
prior to this rainmaker project, and I don’t remember the NDP 
saying word one about any changes to the Crowns. In fact I 
remember them campaigning on quite the opposite, Mr. Chair. 
 
So I will just say this. We’ll do much better in terms of 
disclosure than members opposite were going to do because we 
had to dig through SaskEnergy documents to find this, Mr. 
Chair. And moreover the meetings did not occur with the 
minister. They occurred with the president and CEO [chief 
executive officer]. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it shouldn’t be a surprise to members in the 
House that with Bill 40, with the opportunity to allow for 
partnerships that can expand the Crowns, create jobs here, 
solidify their position, we do want Crown corporation 
executives to be meeting with potential partners, much as they 
did under the NDP when they were looking for partnerships, 
whether it was with Enbridge or whether it was TransCanada 
Pipelines or Atco. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So no answer there. How many 
discussions with private entities or their representatives have 
happened with looking at, I guess, so-called partnerships; 
maybe even, in the Premier’s wordplay, with SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, when any really serious 
discussions happen when we get close to a decision point, we’ll 
certainly have a public discussion about that. But not until then. 
 
And I would just want to point out once again, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the interim leader of the NDP, said so-called 
partnerships, Mr. Chairman . . . or word play. No, he referred to 
it as word play. Mr. Chair, it’s the words you used when you 
were in power, when you talked about a 40 per cent sale of 
SaskEnergy to a company, Enbridge. You did, in government, 
talked about selling SaskEnergy, a Crown corporation, 40 per 
cent of it. You characterize it . . . they characterized it, Mr. 
Chair, as a partnership. Once again in the interests of their own 
credibility, why is it a partnership when they proposed it, but 
privatization or something more nefarious when anyone else 
proposes it? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — There was no answer to the question. 
How many meetings, with which entities have meetings 
occurred, with a so-called partnership as it relates to SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there’s been preliminary 
inquiries and discussions as a result of Bill 40, shortly after the 
election when MTS [Manitoba Telecom Services] was a 
takeover candidate and that deal happened to proceed. And I 
indicated that, look, if we got an offer and the offer seemed to 
check a lot of boxes, we would have a referendum and see if the 
people wanted to change the ownership structure, until it was 
very clear to me that Saskatchewan people under no 
circumstances were interested. 
 
But as a result of that discussion, there’s been telcos across this 
country that have asked and inquired about the status of 

SaskTel. There are not, to my knowledge, to my knowledge, 
in-depth, detailed partnership discussions. There are general 
inquiries that are happening, I would say that’s fair to say, 
general discussions that Crown officials are engaging in, as 
should be the case. And we should not be debating them in the 
interests of protecting the interests of the Crown corporations. 
We shouldn’t be debating the names of those companies on the 
floor of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No answer, no transparency. We know 
that one of his former insiders is repping one of those big 
telecoms. 
 
 As it relates to SaskPower, what sort of meetings and with 
which entities have occurred with potential so-called 
partnership with SaskPower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — There’s been none, Mr. Chair. No meetings 
with partners. There has been a discussion in government and 
we’ve had it publicly that, you know, in the case of an electrical 
utility, it provides for certain conveyances and institutional 
investors the opportunity for steady, maybe lower-yielding, but 
steady returns.  
 
And, Mr. Chairman, right now if a Saskatchewan institutional 
investor or a Saskatchewan pension plan or a 
government-related investment agency like workers’ 
compensation, that WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 
fund, or Auto Fund, if it wanted to invest in a electrical utility, a 
good, strong electrical utility, it couldn’t even invest in 
SaskPower. It would have to go to Bay Street. It would have to 
go to some other province, maybe Ontario Hydro. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And so we have notionally talked about a change whereby those 
institutional investment vehicles — like our pension plans in the 
province, and like the Auto Fund that we have here, maybe 
WCB — could make an investment in a company like 
SaskPower. But there have been no meetings and no specific 
discussions with any particular entity regarding Bill 40 and 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sounds like the kind of deals that the 
Minister for SaskPower and the GTH used to do with himself, 
Mr. Speaker. What about with SaskEnergy? What kind of 
meetings have been had as it relates to SaskEnergy and any sort 
of so-called potential partnerships there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Enbridge, TransCanada Pipeline, Atco, but 
that was under you, when you were the government. There’s 
been no meetings under this government. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, arrogant, petulant, petty, 
divisive, I mean, but you know that’s his prerogative, Mr. 
Speaker, and Saskatchewan people will see it for what it is. And 
as I say, people across this province, in rural and urban 
Saskatchewan, and the North and the South, still expect their 
Premier and those that come before them to be straight with 
them, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I guess the Premier, even if 
he is outgoing or whatever his state of play is, owes it to 
Saskatchewan people to serve their interests. We certainly don’t 
see that, Mr. Speaker. 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

As far as the STC, the STC sell-off, of course a total betrayal of 
Saskatchewan people, something that hits the most vulnerable 
incredibly hard. A service that connects our entire province, Mr. 
Speaker. Something that’s important economically. Something 
that’s a lifeline for patients. Something that supports our health 
system, Mr. Speaker, with the movement of blood, and goods, 
and supports our library system. 
 
My question with this reckless sell-off, again a betrayal to 
Saskatchewan people from this Premier, what sort of analysis 
went into the actual costs of picking up all the parts, the pieces 
of what STC provides Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. First of 
all, with respect to the last answer, I just think it’s important 
that we — all of us, including our side — we know the difficult 
decisions we’ve made, and we’re about to discuss one now, that 
there is an understanding that from time to time the debate as it 
exists between us can also have a little bit of levity. Not on this 
particular issue though. This is a very serious issue for those 
who were served by STC and those who were employed by 
STC — good employees of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
long-standing employees of the province. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, with respect to the specific question on 
transitioning, health is involved. The Ministry of Health is 
involved in terms of providing services that STC used to 
provide previously before the wind-down. I would note that 
there are many, many, many communities that were never 
served by STC, in part because of route cuts that both parties 
have undertaken with respect to STC, and sometimes for other 
reasons because there never were routes in the first place. And 
there were provisions made within the Ministry of Health to be 
able to accommodate those realities. 
 
The same will be true in Social Services where there will be 
support for those who need it. I noted that earlier today. The 
Leader of the Opposition asked the very appropriate and 
reasonable question about the cost of the taxis that have been 
used in the transition, and he used the number of $21,000. I’m 
certainly not going to refute that number, but I would point out 
that’s about half the daily, I think it’s half the daily subsidy, 
half the daily subsidy that taxpayers have been putting into STC 
here recently. So we are going to . . . It’s not a small amount 
though. 
 
We are going to continue to provide those services and 
transition away from the previous model. And the previous 
model has been losing a lot of money for a lot of years, to the 
point now where the subsidy is, on a per passenger basis, the 
subsidy from taxpayers is over $90 a person. And, Mr. 
Chairman, we’ve just . . . we have decided that, even as 
important as the service is, it’s not sustainable. And as I’ve 
noted, you know, other political parties in power, including my 
friends opposite, they’ve done a similar analysis. Members 
opposite cut routes. They eliminated routes when the subsidy 
was not nearly that high. When the subsidy was a third of that, 
they had decided that that’s too much money to subsidize a 
route at 30 bucks a passenger, and they cut it. That would have 
been a tough decision for them to make. That would have 
impacted people along that line. That would have impacted the 
drivers. But they took that decision. 
 

We also made some route rationalization decisions. I can share 
with members again that the per passenger subsidy is now up to 
over $90 a passenger, $90. And so at some point the 
government has to say, we need to make a priority decision 
here. Do we have $90 million to invest in STC over the next 
five years? That’s what it would take, $90 million. Or do we 
want that to go to core services in health care and education and 
infrastructure and social services. Well we chose to make the 
difficult decision and prioritize that 90 million over the next 
five years into those other areas. But we understand that it poses 
challenges for people and more importantly we dramatically 
affected the lives of the employees at STC. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, this is a true betrayal of 
Saskatchewan people. And for the Premier to minimize the 
value of STC to Saskatchewan people and the vast arteries that 
it connects, our vast and beautiful and remote and rural 
province is . . . Well he does so at his own peril or the peril of 
those that are going to be there for his party after him, Mr. 
Speaker. STC is a lifeline to our province. It’s incredibly 
important to organizations and health care, libraries all across 
our province. It’s valued by businesses. It’s valued by farms. 
It’s valued by students. It connects people to opportunities. 
 
And the Premier’s presenting again false choices here. He’s 
pretending somehow that this cut is . . . Well the reality here 
and the choice that he has made is that he’s giving a break to 
the biggest corporations in Saskatchewan to the tune of $60 
million, at the same time as he’s doing in STC with no analysis 
of any potential savings. Because again, this is something that 
government will be having to pick up the costs for a piecemeal 
system that serves Saskatchewan people in a much poorer way 
to get patients to the care and appointments and services they 
deserve, for example. And the list can on from blood services 
through to the libraries. It’s the same kind of reckless, 
short-sighted approach we see from this Premier on so many 
fronts. 
 
I guess my point would be this: he has no mandate to do this. 
He certainly wasn’t straight with the workers who lives have 
been devastated. And he has no analysis before us here today to 
support the choice that he’s made from a fiscal perspective 
even, Mr. Speaker. So I guess, I ask the Premier: how can he 
stand by this sell-off without any financial analysis and without 
a mandate? In fact the opposite of a mandate, he promised he 
wouldn’t sell off STC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just don’t agree with 
the hon. member. I do agree about the seriousness of the issue, 
but certainly there is analysis done. I’ve just shared with 
members of the House that if we were to continue with STC, 
the subsidy would be . . . we’d have to invest $90 million over 
the next five years. We’ve provided a subsidy since 2007 of 
$112 million. I have noted that per subsidized . . . forecasted 
subsidy for . . . the subsidies forecasted for STC per passenger 
in ’17-18 is going to be $94 per passenger. There’s been an 
analysis done, and we’ve made a difficult decision that we can’t 
afford this $90 million when we have so many other needs in 
government that need our attention. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about . . . Well first of all, the other 
thing the hon. member indicated was that businesses rely on 
STC. And some do, I would say that’s the case. But when his 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

party was in power they cut routes, and when those routes were 
cut the profitable part of STC — that’s the parcel side — there 
was an uptake in that activity by the private sector. Now I think 
the hon. member would agree with me that there’s every 
likelihood that the private sector is going to pick up that parcel 
side, that profitable parcel side, after the wind-down. Now I’ll 
correct the member again: we’re not selling the company. The 
company’s not profitable. There is not a company to sell. It is a 
wind-down. 
 
Now I would also point out to members that there will be also 
some profitable passenger routes, and we’ve already seen 
companies step forward and indicate that there’s an interest in 
providing daily service along a number of routes in the . . . 
Some of the routes that the private sector I think has stepped 
forward, and weren’t necessarily profitable ones, I’m not sure. 
 
The member for the Martensville constituency has an 
entrepreneur that wants to do a daily route I think at 15 bucks a 
passenger, which is like almost a tenth of what we would have 
to charge because of the overhead that we have and the salaries 
we pay. And so you can have a small business provide these 
services, and we certainly are looking forward to seeing that 
happen. 
 
When the NDP were in power and they cut routes, we did see 
an uptake in the parcel service. I remember up No. 32, up the 
Leader line. I remember the mayor of Leader, Mar Clary. He 
also drove the bus. He started a little business when they cut 
that line, and he took people up and down 32 to Swift Current 
in a passenger van. So there’s going to be options. 
 
But I also want to indicate that in terms of remote areas of the 
province being served, of the 5,000 trips provided through the 
northern medical transportation program in 2015-16, less than 1 
per cent were by bus. Of the northern medical transportation 
program trips, 356 by plane, 1,410 by ambulance obviously, 
3,146 by taxi, and 34 by bus. And so with respect to that 
particular issue — which is important, that’s health care access 
for northerners — you can see that less than 1 per cent were on 
the bus. And we’re going to be able to absorb those certainly 
through these other modes of transportation that people have 
been choosing or their professionals have been choosing, Mr. 
Chairman. But that’s what certainly will be in place. 
 
Social Services also provides travel benefits for SAP 
[Saskatchewan assistance plan], SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability], and TEA [transitional employment 
allowance] clients to assist them in a number of different 
situations. Transportation is then based on the most appropriate 
method and the needs of the clients and their proximity. There’s 
a number of other initiatives of support for people who will be 
able to get around. 
 
But again I would reiterate that prior to these changes to the 
wind-down, there are many communities that were not served 
by STC at all. And so whether it was the transportation of 
blood, whether it was people who needed the access either to 
medical appointments or for reasons of social services, there 
were provisions for them, and there will be going forward. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier of Saskatchewan has no 
mandate on this front. It’s not decent to cause this sort of 

damage and to sell this off without being straight with 
Saskatchewan people. But we see this as a sort of attack on 
people, the most vulnerable on many fronts — cold-hearted, 
damaging cuts at the same time as the Premier has giveaways 
and breaks for the most wealthy and well connected, as we’ve 
canvassed well here today. 
 
But let me just go through a few of what these actual impacts 
are because the fight is real for Saskatchewan families who are 
facing these sort of devastating cuts. Of course you had the 
promise from the campaign of this government to have 
individualized funding for those with autism. That promise 
broken, leaving those families left high and dry without the 
supports that they were promised. Taking away the basic 
dignity of a funeral service for the working poor and for those 
on social assistance, Mr. Speaker, an outlier in the rest of 
Canada on this front and lacking any level of humanity and 
decency that the people of the province deserve. 
 
Or cuts as we see in this budget, and these aren’t big money 
items. The big money items are of course $60 million for the 
largest corporations. That’s the giveaway; that’s the break that 
this Premier’s pushing forward. Or the $40 million, I think $38 
million for the highest wage earners, Mr. Speaker, at the same 
time that they make a cut here to cut the paratransit support for 
those on SAID, Mr. Speaker, those that are living with 
disabilities, those that are overcoming all of those challenges 
daily that need support to get to medical appointments, to get to 
job opportunities, to have healthy social relationships. And of 
course they’ve made the changes to SAID that if they move 
from their program, they’re reviewed — likely then to lose 
benefits as well — leaving so many, so many of the very most 
vulnerable held hostage at times where we also know we need 
to do so much better in supporting those facing domestic 
violence or supporting those in unhealthy living conditions. 
 
Or we see the cuts to children, the cuts to the Discovery 
Preschools, which help children with intellectual disabilities, 
with autism, that have complex needs and experienced trauma, 
the cuts to the communication preschool. 
 
[17:00] 
 
You know, the cuts on these fronts go on and on, and they’re 
not large budget items. They’re actually quite affordable in the 
scheme of things. What’s a big budget item is a $100 million 
break to the wealthiest and well connected. 
 
Or we see the cuts to the hearing aid program, $3 million of 
so-called savings at the expense of kids and families across 
Saskatchewan who are being deprived of the dignity, the 
opportunity that’s presented with being able to hear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Cuts to the parent mentoring program, $1.4 million, and is 
support that, for a province as vast as ours and with the 
challenges of parenting and with postpartum, and all the 
realities of young families and young moms and young dads, 
we need to make sure those supports are in place. 
 
Or the cuts to spiritual care in our health facilities, in our 
hospitals, depriving Saskatchewan people at a time where they 
may need it most, the ability to connect with that level of care. 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Mr. Speaker, many people who may not have relied or have a 
relationship with a faith leader on a regular basis through their 
life, who might be at a point in their life who really need it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Cuts to podiatry, $1.2 million in so-called savings, but the 
reality being stated very clearly that if we don’t provide these 
services, that we’re going to be dealing with amputation after 
amputation for those on, with those with diabetes, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know who has diabetes in our province? Many, many 
in our province. It’s prevalent though, Mr. Speaker, for far too 
many across our population, and it’s prevalent for our First 
Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Cuts to seniors, increases to long-term care fees that are being 
hiked up $620. These are small budget items with devastating 
impacts on real families and real people across Saskatchewan. 
 
How can the Premier gift and give away the benefits of close to 
$100 million to the wealthiest and the most well connected 
while devastating these kids, families, and people across our 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would point out 
again for members, I’m not sure how many times it’s been that 
what the member just characterized as a giveaway for 
well-connected people, they believed to be good economic 
policy when they were in government. 
 
Premier Calvert, who I think had a pretty solid record on the 
social side of things — although under certain areas where 
again there was more talk than action — understood that the 
importance of a strong economy to support quality of life. And 
what the member just characterized as a giveaway to the well 
connected, his party used to say in government was good 
economic policy. 
 
Mr. Chair, we want to have a strong economy, and we have had 
a strong economy and have a strong economy in this province, 
to support quality programs. Members opposite often ask, 
where did the money go? And I’m going to answer the 
questions directly about the record on this side of the House, 
with respect to help for those who are most vulnerable, and deal 
specifically with the budget. 
 
First of all I would point out that in this very difficult budget, 
this was the largest social services budget in the history of the 
province. When other ministries were being reduced this is . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well and the member for Regina 
Lakeview is heckling and maybe disagreeing with that. 
 
Here’s how this breaks down. The largest social services budget 
in the history of the province breaks down to a 5.5 per cent 
increase in the children and families area, support for children 
and families in the province; a 1.1 per cent increase for people 
with disabilities — 3.7 billion across all ministries for people 
with disabilities since 2009. And in this budget, the one the 
member just criticized, there’s a 13 per cent increase in income 
assistance programs which serve poor people in our province, 
low-income people in our province. Well he’s shaking his head. 
That’s how the budget breaks down. That’s what’s in the 
provincial budget. 
 

And moreover, he asked a question about SAID. SAID was 
created by members on this side of the House in 2009. The 
disability community in this province — and there’s a former 
Social Services minister — they asked for the dignity of a 
program like SAID from members opposite . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Fair enough. I was wrong. I don’t think he was 
the minister of Social Services. 
 
But the disability sector said, we want the dignity of a program. 
We want it. Our situation’s different. It’s not that we want 
social assistance. We are unable to work, and so we want 
income support. And so it was our government that created 
SAID. And in ’17-18 in the budget — the member’s just talking 
about SAID support — it’s $149.3 million is the budget for 
SAID. Since its creation, our government has provided almost 
$1.2 billion. 
 
We have increased the maximum SES [Saskatchewan 
employment supplement] benefits by 14 per cent and extended 
the earnings threshold by approximately 16 per cent to help 
those families who are among the working poor. We’ve 
increased the minimum wage by 34 per cent. And now it’s 
indexed and will keep track with the rate of inflation, the cost of 
living. 
 
I’ve said this earlier today. We’ve tripled the seniors’ income 
plan, which was ignored and frozen for 16 years when there 
was some pretty good years in there. When members opposite 
could have helped out low-income seniors with that plan — it’s 
their program — they did nothing. They froze it for 16 years. 
 
It’s been tripled since 2007 and protected in this very difficult 
budget. Mr. Chairman, we have invested 149.3 million in child 
care subsidies since 2007. There’s been 5,000 new licensed 
child care spaces created since 2007, and this is in terms of 
support for families in the province of Saskatchewan. I could go 
on and on. We did campaign on increasing . . . We created 
SAID and then we campaigned on increasing SAID supports a 
couple of elections ago, and we kept that promise. 
 
Mr. Chair, and perhaps most importantly for some of us, it was 
our government that decided that 440 people with an 
intellectual disability waiting on a wait-list for the dignity of a 
home was probably intolerable. It was probably the wrong thing 
here in Saskatchewan, because that’s what we inherited. And so 
we took significant dollars and we invested to work with CBOs 
[community-based organization] to build group homes to take 
care of that. 
 
There were some decisions taken in . . . Well I would also point 
out the member in his question mentioned the issues of 
domestic violence. Mr. Chairman, the very first centre to 
support victims of domestic violence built in the province since 
the ’80s was built by this side of the House in the member from 
Melfort’s constituency. I know that very well because the last 
one that was built was the government that preceded them way 
back in the ’80s. My parents were on the local volunteer 
committee that tried to get that shelter built in Swift Current. 
That was the last one, in the ’80s. 
 
And so we’ve moved on this issue and we have a Justice 
minister who has been an advocate and a leader with respect to 
this particular issue, not just talking about it, but acting on it, 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

including funding that particular centre and a number of other 
initiatives. And we know that there’s more work to be done. 
And we know that even though this is a record budget and 
we’ve made these record investments, that there is a great need 
in the province. And we are mindful that the way we will 
sustain, the way we’ll be able to meet that need in the long term 
is a strong economy. 
 
The member, . . . he had a long list, and I didn’t keep track of 
all of them, but I heard him mention the pastoral care issue. I 
just want to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well in spiritual 
care. The Health critic’s corrected me and fair enough. 
 
The spiritual care issue is an important one. I want to share with 
members opposite what happens in my hometown and in 
Southwest Saskatchewan where the Swift Current ministerial 
makes sure, in an ecumenical way, in a way that respects all 
faiths, to ensure that they are making available spiritual or 
pastoral care. That has happened in our part of the world for a 
very long time. It’s happened without the benefit of a 
government program. It’s happened because people of faith 
have supported their churches, have supported their mosques, 
have supported their different faith communities with their 
dollars. They have contributed to make sure that there’s a 
chaplaincy program, to make sure. 
 
And by the way, the health region works with them and even 
when we have one health region in the province, we’re going to 
make sure that it’s understood that that kind of outreach is to be 
accommodated, that sort of spiritual care is to be 
accommodated. 
 
And I can tell that the Health critic just doesn’t agree. She’s 
shaking her head. I would point out to her that while there has 
been government dollars for this same sort of program in 
certain places, depending where you live, it hasn’t existed and 
didn’t under them in other communities. Why is that? Well, 
why is that? I don’t know if that’s necessarily fair, Mr. Chair. 
 
Here’s what I do think is reasonable, is that . . . I mean I’ve 
been at meetings on Good Friday where that’s been the cause, 
the charity, that’s the reason for the offering, to support the 
Swift Current ministerial in delivering that chaplaincy program. 
And by the way, it’s respecting of all faiths. I think that’s an 
excellent role for our churches. It’s not easy perhaps if people 
have grown accustomed to public dollars for that sort of thing, 
but I stand by the government’s decision. Because I’ll tell you 
what, in big parts of this province, it’s worked without a 
government program. And I believe that it can work, that kind 
of spiritual care, that kind of pastoral care, can work 
everywhere in Saskatchewan without a government program. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not adequate answers to cuts that are 
devastating to the people of Saskatchewan and false choices 
being presented by this Premier who is giving $100 million to 
the most wealthy and well connected, with devastating cuts to 
people and families and the most vulnerable. 
 
The increase in the social assistance budget of course is 
utilization. There’s more people on social assistance. There’s 
not more money for those on social assistance. What there is is 
dramatic impacts and hikes in their cost of living. 
 

We have so many CBOs — shifting gears here, and wanting 
direct answers from the Premier on some of this stuff — CBOs 
through the health sector. Whether you’re talking Planned 
Parenthood, or the Lighthouse, mobile crisis, you know, Hope’s 
Home, the list goes on and on. But the minister has intimated 
that there’s a 10 per cent cut coming. Now it’s not going to be 
applied the same way across the sector. He says it’ll be 
happening in June. 
 
Well those working in the CBOs, those delivering service, 
deserve to have some certainty on this front. And certainly the 
Premier will have answers and I expect him here today to share 
what cuts, what impacts he’s proposing. Obviously we don’t 
think cuts should be on the table. We think that he should be 
cutting his giveaway to the corporations and supporting these 
CBOs. So could he come clean on his plans as it relates to our 
CBOs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank the member 
for the question. Part of the difficult decisions in the budget 
wasn’t just sort of the cuts that we were making to programs 
that are wholly within government, but also that are . . . some of 
the programs that had been delivered by our valued partners, 
and some of them are community-based organizations. There’s 
a two-part answer to the member’s question. 
 
In the case of Social Services, the ministry is meeting with the 
CBOs, and on a case-by-case basis, going through the budget to 
achieve some savings. In the case of Health, there is a target of 
10 per cent overall savings across all the CBOs, not to be 10 per 
cent from each one, but the overall target is 10 per cent. There 
will be, my understanding the Minister of Health has shared 
with me, that they are going to hear back from officials in June 
with some recommendations, and then the due diligence will 
work to ensure that the challenges are evenly shared with 
respect to the request for a 10 per cent reduction in CBOs, in 
overall CBO support on the Health side. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier has no clue on the realities 
in those CBOs, and how razor thin they operate and the services 
that they provide and the great lengths that they go to, to 
organize their resources to serve the most vulnerable. And the 
kind of games he’s playing with those that give the most to 
those that need it the most are disgraceful, Mr. Chair. Those 
CBOs deserve answers. 
 
But I need to move along to . . . You know, there’s so many 
areas that are not getting the attention this Premier deserves. In 
the North we see, you know, closures of facilities that provide 
jobs. We see a lack of assistance flowing out of the devastating 
shootings in the school at La Loche. We see a government 
that’s far more ready to do the photo op and the cute tweets, Mr. 
Speaker, but not the lasting work in a region. We see inadequate 
mental health supports. The list can go on and on. 
 
But there’s a program in the North that was providing 
tremendous hope for so many, for so long, that was 
transforming classrooms, transforming lives, and transforming 
communities, that was empowering those through the North and 
creating tremendous opportunity, certainly economically but 
socially as well. And I guess I ask the Premier of Saskatchewan, 
how does he think that it’s in our benefit to scrap a program like 
NORTEP [northern teacher education program], that is part of 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

the hope and opportunity and stability in the North, instead of 
supporting and expanding that very important program? 
 
[17:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much for the question. 
Mr. Chair, we share a desire to make sure that programming is 
available in the North. And I have good news to report to all 
members that’s fairly current. There’s been 232 brand new 
students applied to Northlands’ university programming. That 
includes 45 for a Bachelor of Education; 35 of those are from 
NORTEP. So this is very, very positive. We see . . . And our 
vision is that university program will expand in the North, not 
contract. And these numbers are evidence of that being the case. 
 
Northlands is up and running in La Ronge to be able to provide 
this. It’s respected, I think. It has a very well-respected . . . It 
has a solid board. And it’s made exclusively . . . That board is 
constituted of northerners. And it runs the university programs 
in Creighton and Buffalo and Ile-a-la-Crosse with plans to 
expand. And again I would repeat for members and for my hon. 
friend that we’ve seen 232 brand new students have applied for 
Northlands’ university programming, including — and this is 
important — 45 into the Bachelor of Ed program, 34 of which 
are from NORTEP. 
 
We’re going to continue to focus on providing the 
programming. It might happen in a different way. The 
conveyance might have changed, but the commitment to the 
program and access to education remains. Advanced Education 
and Education also work together on the new Dene Teacher 
Education Program, or DTEP, which I think members opposite 
should mark well. Trains up to 30 local students to teach local, 
to teach them over four years, providing half of the $480,000 
program costs with school divisions and First Nations that cover 
the remainder. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I don’t, I just don’t agree with the 
member’s characterization that there haven’t been supports, 
new and additional supports, in response to some of, well the 
very horrific event in La Loche, but others as well. Because 
that’s not the case. There have been new resources and a new 
response in the North, and we can go through those. We could 
also probably agree that, given the scale of the problem, more 
needs to be done to be sure, and the challenge, more needs to be 
done. But to characterize the government as not caring, it belies 
the fact, Mr. Chairman, that we have been investing new 
resources in the North, not just in education, not just in things 
like revenue sharing for our municipal partners, but in 
programs, mental health programs, health programs, social 
services, counselling, and we can get into the details. Happy to 
try to get into the details of that later on, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, nothing in the Premier’s 
words there that are meaningful to the North. We have a 
Premier that’s been distracted this last year, blowing up and 
taking over a program that served northerners for so many 
years, that’s provided tremendous hope and opportunity, instead 
of building upon it and looking at where he could invest his 
time and his resources for the greater good of all. At the same 
time he’s, of course, he gives breaks to the most wealthy and 
well connected. 
 

You know, another thing that the Premier was anything but 
straight with Saskatchewan people on was education. In the last 
election, he certainly didn’t tell Saskatchewan people that he 
was going to force massive cuts upon our classrooms, at the 
same time as actually hiking education property taxes. He 
certainly never said he was going to silence our democratically 
elected local school boards, our local voices. And he certainly 
never said that he was going to be pulling millions of dollars 
out of post-secondary education, with massive consequences for 
our institutions, but for students. And he certainly didn’t share 
that he was going to attack education in this way, all at the same 
very time as giving away benefits and breaks to the most 
wealthy and well connected. 
 
When it comes to education, when it comes to our kids’ 
classrooms that are already under so much strain, why wasn’t 
this Premier straight with Saskatchewan people? Why won’t he 
make the investment that they need and deserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve attacked 
education, I guess, with a 114 per cent increase overall in 
operating funding since we got elected. We’ve invaded 
education with eighty . . . eight hundred and seventy-five more 
teachers than were here, fully funded, than when members 
opposite were on the governing side. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve attacked education with brand new 
schools in rural and urban Saskatchewan. We invaded education 
with finally some maintenance dollars for school divisions, who 
couldn’t get access to any dollars when, again, members 
opposite had a lot of money and time to talk but not a lot of 
time to act on fundamental maintenance issues that school 
boards would share with their MLAs on either side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this particular budget poses challenges for the 
government and, to be sure, there are challenges in the 
education sector. But I am hopeful that there is going to be that 
ability to deal with those challenges, in part because they have 
received from this side of the House, from this government, 
more money in operating, greater increases, more money in 
capital, greater increases, finally some money for maintenance, 
than they ever did from members opposite when they had a 
chance to do more than talk, Mr. Chair — when they used to sit 
on very significant surpluses, when they actually gave school 
boards access to the local tax base as well, combined it all 
together and the support for education wasn’t there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve made some difficult choices, and I know I 
want to salute a number of the school boards that have done a 
very good job responding to those challenges. In my own home 
community, Chinook School Division, which was arguably hit 
as hard as any, harder than any, they have made some difficult 
choices. But they have decided to take some people that used to 
be in administration in the office and get them back in the 
classroom and save some spaces that way. They’ve decided to 
make sure that . . . And you know, they’ve had to make some 
choices around some professional services, but they have made 
the choice not to eliminate them but to make them available 
perhaps at a little bit of a greater distance than has been the 
case. 
 
But the teachers are in the classroom. Positions have been 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

moved from admin to the classroom, and I want to give them 
full credit for dealing with the challenging situation that they 
have there, and I think a number of other boards have done the 
same. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important for us to remember the 
context here. The members across the way are going to . . . 
They try to characterize this as some sort of attack, when the 
fact is that funding for education under this government has 
been unprecedented in our time in office, unprecedented. 
Operating funds to school up 114 per cent — I’m pretty sure the 
inflation rate over that period of time was not 114 per cent. And 
even though the province is finally growing and we see 
enrolment increases in some areas, I’m pretty sure that doesn’t 
account for or constitute the . . . or take up the 114 per cent 
increase in operating funding. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we’re going to get to a point in this 
province where things are balanced, and as I’ve said many 
times, and members, I know they . . . members opposite know 
that I say this, because they repeat it back to me: the best 
indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour. And our record 
of education is one of investment for our students, new schools 
in the province, maintenance for the schools that exist. That’s 
what we do when there is any fiscal room at all. That’s what we 
will continue to do, Mr. Chairman, even as we face the current 
fiscal challenge. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Chair, it’s just so 
disappointing for Saskatchewan people to hear that sort of a 
response — and back-patting if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker 
— to those hard-working but beleaguered teachers and 
educators all across our province doing all they can for the 
students of today, and a budget that brings forward massive cuts 
on our classrooms with consequences of eliminating programs 
for students with intensive needs, for those that have 
experienced trauma, for those with autism, having the impacts 
of increasing class size in classrooms that have been growing 
and growing under this government and having cuts, supports 
being cut every step of the way. This is a damaging budget by 
this government. 
 
But I also know Saskatchewan people value local control of 
their education, and I know that when I meet with boards, and 
our team as we’ve met with boards all across the province, it’s 
evident in communities like Fox Valley where over 200 people 
come out to express their dismay and their feeling of being 
betrayed by this government when they’re moving towards 
attacking local autonomy, local control. And of course this 
government’s saying sweet things and pretending that they 
didn’t do that, but Bill 63 that they passed gutted local control 
of our classrooms. 
 
This is a Premier making clear choices. He clearly chose to 
ignore all the people across Saskatchewan and rammed forward 
with gutting local control. And he made choices as well to give 
breaks for the most wealthy and well connected to the tune of 
$100 million, in the same budget that he actually increases 
education property taxes by, I believe, $67 million, all while 
then actually cutting education by $54 million. This is a 
government that has clearly not made education a priority. 
 
How can this Premier, how can this Premier justify his choices? 

Because that’s what they are in this budget — its gifts to the 
most wealthy and well connected at the expense of students. 
How can he justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear. 
The funding to school divisions, K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] education funding is up 114 per cent since we were elected. 
I think I indicated that was operating; that’s overall dollars — 
capital and operating — up 114 per cent since we came to 
office, Mr. Chair. 
 
The member talked about, I think he was referencing the 
legislation with respect to government oversight for boards. Mr. 
Chairman, I will say to you, and for the record as I’ve said to a 
number of trustees, there is not going to be a material change in 
how boards operate. They will have autonomy. They will have 
independence to make the decisions they need to make to 
operate a school division. 
 
But if a school division for example feels it necessary to go to 
take 12 people to, as the minister’s pointed out, to Palm Springs 
on a trip and use precious education dollars to do that, we 
probably are going to step in. When a school division, a public 
school division wants to sue a separate division that’s simply 
trying to maintain a school being open, spend taxpayers’ dollars 
in a lawsuit and then more dollars spent by the separate division 
in that same lawsuit, we probably want the ability to step in. 
 
Mr. Chairman, other Education ministers that were of the NDP 
persuasion agreed that their powers were limited. I think 
Andrew Thomson was one, an Education minister for the NDP, 
indicated his powers were limited with respect to stepping in 
and ensuring that school boards were focused on the classroom. 
Mr. Chairman, we know that is the case 99 per cent of the time, 
so they can expect autonomy and independence as they conduct 
their business. 
 
[17:30] 
 
But I think taxpayers also would want to know that their 
provincial legislature has at least now the legislative authority, 
not just moral suasion, not just the opportunity to call, but 
actual legal authority to step in and say, you are not going to 
sue another school division because the school division wanted 
to keep open a school. You are not going to use millions of 
dollars for that. 
 
And I know the NDP don’t agree. The NDP, well first they 
support the principle of the ruling. The Education critic came 
out in a moment of clarity and honesty when that ruling was 
made and said, we actually kind of support the notion here that 
public dollars should not be going to faith-based education and 
that . . . Well, we should find the quote. Is it right here? Well 
here it is. Here it is. Because . . . Now the member is chirping 
from her seat. The reporter asked her a question: “But you agree 
that non-Catholic students should not be funded in the Catholic 
schools as the Theodore ruling has?” This is the member, and I 
quote: 
 

What I have said is that we recognize this was a decision 
that was made in the Court of Queen’s Bench by the justice 
and I do not think it is appropriate that I would call into 
question that decision. 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Well here’s where we’re different, Mr. Chair. The NDP don’t 
think it’s important to call into question that decision, which 
would impact 10,000 students plus, would be yanked from the 
separate system because they’re not Catholics and would 
disrupt the education system in Saskatchewan, one that’s 
working reasonably well. Well we don’t agree. We think it’s 
perfectly right for the government to call something like that 
into question. And we think it’s perfectly right for the 
government, who is the sole funder of education, to have the 
legal authority that the member opposes, that he just criticized, 
to step in on those occasions and say to a school board, now we 
think we’re going to call that into question. We think that’s 
wrong. We think that’s not in the interest of students. 
 
Well the member is still chirping from her seat. I hope she gets 
up in the debate because she’s had several positions on this 
issue. Here’s what the reporter later on asked the member: 
“You’re not as keen . . .” Here’s what the reporter said to that 
member where she stated, I think by accident, true NDP policy, 
which I think people will remember at the next election. This is 
the reporter: “You’re not as keen on giving 80 cents on the 
dollar to other independent associate schools,” like the ones that 
they were welcoming and professing to support when they were 
in the House the other day. Those are the independent associate 
schools that the reporter is asking about. I’ll repeat the question. 
The reporter says, “You’re not as keen on giving 80 cents on 
the dollar to other independent associate schools.” Here’s what 
the member said: “If that comes at the expense of the publicly 
funded school system, no.” 
 
Then the reporter gives her another chance. The reporter says, 
“Does it? Does it come at the expense of the publicly funded 
system?” the reporter asked the Education critic. And here’s 
what the MLA said, “Well if, I suppose, if we’re looking at 
finite dollars, yes it does.”  
 
So that member wants to stand up, the leader wants to stand up 
and decry funding for schools. Meanwhile his Education critic 
is saying if they were the government, they wouldn’t provide 
any per cent funding for associate schools. She would reduce 
funding for . . . And you know what? We shouldn’t be too hard 
on the critic. She’s just taking the lead of the Leader of the 
Opposition because the interim Leader of the Opposition in 
November 15 of 2012, when this government increased funding 
for those same associate schools . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well the Deputy Leader wants to get into the debate as well. He 
should. 
 
November 15th, 2012, when this government increased . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The question’s on school funding. 
When we increased funding to associate schools — funding 
which has been maintained in this budget, which is very much 
part of the debate today — when we did that, here’s what the 
now Leader of the NDP said, the same member that was 
praising and heralding those associate schools up in the gallery 
a few days ago. Here’s what he said to the Minister of 
Education about funding associate schools at 80 per cent: “Will 
the minister do the right thing? Will he stop diverting dollars 
from a publicly funded education system?”  
 
And so there you have it, Mr. Chair. The question’s on funding 
for schools. What does he consider these associate schools, like 
Harvest or Regina Christian or Saskatoon Christian or the Huda 

School or the Muslim school in Saskatoon that’s an associate 
school that gets 80 per cent funding from the government so 
long as curriculum is followed . . . And by the way, they’re 
getting great results in those schools, in those faith-based 
schools. They’re turning out some pretty good graduates. When 
he had a chance to talk about funding for them in the House, do 
you know what he called them? He called them a diversion 
from the publicly funded system. That’s the truth of his position 
with respect to funding schools. 
 
We have a different view on this side of the House. We like to 
have the separate system. We like to have the public system. 
We want to support those associate schools at 80 per cent. We 
want choice for parents and quality education for students, Mr. 
Chairman. And what we will not do, what we will not do on this 
side of the House is say one thing to those schools when they’re 
in the gallery and another thing when they’re not here, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, at least he’s consistent on 
one thing, and that’s not being straight with Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier can get up here, and he 
can yell and he can make all sorts of noise, but he’s playing 
divisive, costly games. And certainly the Premier knows our 
high level of support, Mr. Speaker, for students in schools 
across Saskatchewan and our readiness to act. So he can play 
games all he wants. Certainly it distracts from the cuts that he’s 
making in education, and certainly it distracts from the takeover 
of local control in our classrooms. 
 
You know, I got a kick out of the Premier here today. You 
know, he gets up, and he’s going to go cherry-pick a few 
examples that might not be the best example of public spending. 
Now certainly the voters can hold their local school boards 
accountable. I trust in voters to do that. But this is coming from 
the Premier, who’s presided over mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste like we’ve hardly ever seen before in Saskatchewan. The 
guy that used to send them by the plane-full down to the airbag 
factory, Mr. Speaker, and buck after buck, good buck after good 
buck on the lean project or the carbon capture project, or 
managing a bypass, of course, that went from $400 million to 
over $2 billion, not supporting the Saskatchewan companies in 
the way he should, Mr. Speaker. Or of course, we could get into 
the GTH mess, the GTH mess of this government. 
 
And I guess, on the GTH, you know, this Premier owes some 
answers to Saskatchewan people. Now he hasn’t answered time 
and time again, and it should be a straightforward . . . It’s a 
straightforward question. Should be a simple answer. When did 
the Premier of Saskatchewan learn that the original seller of 
land in the GTH scandal was a business interest . . . of the then 
minister responsible for the GTH? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’ll answer the member’s 
question. I answered it on the 9th of March, but I’ll answer it 
again for him. 
 
But before I do, he just said we mischaracterized his position on 
funding for schools. Mr. Chairman, I’ve got a copy, there’s a 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] article that’s 
available to everybody from January 5th, 2012. And the 
headline is called, “Cash for independent schools hurts the 
public system: NDP.” Now the Leader of the Opposition, the 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

current Leader of the Opposition, I think he was the Education 
critic, is quoted in the article. The article’s about the 
government, our government providing 80 per cent funding for 
associate schools, the same ones that he professed to support 
when they were here in . . . [inaudible] . . . Now, he is quoted in 
this article, and it says this: 
 

If this is a matter of evolving to meet the needs of certain 
students or certain communities, we have the abilities to do 
that within our public education system.  
 
It’s disappointing . . . [this is what he said] It’s 
disappointing to see a government choosing to fragment 
that system instead of strengthening it.  

 
Mr. Chairman, that’s what he . . . First of all, the associate 
schools like Regina Christian and the Huda school, they were a 
diversion. In this article, he says that it’s fragmenting the 
system when we support them. Nobody knows his position, and 
why would we blame them because I’m not sure he does 
because he just here today said again he’s being 
mischaracterized. He’s had plenty of opportunity to explain 
then.  
 
Maybe, you know what, Mr. Chairman? I think he might want 
to just say — we’ve done it at times as government — to say, I 
was wrong. What I said in 2012, when I called those schools a 
diversion, I was wrong. Or when I called them fragmenting the 
system, I was wrong, and our position has changed. He might 
want to do that, or maybe not.  
 
As for his question, Mr. Speaker, I indicated on March 9th that 
when the matter became public there was a lot of media 
coverage. That’s when I learned about the identities of the 
people involved. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — When the matter became public. So 
we’re talking about a member that still sits in this Assembly as 
a member of your caucus, as a minister that was a member of 
your cabinet, you’re telling me that that minister, that friend of 
yours, that campaign manager of the Sask Party never levelled 
with you, that he had before cabinet a deal on the GTH with his 
own business interests, with the person he rented farm land 
from?  
 
You’re telling me that this whole deal came about, and then the 
second buyer came forward, and the Premier of Saskatchewan 
didn’t have that information, didn’t know that information, that 
that MLA who still sits in his caucus hadn’t shared that with the 
Premier of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we’re talking about a 
transaction that never happened, because it was a numbered 
company and we didn’t know the identity of the numbered 
company. Mr. Chairman, the auditor deals with this matter in 
her report and says the following: “However during its due 
diligence and subsequent to the submission to the Cabinet . . .” 
This is the auditor now, maybe the Deputy Leader doesn’t care 
much for us on this side, but I think we all respect the auditor: 

 
However during its due diligence and subsequent to the 
submission to cabinet, the GTH could not satisfy itself as 
to the identity of the owners of 3rd Party B. As a result, it 

did not seek Cabinet’s approval or meet the conditions of 
the offer, and the offer expired.  

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know this is troubling and it’s 
rather astounding what we have shared on the floor of this 
Assembly here today. This question has been asked of that 
Premier time and time again, and he’s obfuscated, done all he 
can not to answer it. 
 
But what we’ve learned here today is . . . And the Premier now 
is trying to say something that this deal never happened, but the 
deal did happen. It was sold to another supporter of the Sask 
Party. And the money was paid by the Sask Party, wildly 
exorbitant dollars, all while the minister responsible made sure 
that the grease was there, that the dollars were there from 
SaskPower, the hard-working people of Saskatchewan who paid 
for it there. 
 
And of course, so we have a Premier who’s revealed here today 
that he never had this information shared with him until, he 
says, just before the election. Now if this is believable, it’s 
outrageous that that member, that MLA, that cabinet minister 
wouldn’t have been booted that day from cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
These are about dollars that have been wasted, that have been 
ripped off from Saskatchewan people. 
 
To the Premier of Saskatchewan: it’s hardly believable that you 
didn’t have this information till that day, but let’s just pretend 
that we . . . do. So you had the minister that brought forward a 
deal with his business interests, his landlord. And the cabinet 
ended up rejecting it, I think possibly with a bit of due diligence 
from the Justice minister. But then a year later this deal shows 
back up with a supporter and friend of government. This time 
not many questions asked; we’ll just pay a whole bunch more 
than they were prepared to pay the year before, Mr. Speaker, 
and they do the deal. 
 
To the Premier of Saskatchewan: with his revelation here today 
and with what he’s learned, how can he defend not booting that 
minister from his cabinet? How can he defend not booting that 
MLA from his caucus because it speaks to the very heart and 
culture of the mismanagement of this government? This deal is 
under investigation and the fact it’s taken this long to get to this 
answer is just beyond belief. How can the Premier continue to 
stand by that MLA as he stood by him as a cabinet minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve answered the 
question. The auditor points out that the identity’s not known. I 
mean, the auditor, the report that we’ve debated for a year and 
talked about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I didn’t hear the 
member from Nutana from her chair. What’s she alleging? She 
won’t say it now, Mr. Chair, because that’s their MO [modus 
operandi] on this whole file. They’ll sort of throw out all 
manner of innuendo, not just against members here, but that 
businessman that he talks about, Mr. Marquart, who I think he 
knows personally. He might even be reaching out indirectly to 
say, make sure he doesn’t know I . . . You know, this is nothing 
personal, Mr. Chairman. 
 
[17:45] 
 
Mr. Marquart’s been at a leader’s dinner. I met with him once. 
You’ve constantly characterized him as some sort of close 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

friend of the Saskatchewan Party, some big donor of the party. 
Check the numbers, check the facts. And you might want to, 
next time you’re reaching out to him through other associates, 
other New Democrats in the community, when you’re trying to 
reach out to Mr. Marquart, you might want to explain why 
would you continually smear someone, characterizing them as 
some friend of the government, some friend of the party, when 
the facts don’t back it up? Comes to a leader’s dinner, and for 
that, Mr. Chairman, he’s dragged through unending weeks of 
mud by that leader. 
 
Now it shouldn’t surprise us because on not very much 
information, he also took to his place in the House and accused 
me of accepting a trip to Mexico with a developer. On the floor 
of this place, based on hearsay, that’s what he did, Mr. Chair. 
Didn’t check with it. Didn’t look into it at all. So he not only 
. . . I mean I don’t really care what he says about me. I don’t 
really care. But think about that developer in this city — 
someone who has invested a lot of money, someone who has 
created a lot of jobs in this community — think how that 
developer feels for that drive-by smear. It’s a bit of a pattern for 
my hon. friend. 
 
The auditor indicated pretty clearly that the identity was not 
known. That’s in the auditor’s report. Moreover, Mr. Chair, I’m 
going . . . And he said, well why is he still in cabinet? That was 
the other question post the auditor’s report. 
 
In her report the auditor stated, and I’m quoting now. This is in 
the auditor’s report: 
 

For Board members and key employees we sampled, 
including the Board Chair . . . [that’s the minister, the 
member for Kindersley] we did not find any . . . conflict of 
interest. 
 
 . . . For the Chair/Minister this is consistent with the 
Saskatchewan Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s 
findings in January 2016. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
question the folks out across this province. We don’t question 
businesses. Who we question is the Premier of Saskatchewan 
who can’t give a straight answer to Saskatchewan people, such 
as, you know, the appraisal. 
 
You know, it wasn’t long ago, apparently after the Premier had 
just learned this other information, the Premier said, well he had 
an appraisal that justified this exorbitant price, the millions of 
dollars that were wasted to the two supporters of the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
My question to the Premier: why would he suggest that he had 
an appraisal that justified that price when it’s clear that’s not the 
case? And if he had it, share it with Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, a copy of third . . . I’m reading 
from the auditor’s report again: 
 

A copy of 3rd Party C’s appraisal for the NW quarter of the 
East Parcels, which assigned a land value of about 
$129,000 per acre; he recognized this appraisal used a 
different valuation approach than the GTH requested its 

appraisers use. (The GTH did not receive the landowner’s 
appraisal until negotiations were complete).  

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So why did the Premier say what he 
said? Why did he say he had an appraisal that justified the price, 
when we find out that it was never reviewed before the deal was 
done and we find out that the methodology was bogus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the clearest indicator 
that there was probably another appraisal is that their appraisal 
was 129 and what was paid for the land was 103. There was 
another appraisal. And the person that has done the appraisal 
has denied authorization to release it. 
 
But even if it was just the 129, which clearly it wasn’t, because 
the land, the deal was for 103, consider that we’ve just sold land 
at the GTH for $256,000 per acre. Even when you account for 
the servicing of the land which would probably be 70 or 
$80,000 an acre at the high end, even when you account for 
that, we’re making money. The taxpayers are making money on 
that deal. 
 
And so I want to congratulate members opposite, because that 
original $33 million you allocated as a grant in part support to 
CP to have them move out there was pretty prescient. It was 
forward-looking. Now we didn’t pay that much. We got it for a 
lot less, but it was the right thing to do, because we’ve also seen 
not just Loblaws, but any number of companies locating there 
and new jobs at the GTH. There was another appraisal. We are 
unable to release it at the request of those that did the appraisal, 
but the surest example that it happened is that what was paid 
was 103 when the seller’s appraisal was 129. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The $103,000 an acre was outlandish. It 
was a rip-off. It ripped off Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Chair. 
But it was the Premier of Saskatchewan who went out to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to the media, and said that he had an 
appraisal that justified that price, when that’s clearly not the 
case. And even here today, try as he may, it’s clear that that 
appraisal, the one that he references, was never reviewed by 
government before the deal was done and was a bogus 
methodology. 
 
Why would the Premier of Saskatchewan stand before 
Saskatchewan people and the media and claim he has an 
appraisal that justified the price, when clearly it was neither 
reviewed or relevant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because there is an appraisal and because 
it’s done by a professional. And it’s not bogus, because it exists. 
And the evidence that it exists, to my hon. friend, would be that 
nobody paid 129 grand per acre for the land, which was their 
appraisal . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the deputy leader 
just said, well that explains it. And he’s right. That actually 
does explain it. That’s the answer to the question. 
 
I mean there are . . . The auditor pointed out some shortcomings 
in the government’s approach to this. There’s no doubt about it. 
It was a time of highly rapidly escalating land prices. The 
auditors noted that the coordination from different ministries 
involved was not at the level it should be, that the policies with 
respect to land assembly would probably need to be modernized 
and updated. And we have responded to each of those 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

recommendations. 
 
But there was also commentary on the issue of conflict of 
interest. There’s also commentary on the fact that there is an 
appraisal. I’m telling the member opposite, and I guess he 
won’t take me at his . . . word, that that appraisal is very much 
valid. And it’s obviously a lot less than this number of 129, 
because the final price was 103. 
 
And the other thing he said when he opened this last salvo was 
that, well that 103 was way too much. Mr. Chairman, we just 
sold land at the GTH for $256,000 an acre. And even when you 
account for servicing, that is a profit. That’s a profit. So based 
on what . . . Why is he saying, does he have an appraisal? Why 
is he saying that $103,000 is too much given the fact that the 
market is now paying $256,000 per acre for that land? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s pretty outrageous what we see from 
the Premier today. He’s now gone to a position to actually . . . 
At one point he pretended to be a bit contrite about these 
millions of dollars that were wasted. Now he’s trying to suggest 
with deals like these, you know, who could criticize? 
 
This deal wasted millions of dollars. The Premier doesn’t have 
an ounce of evidence to support the exorbitant price that he 
paid. And of course the kind of games he’s playing here today, 
about 103,000, comparing it to some other land — he’s not 
comparing apples to apples. Some is developed and serviced, 
others . . . This land certainly isn’t. 
 
But it goes back to being straight with people again. The 
Premier of Saskatchewan told Saskatchewan people that he had 
an appraisal that justified the price that he offered these two 
supporters of his government. It’s clear here today that the one 
for $129,000, that they never even reviewed it, and it’s also 
clear from the auditor’s report of course that it was a 
methodology that wasn’t relevant. 
 
To the Premier of Saskatchewan: does he actually have an 
appraisal that supports this land acquisition? And if so, let’s 
table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the answer is yes, we have an 
appraisal. It’s quite clear we do because the appraisal from the 
other side was 129 and the final price was much less than that. 
And we have sought the approval of the appraiser to have it 
released and that approval’s been denied, which it is in his right 
or her right to do. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m going to canvass again as we have in this 
House, the problems that the auditor pointed out quite rightly 
with respect to the GTH land acquisition. Mr. Chairman, when 
questions arose around the GTH purchase of the 204-acre parcel 
of land in late 2013, that’s when we asked the auditor . . . Well 
it was not 2013. It would have been . . . The parcel was in 2013. 
When the concerns were raised though, that’s when we asked 
the auditor to look at the matter, and the auditor did, and the 
auditor found some challenges. 
 
We co-operated fully with the auditor, Mr. Chair. We made 
available to the auditor cabinet documentation, which does not 
happen in every circumstance, I can assure you, when there is a 
particular issue. 

I can remember even when SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] was a particular issue, the then 
premier had his deputy minister investigate it. It wasn’t an 
independent officer of the legislature. There was no . . . Well I 
guess there might have been access from the deputy minister to 
cabinet documents, but it lacked independence and it lacked, I 
think, scrutiny as a result. 
 
The auditor did report that her office received full co-operation 
from the government and she released her report. Here’s what 
she said, and we take this very seriously. The auditor stated 
there was a lack of coordination between the GTH and the 
Ministry of Highways that led to “. . . delayed decisions on 
buying the land during a period of time of rapidly escalating 
land values.” She said those delays “. . . contributed to buying 
this land at a significantly higher price . . .” And that “. . . the 
Government did not take sufficient and timely action to mitigate 
its and ultimately the taxpayers’ exposure to increases in land 
values.” She also concluded that, “While all agreed on the 
importance of buying the East Parcels and were aware of the 
rapidly escalating land prices [I’m quoting the auditor], no 
agency had clear responsibility for leading the purchase of 
them.”  
 
Those are mistakes that we take responsibility for and that we 
take very seriously, and that we are moving to ensure never 
happens again by following the recommendations that she has 
made. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the pursuit of that very important economic 
development project, and in the very unique environment, at 
least unique for Saskatchewan because we just hadn’t seen land 
prices escalating that rapidly in this province’s — well except 
for maybe its earliest days — in the province’s history. There 
were mistakes made. 
 
But I would argue that the opposition has gone beyond the 
auditor’s findings to make a lot of allegations and to cast 
aspersions not just on members of this House but members of 
the community, members of this community who are not 
particularly strong supporters of any one party because they 
may have gone to a dinner, but who are business people in the 
province of Saskatchewan in Regina and area. 
 
He said earlier, he said I won’t get up and sort of take a run or 
cast any aspersions at anyone else but the government, but 
that’s not been his MO. Ask Denro what his MO is, or ask these 
two individuals. He just sort of writes them off as highly 
connected supporters of the party because they came to a 
dinner, because it suits his political commentary that sometimes 
escalate beyond even what he would want to present as a 
member of the House. 
 
So the auditor also stated that, “For Board members and key 
employees we sampled, including the Board Chair . . . ” and I’ll 
repeat this, who’s the member for Kindersley and the then 
minister, “. . . we did not find any . . . conflict of interest.” 
 
The auditor addressed this as well in a June 30 news release that 
said “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or 
Board of Directors.”  
 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Later in an interview in radio, she indicated . . . I think it was 
the 4th of July. She said, “We didn’t do what is termed a 
forensic audit.” Sometimes members call for a forensic audit. 
But she said, “but in any audit as auditors we’re always looking 
for red flags. Because this is a land transaction, we did look for 
conflicts of interest.”  
 
That’s what the auditor said: “. . . we did look for conflicts of 
interest. We didn’t find evidence of conflict of interest or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course of . . . [their] 
work, so there were no red flags there.”  
 
So we take very seriously the recommendations of the auditor 
with respect to the problems she pointed out on the acquisition. 
But we also will defend the integrity and the position of the 
government as it has been assailed by members opposite even 
when we’ve had independent officers of this legislature say 
something quite different. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier here today has shared that 
he found out, or he’s shared with us that he found out that the 
then minister was in a business relationship with the original 
seller. He shares that when it became public. I mean, it’s 
beyond belief and completely irresponsible that this Premier 
wouldn’t have punted this minister from cabinet, this MLA 
from his caucus. 
 
[18:00] 
 
But my question is simple. So when the minister . . . What has 
the minister or the former minister, the MLA, shared with the 
Premier? Has he admitted that he had knowledge that this 
business interest was who he was doing a deal with? Or is he 
suggesting that he almost did a deal with his business interest 
but somehow didn’t know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, obviously if there was some sort 
of an arrangement the likes of which you’re alleging, he’s 
alleging, that would have been a conflict of interest. I told you 
when we found out about individuals. We were talking about a 
numbered company which we would not do business with. And, 
Mr. Chairman, I would point this out: the auditor interviewed 
everybody involved. I’ll repeat again what the auditor said: 
“For Board members and key employees we sampled, including 
the Board Chair [That’s the minister, the member for 
Kindersley] . . . we did not find any evidence of conflict of 
interest.”  
 
Now maybe you don’t trust us; fair enough. But do you trust the 
auditor to have asked the appropriate questions? She says right 
here in the report, “For Board members and key employees we 
sampled, including the Board Chair . . . we did not find any 
evidence of conflict of interest.” What you’re kind of alleging 
would be a prima facie case for a conflict of interest. The 
auditor, not . . . Don’t worry about taking the MLA for Swift 
Current’s word for it. The independent officer of the legislature 
indicates that with respect to the Chair, the member, the 
minister, there was no conflict of interest. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Didn’t answer the question and . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . No, you didn’t answer the question 
as to when the MLA that still sits in this Assembly, when he 
suggests that he knew, when he found out that he almost did a 

deal with his business interests. 
 
Just on a bit of a different space, different question here. I’m 
wondering what email account the Premier uses with his 
Republican lobbyist from the US [United States]?  
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I have a couple of personal 
email accounts. I’m happy to disclose this because truly it’s the 
member’s business. But I have a couple of personal email 
accounts, none of them that use the government server. And I’m 
home a lot and do a lot of work on the weekend, so some of 
those correspondence, not just with Ambassador Wilkins but 
with others. Even government officials and people from across 
the province would be corresponded on the basis of that private 
email address which I won’t be sharing with members of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Fair on not sharing it with members of 
the House. I respect that response. But it does raise an 
interesting question. I’m not sure what sort of due diligence has 
been done on utilization of a personal account on a matter with 
this American lobbyist, with somebody that certainly is engaged 
in, you know, matters of national importance. And I know a few 
years ago, we asked for some correspondence on what kind of 
dialogue was occurring with this lobbyist, and back then this is 
what the Premier said: 
 

Absolutely not, [and then he won’t share this] Mr. Chair. 
Here we have, engaged on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan, an agent that is representing our diplomatic 
interests, representing commercial interests in the province 
of Saskatchewan. No, we won’t be tabling those, Mr. 
Chairman. It would be irresponsible of the government to 
do it, regardless of the stripe of that government.  

 
If these documents are so sensitive, I’m just wondering what 
sort of due diligence was done to utilize some sort of private 
email or private server for this sort of information. And I guess 
my only question on this is to hear what sort of due diligence 
has occurred, and would the Premier . . . I’m not asking him to 
share the contents with us, not asking him to share his private 
email with us, but will he turn this matter at least over for 
review to the Privacy Commissioner as well as the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner?  
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, I have not checked with the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner on this, Mr. Chair. The Nelson Mullins 
firm, Ambassador Wilkins isn’t lobbying another government, 
not lobbying the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m not sure where the member’s going. I’m not sure what the 
issue is here. We conduct business sometimes on the weekend. 
I’ll use my accounts that I have available on my iPad and we’ll 
be asking questions. 
 
For example, we were engaged with Ambassador Wilkins a lot 
just prior to the recent trip to Washington. Mr. Chair, we had a 
number of meetings booked: Secretary of Commerce, Wilbur 
Ross; Senator of Montana, Steve Daines; Jon Tester, Senator of 
Montana; Rick Perry, Secretary of Energy; Chuck Grassley, one 
of the senior members of the Senate, Senator from Iowa; Joe 
Manchin, Senator of West Virginia. Mr. Chairman we met with 
the head of the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], Scott 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

Pruitt; the president of the director’s office of management and 
budget, which is someone that’s become . . . someone that I 
know, as a result of his connections to the South Carolina 
delegation, Mick Mulvaney.  
 
And, Mr. Chairman we get great value for this. We don’t have 
an office for which we pay over a million, as other provinces 
do. We have a contract, and we provide direction and requests 
to the ambassador to provide reports on how meetings are being 
arranged. There would be nothing in those emails of any 
particular sensitivity. The positions of our province are quite, 
are quite, I make them quite public, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We’d like to continue to promote our leadership in BD3 
[Boundary dam 3]. There would be references to that in the 
email. We were very worried for a time about country of origin 
labelling, when the Americans were going to ignore another 
WTO [World Trade Organization] ruling. So that kind of 
information would be in the email. 
 
We were very worried about the softwood lumber situation. So 
our request to set up meetings to ensure that our case was being 
made on the softwood lumber agreement, that would be part of 
the email that we would send, that we would ask with respect to 
the ambassador, any number of issues around the trade file, 
around NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement].  
 
But, Mr. Chairman, there would be nothing of any particular 
sensitivity in the emails, other than doing the business of the 
province and ensuring the interests of the province are 
appropriately represented in the US capital. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Okay well, maybe, Mr. Chair, but I 
guess . . . So the Premier’s been asked to provide some 
information about these emails, this correspondence, in the past, 
and again the Premier’s response was clear on that side. It said, 
an agent that is . . . He said, “Absolutely not, [first of all that] 
. . . an agent that is representing our diplomatic interests 
representing commercial interests in the province of 
Saskatchewan. No, we won’t be tabling those . . . It would be 
irresponsible of the government to do it, regardless of the stripe 
of that government.” 
 
So it seems that, at that point, the Premier was suggesting that 
there was rather sensitive information, which you’d suspect that 
there certainly could be in this sort of communication. The 
Premier stated that there hasn’t been due diligence or 
engagement with the Privacy Commissioner or with the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner to date. 
 
And I guess my question is just straightforward to the Premier 
right now. I’m not asking him to share those contents with 
Saskatchewan people. I’m not asking him to share his private 
email address. But would he ensure that these email accounts 
are reviewed? This matter is reviewed. The integrity of this 
system is reviewed. The contents of this matter is reviewed, 
both by the Privacy Commissioner and the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner, who are in a position of trust to report out 
whether or not this system is appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s a private account, but 
I’ve taken obvious steps in terms of the security of the account. 
I can share with members that part of the correspondence, with 

respect to the Washington trip, would be very specific to some 
companies who have interests and concerns around Buy 
America provisions, and I do not think it’s appropriate for them 
to be disclosed. I mean anybody can . . . I guess if there’s an 
independent officer of the legislature that feels compelled to 
look at them, that’s one thing. But I would say to the members 
opposite that I’m not sure what sort of a fishing trip you’re on, 
but appropriate measures have been followed in every 
circumstance, with respect to what’s in the emails. And again 
this firm’s not lobbying Saskatchewan; they’re lobbying the US 
government. 
 
I do not think it reasonable to request a review of these things 
given the fact that in certain circumstances, companies, 
individual interests, are being represented because their interests 
and the employees that work for them align with the interests of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well as I say it’s important that that be 
reviewed by the Privacy Commissioner and the Conflict of 
Information Commissioner. We trust them to report out to the 
people of the province. 
 
Shifting gears, you know, significantly but certainly there’s 
many that are observing and waiting for this matter to be 
addressed. Again we see a government that’s giving all sorts of 
giveaways and breaks to the wealthiest and well connected at 
the same time as they’re making cuts for the most vulnerable. 
We see that in mental health of course. We see that as well for 
addictions, and we see that with the cuts that are happening 
through our CBOs. And we see that then with the broken deals 
and the dollars that are being pulled back from our cities. 
 
We see an impact on the cuts to policing as well. This is a really 
troubling combination to police forces and police across our 
province, but also to our communities. And I know it’s been 
relayed to us in meetings with Saskatoon police, Regina police, 
other officers across the province, that the inadequate access to 
mental health and the challenge to access addiction services are 
very real. Couple that with what’s happening in Regina right 
now is a million dollar cut in their budget because of the cuts of 
this province, this leaves policing, but our communities and 
people in a challenging way, all while we see a massive 
increase, a very troubling crisis with utilization of crystal meth. 
And when you chat with police forces across the province and 
members, there’s a direct correlation that they share with the 
violence in our community, with the crime in our community, 
with the guns in our community, and the massive spike, the 
massive utilization of crystal meth. 
 
So I guess my question to the Premier, this is an area that needs 
attention and I beg his attention. We need the investment in 
mental health. We need the investment in addictions. We need 
the investment in policing. We need it in our CBOs. We don’t 
need a giveaway to the largest corporations. Does the Premier 
recognize this very real challenge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 
question. The issues that he raised are very, very important. Mr. 
Chair, we have, since coming to office increased police 
services. And I think there might have been a characterization, a 
mischaracterization of cuts to police services in the member’s 
preamble, where there have not been. 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

Mr. Chair, with respect to some of the current issues that are 
facing us, you know, we noted . . . I’ll get to the issue of opioids 
in a moment here and specifically fentanyl, which is 
increasingly of concern in our province. 
 
You know, we had members on this side of the House led by 
the member for North Battleford engage with stakeholders — 
SARM and SUMA and police officers, the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police], but other police agencies — on the 
issue of rural crime which is a very, very important issue as 
well. And we’re going to see some recommendations and some 
action flowing from that. There was $1 million actually in the 
budget for new initiatives with respect to rural crime.  
 
I’d expect that we would also want to provide some support for 
our police agencies in the big cities who are dealing with an 
outbreak, whether it’s opiates . . . Fentanyl in particular is an 
issue. We are working hard to enhance the availability of 
naloxone, which is that spray that can immediately counteract 
the impacts of fentanyl. We’re working hard to make that 
available to our police as well. 
 
And you know, I hope members opposite will recognize it’s 
been our government that’s actually funded new additional 
positions amongst our policing agencies. The work of ICE 
[Internet child exploitation] to protect children in our province 
has been remarkable and we’ve celebrated their efforts in the 
House. 
 
So I want members to know that this remains a priority, and I 
want members to know that we, far from reducing resources 
here, we announced in the budget additional money to support 
the work of the committee led by the member for North 
Battleford. And we’re engaged with our police chiefs on some 
of the other key issues that are in our . . . very concerningly are 
more prevalent in our big cities. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Do we have time for questions or . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s it. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’m being told by our House leaders that 
the time has expired at this point. I just want to follow up for a 
moment though on that question. The response around fentanyl 
is very much appropriate, and we need the response there, but 
crystal meth is something different and it needs a response. And 
when you see the cuts that are happening with mental health 
and addictions and then the cuts that are being forced on 
policing through the cuts to the municipalities, this makes it 
really, really challenging. 
 
[18:15] 
 
I’d like to get around to just sort of closing here today. And I’d 
like to thank certainly the officials that are here today and the 
Premier for his, well the Premier for his time here today. But to 
say that . . . to categorize this budget and the actions of this 
government as anything but a betrayal of Saskatchewan people 
and damaging, would be not fair. 
 
And the choices that we see of this government to gift and give 
away $100 million to the most wealthy and well connected, the 
highest wage earners, the biggest corporations at a time where 

they take away the critical supports and the lives of the most 
marginalized, the lives of the most vulnerable, at a time where 
they make people and families pay the price for years of the 
mismanagement and scandal and waste, just isn’t right. 
 
And then when we see, on so many fronts, we’re dealing with a 
government and a Premier who sadly just isn’t straight with 
Saskatchewan people on file after file. Desperate sell-off 
schemes and attempts of our Crown corporations without even 
having the decency or backbone to go to the owners of those 
Crown corporations, the shareholders of those Crown 
corporations, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Or the cuts on our already strained and stressed classrooms, 
despite taking more out of property taxes. Or the takeovers that 
this government conducts on front after front, from NORTEP 
through to our school boards through to our health regions 
through to Wascana Park, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine. 
 
A government that clearly doesn’t have trust in Saskatchewan 
people to lead and do their job, and a Sask Party that’s lost its 
way but seems to think it needs to have full control of 
everything, which is pretty problematic when you see a 
government that can’t even get the small stuff right, like a land 
deal out at the GTH, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s good reason why so many across this province who 
work so hard every day, people and families and businesses and 
farms, are feeling dismayed and feeling deceived, Mr. Speaker. 
What I’ll convey to them is we’re going to continue to work to 
stand up for the province we all love, to stand up for people, 
and to fight to build our province together. 
 
I thank the Premier for his time here today. I thank the officials 
for their time here today. And I certainly thank all the civil 
servants that work all across government. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Chair: — Seeing no other members wishing to enter into 
the debate, I would ask the Premier if he would like to make 
some concluding comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I would, very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
I want to thank my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, 
for his questions, for his time tonight, for his commitment and 
dedication to the province of Saskatchewan as well as his 
specific constituents. 
 
I want to acknowledge the fact that this is likely the last time we 
will do this, given the timetable that’s been announced for the 
New Democratic leadership. And so we’ve only had, I guess, a 
couple of occasions for it. But I do . . . He’s passionate about 
the province and it comes across certainly in the questions he 
has to ask. I don’t always agree with, well I rarely agree with 
the preamble to the questions, but it’s important that they’re 
asked, Mr. Chair, and it’s important that they’re answered, even 
if the answer does not quite meet the test of the person that’s 
posing the question or members across the way. 
 
Mr. Chair, this was a very difficult budget that we introduced in 
Saskatchewan. And there’s been an interesting trend that’s been 
happening over the last couple of quarters, I would say, 
whereby the economy of the province of Saskatchewan is 



May 10, 2017 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

strengthening, but the budget of the province, the fiscal health 
of Saskatchewan, has not been improving. Usually that doesn’t 
happen. And that’s why a lot of people in Saskatchewan just 
don’t . . . It’s hard for all of us to understand, well, how can 
there be this divergence because it seems to be usually the case 
that the economy and the budget of the government moves in 
tandem. The economy creates more tax revenue and the 
government can do more things and avoid deficits and that sort 
of thing. But we are seeing that reality now. 
 
And here’s perhaps — maybe it’s anecdotally; I think it’s more 
than that — here’s perhaps part of the reason why. I live in 
Swift Current, which is right in the heart of Saskatchewan’s 
oldest oil field, and we have a lot . . . I have neighbours 
involved in the energy sector, Mr. Chairman. I would walk our 
dog down the alley, and visit with one of them in particular who 
had been out of work for 18 months. He had been an 
independent contractor, so employment insurance wasn’t really 
an option for him. And moreover, he had been wise and put 
away a lot of money for a rainy day, much as the government 
did. And just like the government, his rainy day fund had ended 
because he was out of work for so very long. 
 
Well I’m not sure as to his current status right now, but I’m 
hopeful that he’s going back to work or is back to work because 
so many, so many are in the energy sector in my hometown. 
They are going back to work. They may be going back to work 
for a little bit less than what they made before. I think at this 
count the wage reduction is a lot greater than 3.5 per cent that 
we all took as members, but they’re heading back to work. 
 
Mr. Chairman, they’re heading back to work because the 
industry, the oil industry in particular, has adjusted to 50 bucks 
West Texas. And it was obviously a lot higher and that 
adjustment period took long, but they’ve driven their costs 
down so that there can be some activity again. And I think the 
results of drilling reports here recently — I look at the member 
for Weyburn — have been very, very positive, and the member 
for Cannington, and all of those of us who are fortunate enough 
to represent the energy sector. And they’re drilling again, even 
though today I think it was 45 bucks, not that I look every hour 
at the price of oil. But the prices remain low and yet the activity 
continues. 
 
And therein might lie the answer to the question the people 
have asked, which is, if the economy is strengthening and 
getting stronger and stronger, why then does the government 
need to take these steps in the budget? And the answer is that 
the economy is adjusting to lower commodity prices, and the 
most important factor: people getting back to work is 
happening, but the government is not generating the revenues 
that it used to generate. 
 
And so now for the last three years we’ve been over a billion 
dollars off in resource revenue. And the problem is going to be 
intractable, it looks like, for some period of time. I haven’t met 
very many experts who are forecasting much beyond $60 for 
the mid-term and maybe even longer than that. 
 
Prices have fallen here again lately because of what’s 
happening in Texas and Oklahoma, and a new norm. Potash 
prices have been low for a very long time. Uranium prices are 
low. We didn’t talk about the closure of Rabbit Lake, although 

the member did mention the mine closure up north, and that’s 
also driven by commodity prices. 
 
Cameco, our great uranium company headquartered in 
Saskatoon, had a customer in Japan since the ’70s. And that 
customer is no longer there as Japan, frankly, actually is in part 
moving to coal as a result of them seeking alternatives in the 
wake of Fukushima. And so while they’re slowly considering 
their nuclear fleet again; that industry’s also been hit hard. 
 
And so if there were forecasts previously — and there were 
because we relied on them — that these commodity prices were 
going to come back, government took certain decisions and 
actions on the basis of that forecast and planning. Clearly 
though, the forecasters, as is the case from time to time, and all 
of us could be included in this . . . It hasn’t been the case that 
there would be this comeback in prices. 
 
So all of that to say this, Mr. Chair: we’ve decided that it’s time 
now to move away from such a reliance on royalty, on resource 
revenues in Saskatchewan. We’ve decided also that we would 
take that opportunity because it strengthens the economy, 
because economists recommend it and because people like 
former Premier Calvert agreed. 
 
We’re going to move to lower taxes on business, corporate 
taxes, and income taxes and move towards consumption, and 
that we would also make some expenditure reductions so that 
we can balance our budget in three years because that’s the 
cornerstone of our growth plan. 
 
And so I would say that that has caused, obviously created a lot 
of opportunities for criticism from members opposite and 
stakeholders, the people in the province who are concerned. 
And I understand that. We understand that.  
 
But this budget is not really about this year, this budget is about 
two and three and four and five years from now so that we can 
put ourselves on a steady track, on a stronger track, on a 
sustainable track that is not going to be on that roller coaster 
anymore. And while we do it we’ll lower some taxes on income 
and business taxes that we’ve talked about here today that we 
know will strengthen our economy, Mr. Chair, because it’s the 
economy that pays for all of the other questions, programming 
that my hon. friend raised quite rightly today, whether it’s 
mental health, education, services in the North, highway 
infrastructure. The only way we can pay for those is if we have 
a strong economy that supports a broad tax base — at low rates, 
I would argue, but a broad tax base. 
 
And so in order to do that, we’ve had to undertake the 
beginning of a three-year plan, and that has formed the basis for 
the decisions that we have made, Mr. Chair. But make no 
mistake, our commitment and dedication is to this province, and 
not just to the people we serve today but their kids and their 
grandkids. That’s how we’re motivated on this side of the 
House, and we understand we need to be accountable for the 
decisions we’ve made. And some will be critical, but I just want 
to assure people watching and members on that side that our 
motivation is about the short-, the mid-, and the long-term 
interests of this province, about this generation and the next. 
And so we’ll accept the criticism and be accountable for the 
budget that we passed. 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2017 

And again, I want to thank the member opposite for his 
questions today. I want to thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank 
our officials and through the permanent head, the head of the 
public service, Ms. Koch. I also want to acknowledge and thank 
all of those who serve in public service in the province in terms 
of health care and education, over on sort of the third party side 
of things, in executive government as well as the Crown 
corporations. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — We will proceed to vote the estimates, and at 
this time we will excuse the officials. 
 
We will proceed to vote the estimates. Central management and 
services, (EX01) in the sum of $5,648,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Premier’s office, (EX07) in the 
amount of $479,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Cabinet planning, (EX04) in the 
amount of $1,107,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Cabinet secretariat, (EX05) in the 
amount of $451,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Communications office, (EX03) in the 
amount of $1,319,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. House business and research, (EX08) in 
the amount of $255,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Members of Executive Council, 
(EX06). This is a statutory amount of 133,000 and does not 
need to be voted. 
 
Intergovernmental Affairs (EX10) in the amount $4,243,000, is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Francophone affairs (EX11), in the 
amount of $690,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Lieutenant Governor’s office, (EX12) 
in the amount of $707,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
following 12 months ending March 31, 2018, the following 
sums for Executive Council: $14,899,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. There being no further business before 
this committee, I would invite a member of the committee to 
move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave 
to sit again. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
[18:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I call the Assembly back to order. I recognize 
the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. It now being past the time of 
adjournment, this Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 
10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 18:30.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Correction Regarding a Member’s Statement  
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2447 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2448 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2448 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2448 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2453 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2449 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2450 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2450 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2450 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2450 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2451 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Sports Hall of Fame Induction Banquet 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2451 
 Legacy of the Battle of the Atlantic 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2451 
 Caring for our Watersheds Competition 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2451 
 Kenneth Levene Graduate School of Business Dinner 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2452 
 Opening of Newly Renovated Martensville High School 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2452 
 Regina Surgical Centre Celebrates Fifth Anniversary 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2452 
 Regina Bypass Design Builders’ Safety Record 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2453 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Closing of Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2453 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2453 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2454 
 Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2454 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2454 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2454 
 Carbon Pricing and Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2455 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2455 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2456 
 Grants-in-Lieu Program 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2456 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2456 
 Government’s Fiscal Management and Reporting of Political Donations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2457 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2457 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2457 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2458 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2459 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2460 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2458 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2459 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (SaskPower and SaskEnergy) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2458 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2459 
 Bill No. 50 — The Provincial Capital Commission Act 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2459 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2460 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


