


















































May 29, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 66A  TUESDAY, MAY 29, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4391 
 May 29, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 
introduce some very special guests that have joined us here 
today, Mr. Speaker, and that is some of our Olympic and 
Paralympic athletes, Mr. Speaker, their teams, and their families 
that are here today. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just a few months 
removed from the Winter Olympics in South Korea, and at 
those Olympics we saw Canada and Saskatchewan put in 
another outstanding performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier today we had the opportunity to celebrate 
those performances here at the legislature and to acknowledge 
the tremendous commitment of our athletes and those who 
support them — the coaches, the officials, and the families. 
Some of these special guests are with us in our Assembly today 
and each of them will be introduced by their MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly]. Mr. Speaker, our athletes deserve 
our respect, our admiration for the effort they put in to compete 
against the very best in the world. 
 
And it’s been said that the will to win means nothing without 
the will to prepare. Well preparing for the Olympics takes years 
and sometimes — and many times — decades. Years of training 
for performances that often come down to just a few seconds. 
Mr. Speaker, you have to be a very special kind of person to 
make that kind of a commitment. You need to have very special 
people supporting you in your journey. And in Saskatchewan 
we’re fortunate to have an abundance of those people, and they 
are a tremendous representative of our province. 
 
They did us proud in South Korea with their performance and 
with the dignity, grace, and class that they brought to their 
competition, to our competition, Mr. Speaker. And in 
Saskatchewan we are proud of these Olympians and 
Paralympians, and I would ask all members to welcome our 
guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
Premier in welcoming the athletes, officials, and coaches who 
have joined us today — Olympians and Paralympians. It was 
incredibly inspiring to get to join you earlier today and hear 
some more of your stories, the drive and determination that 
you’ve demonstrated, the commitment to excellence and, as the 
Premier said, the years you’ve put into this. I just want to join 
the Premier and ask all the members to join me in thanking 
these athletes, officials, and coaches for joining us today and for 
doing what they’ve done to make Saskatchewan and Canada 
proud. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce Marie Wright, bronze medallist in wheelchair curling 
at the PyeongChang 2018 Paralympic Winter Games. Marie is 
from Moose Jaw and has taken curling by storm in the 10 short 
years since she began playing the sport. 
 
Marie was part of the first Saskatchewan team to be represented 
at the Canadian Wheelchair Curling Championship, and was 
second to skip Jim Armstrong at the 2017 World Wheelchair 
Curling Championships. 
 
When Marie is not on the ice, she is volunteering her time 
officiating curling, including being a timer at the 2010 Winter 
Games. Thank you, Marie, for all your commitment to sport, 
both on and off the ice. And please join me in welcoming Marie 
to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, somebody that I spent a 
lot of time with playing hockey when we were growing up, and 
that’s Curtis Minard, originally from Weyburn. Curt is a 
para-snowboarder. He competed in the men’s snowboard cross 
and banked slalom in the 2018 Paralympic Winter Games in 
PyeongChang. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Curt has a lot to be proud of. Since he began 
competing in para-snowboarding in February of 2016, including 
winning the Canada national championship and taking home 
bronze in the 2017 World Cup final, not only has Curt 
competed in snowboarding, but he also helped Canada capture 
gold in the 2012 world championships with the standing 
amputee hockey team. Mr. Speaker, Curt truly exemplifies the 
motto that he lives by, that results are limitless if you believe in 
yourself. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming Curt Minard back to Saskatchewan 
and back to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce — actually re-introduce — Wayne Kiel, head coach 
of the bronze medal-winning wheelchair curling team at the 
Paralympics this past year. This is the second time that Wayne 
has represented Canada on the coaching side at the 
Paralympics, being an assistant coach in Sochi, and of course 
this year in PyeongChang with the, as I said, bronze 
medal-winning team and Marie Wright, who was already 
introduced. 
 
Wayne is a veteran when it comes to curling. Somebody said he 
began curling in 1960. I don’t believe that, Mr. Speaker. He had 
to be one at that time. But, Mr. Speaker, he’s been involved in 
the provincial game for a very, very long time. His involvement 
in Saskatchewan includes being a CurlSask high performance 
coach for many years, helping develop the youth curlers of our 



4392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Wayne and the province wants to 
thank Wayne for his drive, his passion, and dedication and the 
love of our provincial sport. Mr. Speaker, he’s truly made a 
difference in our provincial game and we want to thank him for 
that. Please welcome Wayne to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce Kali Christ, long track speed skater at the 2018 
Olympic Winter Games. Kali competed in the 1500 speed 
skating long track. This was not her first Olympics that she 
appeared in. She competed in the Sochi Winter Olympics in 
2014 in the 1500 and the 1000-metre team pursuit. 
 
Kali’s been skating since the young age of three and she 
became interested in speed skating at the age of seven after she 
saw it on TV. She honed her speed-skating skills as a member 
of the Regina Speed Skating Club and developed into an 
Olympic athlete, competing in two consecutive Winter Olympic 
Games. She has made Saskatchewan very proud. Please join me 
in welcoming Kali to her Legislative Assembly. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce Marsha Hudey, an Olympic speed skater who hails 
from White City. You could say Marsha was born into speed 
skating. Her father, two brothers, and her sister are all speed 
skaters, so this obviously paved the way for her. Since then, 
Marsha has placed in many international competitions and was 
part of the PyeongChang and Sochi Olympic Team for the 
500-metre speed skating. Congratulations, Marsha, on your 
outstanding accomplishments. Please join me in welcoming 
Marsha to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to introduce Adam Burwell, snowboard coach for the 
2018 Olympic Winter Games. Adam has been Olympic 
snowboard coach for both Sochi and PyeongChang Olympic 
Games, coaching Saskatchewan’s own Mark McMorris to two 
bronze medals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When Adam is not coaching, he is working on telling stories 
through film. One of his recent pieces is the documentary film 
Unbroken: The Snowboard Life of Mark McMorris. 
Congratulations, Adam. Please join me in welcoming Adam to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce Ken McArton, an official at the 2018 games. Ken was 
a curling game umpire for the Olympic Games in both 
PyeongChang and Sochi. Ken began volunteering as an 
officiator 30 years ago. Since then, Ken has been an umpire for 
many national and international curling events, watching one 

rock at a time and seeing the progression of the sport over the 
years. Thank you, Ken, for your hard work and dedication. 
Please join me in welcoming Ken to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to add a few comments to what we’ve heard already from 
various members. Our Olympic athletes not only brought 
excitement to our living rooms this past winter as we cheered 
them on, but through their commitment, dedication, and hard 
work they brought our province inspiration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some of the world’s best athletes among 
us here today, all of whom are deeply connected to our great 
province. They have shown our youth, our province, and our 
country that your dreams of wearing the red and white on the 
international stage are obtainable. I want to thank each and 
every one of them for contributing to sport in Saskatchewan and 
for being great role models to our youth. 
 
I’d like to mention, if I could, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Olympic and Paralympic athletes who are not able to be here 
today, just to put that on the record. 
 
Paralympian Brittany Hudak competed in five events at the 
winter games and won a bronze medal in her performance in the 
twelve-and-a-half-kilometre biathlon. 
 
Kurt Oatway took home a gold medal in men’s super G 
para-alpine event in addition to competing in the men’s 
downhill, slalom, giant slalom, and super combined sitting 
events. 
 
Coach Ken Babey was the head coach of the para-ice hockey 
team. 
 
Kaspar Wirz was the para-nordic coach for the Republic of 
Korea. 
 
Emily Clark and Brigette Lacquette helped Canada’s Olympic 
women’s hockey team win a silver medal. 
 
Linden Vey is a bronze medallist with the Olympic men’s 
hockey team. 
 
Ben Coakwell competed in the men’s four-man bobsleigh. 
 
Mark McMorris. Mark won bronze in the snowboard slopestyle 
event as well as competed in the big air event. 
 
Ben Hebert competed on Team Koe in Olympic men’s curling. 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4393 

Willie Desjardins and Dave King were coaches on the bronze 
medal-winning men’s Olympic hockey team. 
 
Morgan Alexander and Lyndon Rush coached the Olympic 
bobsleigh team. 
 
Kelly Shafer represented her home country with Team Scotland 
in curling. 
 
Curling coach Gerry Adam coached Team Switzerland in 
PyeongChang. 
 
Thank you very much for your commitment to sport and for 
serving as role models in our communities. You make our 
province so very proud. Thanks for being here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to ask for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an extended 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 
number of people that are seated in the gallery. There are a lot 
of people actually today that are seated in the gallery. I want to 
recognize a few that are from my constituency, as well as a 
couple of others. I would like to . . . Because it’s very common 
for us to recognize the athletes and the coaches, but we know 
there’s a lot of support behind them. There has to be a lot of 
support behind them. 
 
So in the gallery is Margaret Kiel, Wayne’s wife who is a 
tireless — I can’t see her but I know she’s back there; I saw her 
earlier — she’s a tireless volunteer in the Balgonie area. In 
pretty much every activity that goes on, you’ll see Margaret 
working, and just does an amazing job and obviously a great 
support for Wayne. 
 
Their daughter Kimberly Reynolds is also in the gallery, who’s 
an amazing artist and has artwork in many different galleries 
across Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
As well as Ken Bakken is up there as well. Ken Bakken also is 
a tireless volunteer when it comes to curling. He along with 
Wayne have got so many youth involved in the game. We don’t 
have people just start at the Olympics. We have people start at 
the grassroots, and that’s where Wayne and Ken have done such 
an amazing job to make that happen. 
 
Also in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Barb and Brian 
Burwell, Adam’s mom and dad, who have raised an amazing 
son obviously, but also have had him away from home an awful 
lot. 
 
And who I was thinking was here but just could not make it was 
Adam’s wife, Jennifer Burwell, and their young son who 

obviously couldn’t be here. 
 
But you know, when you think of the athletes and you see the 
pictures of them and you see them in the red and white and how 
proud we are, we have to remember all the work that other 
people have done and the sacrifices, not only the athletes, but 
the family and the family members have put in so that our 
athletes can hopefully — and they do — make us very, very 
proud. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So I just want to recognize those family members that are in the 
gallery today, not to mention the countless family members that 
aren’t here today that go a long ways to making us proud as 
citizens of the province. 
 
And last but certainly not least, I’d like to introduce my wife 
who is seated in the gallery as well, Cindy. I think about every 
four years I get to introduce her. Thank heavens there are 
Olympics because she would not show up in this building. So 
anyway I just . . . 
 
It has been a very trying year, a little over a year, I guess 
probably about 14 or 15 months. You know, sometimes when 
you go through injuries, naïveté is great. But when you’re part 
of the medical profession, you don’t get to be quite as naive as I 
was. And certainly it all worked out. But certainly her medical 
profession background and her support allowed our family to 
get whatever recognition it got. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these guests 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone in recognizing some family members that are 
joining Curt Minard here at the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Before I do, I don’t want to forget though. I do want to 
introduce 16 students, grade 7 and 8 students from Gladmar 
Regional School in Gladmar. They’re here with their teacher, 
Chris Abtosway, as well chaperones Hayley LaBatte and Tannis 
Axten. Mr. Speaker, we’ve already had an opportunity to meet 
and they had some questions. They also got a tour of the 
building, as well as got to see the cabinet room and meet the 
Premier and see the Premier’s office. 
 
I also want to recognize Chris. He’s not just a teacher in my 
constituency, but was a neighbour just down the hallway at 
residence in university. And I got to know Chris at that time, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s brought a couple of classes now to the 
Legislative Assembly. So I’d ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming the students from Gladmar Regional School. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet and back to the 
original reason why I got up, Mr. Speaker, so I just want to 
recognize a couple of individuals that are here supporting Curt 
Minard. Mr. Speaker. I’ll just say this: I don’t have time to do it 
today, but Curt has an incredible story, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would encourage everyone to find the story and the journey that 



4394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

he has been. I first learned about that incredible journey when 
his dad Brian Minard came to see me in my constituency office, 
Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions and talked about really 
the battle that Curt was fighting. And so I want to recognize 
Brian and his wife, Irene, who is here, as well as Curt’s fiancée, 
Heidi, for them being here at the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in the nearly 12 years that I’ve been a 
member of the Legislative Assembly, I think this is the first 
time that I have an opportunity to welcome my mom to the 
Legislative Assembly. My mom is here today. She’s good 
friends with Brian and Irene, and so she wanted to be here. She 
did a lot of work in supporting Curt at the Paralympics and 
getting a flag signed by people from in and around Weyburn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, knowing my mom as I do, I know she’s 
sitting up there on pins and needles, nervous for what is about 
to take place in this Chamber. And I would just say, it’s okay, 
Mom. I think I’m getting the hang of it; I think we’ll be okay. 
And certainly the members of the opposition can help me out 
with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker — and I had an opportunity to share this with the 
students from Gladmar — I was in about grade 3 or grade 4 
when I first toured this building as a part of a school trip. A 
group of students from Halbrite School toured this building, and 
that night I went home and told my mom that I knew what I 
wanted to do, what I wanted to be when I grew up. And, Mr. 
Speaker, so to that point I would just say this: Mom, you could 
have talked me out of this. We could have had a discussion 
about this. 
 
But no, I want to thank my mom for all of her love and support, 
and I also want to acknowledge Lee Anderson who is my 
mother’s partner, soon to be my stepfather. They are getting 
married this summer — crazy kids — Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can say on behalf of my family and my brother and 
my sister that we are very blessed to have Lee in my mom’s life 
and in our life. And so I would ask, Mr. Speaker, to welcome 
my mother, Laurie Tracey, as well as Lee Anderson, to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
tremendous honour to have so many esteemed guests and 
champions within our Assembly here today. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to also welcome guests seated in the 
east gallery and on the floor of the Assembly here today. These 
are many people that are living with disabilities within our 
province, and many people, many advocates for people living 
with disabilities in the province. I want to say thank you to this 
group for their courageous personal stories, their voices for 
others around quality of life and around rights, and to let them 
know that their work is important. 
 
I also want to recognize one of my constituents that’s here 
today, Jamie Ellis, on the floor of the Assembly here. You 
won’t find a bigger Pats fan than Jamie. It’s an honour to have 
you here today, Jamie, and I know he would’ve been pulling for 
the Pats all the way through to that final game within the 

Memorial Cup. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these very fine guests to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, today in your gallery I’d 
like to introduce to everyone students from the Aboriginal 
Youth Entrepreneurship Program, which is a strategic initiative 
led by the Saskatoon Tribal Council. You’re going to hear more 
about each of the individuals from individual members, as well 
as through a member’s statement. 
 
But we have student representatives from the AEC 
[Almightyvoice Education Centre] Business Club from One 
Arrow First Nation, Muskoday First Nation Business Club, the 
Mistawasis Nêhiyawak Business Club, and the Kinistin 
Saulteaux First Nation Business Club. 
 
But I’d also like to especially recognize the Aboriginal youth 
entrepreneur coordinator, who is Joe Taylor — he’s from 
Tisdale — who is supposedly retired, but I know is spending 
countless hours motivating our Aboriginal youth in the 
province. I’d like to ask all members to welcome our Aboriginal 
youth entrepreneurs and their mentors to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce three individuals seated in your 
gallery. I believe all three of whom are which, or at least two at 
least, are constituents of mine: Chris Gust, who is here; Serge 
Dubé, who is also here; and his partner, Wendy Saul, who are 
all here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Chris is an individual I’ve had the opportunity to know for the 
past few years since getting involved in politics. He’s a huge 
leader in the community. He’s a big, passionate advocate for 
community supports for workers, and it’s great to have him 
here. Serge is also a leader in his community as well. He has 
had a long history of teaching in Regina. And I won’t give 
much more away because he’s here for a member’s statement 
that I’ll be giving later. 
 
It’s wonderful to see all three of them here in this gallery this 
afternoon. And I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce the group 
individually from the AEC Business Club from One Arrow 
First Nation, and I’d ask them to rise as I read off their name. 
First we have Stephan Littlepine, Skylar Prosper, Eddie 
Prosper, Alexis Almightyvoice, Chanelle Smallchild, Eve 
Daniels, and Alida Kaskamin. And their mentor is Patrick 
Gardypie. 
 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4395 

Now from the Muskoday First Nations Business Club, and I’d 
ask them also to please rise: Braiden Crain, Tessa Tait, Aleah 
Taite, Alexander McGillivray, Shanice Beauchene, Kassandra 
Bear, and their mentors, Barry Bear and Cheryl Murphy. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to take to my feet in this Assembly and acknowledge a guest 
seated in the east gallery. I note with us here today is Leslie 
Blyth, and Leslie started her teaching career in Lang, 
Saskatchewan, I believe. And I’m just thrilled to have the 
opportunity from this place in the Assembly to wish her very 
well on her impending retirement I understand is coming up 
very soon. 
 
Leslie was an inspiration to many learners in that small school 
and I know she’s ending up her career teaching in Balgonie. 
And I just wanted to take this opportunity and invite all 
members to join me in wishing her well, thanking her for her 
service to her students, and wishing her well in her retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have teams from 
the Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneurship Program here today 
seated in your gallery. And I would like to introduce to you and 
through, the Kinistin Saulteaux First Nations business club and 
also the managing owners of Tasty Towne Catering. And I’m 
looking forward to them catering one of our events. 
 
We have with us here today their mentor and teacher, Cyrus 
Smokeyday, and Cyrus, I’ll ask if you’ll stand. And the team’s 
up-and-coming entrepreneurs: Justin Night; Wesley Braebant; 
and the Scott boys, Liam and Tanner. 
 
We also have here with us today, Chris Ochuschayoo, and he’s 
from the Mistawasis First Nation. He’s another young 
entrepreneur who is building and marketing eagle feather boxes. 
And if I’m not mistaken, he managed to secure a sale to our 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have here in your gallery a group of grade 
7 and 8 students from the town of Star City and they’re my first 
school group, so I’m pretty excited about that. And unlike the 
students from the constituency of our Minister of Environment, 
they didn’t get to see the Premier or his big office, but they did 
have ice cream sandwiches for lunch. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these young leaders are here with their 
teachers Dwane Burke and Morag Wagner. And I would like all 
the members to help me welcome them, as well as the 
entrepreneur teams from Kinistin and Mistawasis to their 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to join the minister and my colleagues from the 
government side in welcoming all the Aboriginal business 

students that are here today. I just want to say from the 
perspective of the opposition . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And in my own language, I’d just tell them I’m so proud that 
they’re here today and to not be afraid to take their rightful 
place in this Assembly. This building belongs to you. Because 
as an Aboriginal person from the North, I’m very proud when 
we have students that join us and their leaders, the business 
leaders that are teaching them the basic skills of business 
development. 
 
And I too, on behalf of the official opposition, welcome the 
students here and I encourage you to continue on your path 
towards economic and social justice for the people, the 
indigenous people across the entire province, and wish you the 
very best in your studies. 
 
And also, another Aboriginal hero of mine, Chris Gust, who is 
with us today. Mr. Speaker, I’m so very proud of the many 
Aboriginal people that have taken their rightful place, and to 
point out to them, you’re the best; keep it up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery we have 51 grade 4 students from École St. Angela 
Merici school here in Regina — that’s a lot of kids — 
accompanied by their teachers Rachel Courchene, Natalie 
Savoie, Sarah Honeysett, Mitch Draude, Tricia Saul, and Helen 
Waters. So I have an opportunity to meet with the students after 
question period and we’ll have some time for questions and 
answers, and I look forward to spending time with these 
wonderful grade 4 students from Regina. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
you and through you I’d like to also welcome the students from 
St. Angela, but one special student in particular: Cassidy Oyka. 
She has become a very good friend of ours. Her mom and dad 
are great friends with our family, and she is just a brilliant 
young girl. She’s a great dancer, and actually her and her sister 
are part of the reason I got elected, because you just can’t say 
no to those two girls on the doorstep. 
 
And they’ve been very good. They go to the same daycare as 
our kids, Jameson, Nickson, and Claire, and Cassidy kind of 
looks after them when we’re away and she always has a smile 
on her face. So I want to say welcome to your Assembly, 
Cassidy, and we’ll see you soon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a couple of 
introductions as well. First I’d like to introduce a former 
constituent of mine sitting in your gallery, Parker Parent. Stand 
up, Parker. Parker and his family recently moved to Regina, is 



4396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

now a constituent of Regina University. Parker was very helpful 
to me for many years, including campaigning, door knocking, 
attending parades, and many other events. Parker has taken a 
great interest in politics on a provincial, federal, and municipal 
level, and he has even gone as far as to create a PowerPoint 
presentation for his class to help explain the different levels of 
government and how they operate. 
 
His dream is to become a lawyer and a politician when he’s 
older. We might have to talk about that. But Parker is also busy 
in his community helping with food drives, donating toys to the 
hospital, and adopting families at various holidays. Parker is 
looking forward to helping out in his new constituency. And 
he’s also very excited that his favourite team, the Washington 
Capitals, are playing for the Stanley Cup this year. I would like 
all my colleagues to join me in welcoming Parker to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, there’s a gentleman seated in your 
gallery that’s familiar to quite a few of us, Mr. Tony Fiacco. 
Tony, he ran for us in 2007 and 2011 and he works in Central 
Services for IT [information technology] as a regional support 
analyst. And on top of that, in his spare time runs a company 
called First Choice Designated Driver Service with 18 people 
he works with here and eight in Saskatoon, helping make sure 
our people get home safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to join with my friend opposite to 
welcome Tony Fiacco to his Assembly. I think he’s seated 
behind the clock. There he is right there. Tony’s certainly a 
good person and has a wonderful family and he runs a really 
important business and service within our community as well. 
I’ve gotten to know Tony and his family over the years. I’ve 
had to run against him twice in two different elections, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s a very impressive and dedicated candidate as 
well. He’s somebody who’s active as a citizen within our 
community. So it’s my pleasure to welcome Tony Fiacco to his 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I ask for leave for an extended 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I really don’t want to ask this question. The 
member has asked leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Before I get going, I want to give a shout-out to the 
Minister of Agriculture, who says he’s feeling left out. He 
hasn’t been introduced, so we’ll just . . . And the only other two 
people in the gallery who have not yet been introduced, Mr. 
Speaker, and I apologize to them for this, but my parents are 
here. 

And it’s the very first time I’ve had the opportunity to welcome 
my parents into the legislature. My father Lloyd, if you could 
wave. There, yes. They’re mad at me right now because I’m 
making them do that. But you know, I have the luxury, Mr. 
Speaker, of going home every night to my family, unlike many 
of my colleagues here. And my parents have played a really 
instrumental role in making sure that my family is looked after 
when I’m not able to be there. And so I’m very grateful to them 
for that. 
 
My father was a tradesman and a small-business owner. He 
helped create a lot of jobs for other people and a livelihood for 
our family. He’s a fisherman and a game hunter. He competed 
in the Walleye Trail throughout Saskatchewan, and so I’ve had 
the distinction of visiting most of the lakes in the province, 
probably at a time when I didn’t appreciate it quite as much as I 
should have. My mom worked for the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] for many, many years and also travelled 
around the province teaching payroll classes. She was a great 
sleepover host and very fierce with a wooden spoon for my 
sister when she misbehaved, of course. 
 
I just want to thank them very much for all they do to keep my 
family going when I’m not able to be around. They’re great 
grandparents to my kids. I’m very proud of you, and welcome 
to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased not to 
request an extended leave. Well, Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you in your gallery I’d like to introduce Dennis and 
Hildred Richardson. They’re sitting in the back row. While 
they’re both mostly retired, Mr. Speaker, Dennis had worked as 
a financial planner in the banking industry and I, along with the 
Minister of Justice, had the good fortune to serve alongside 
Hildred on the Saskatoon Public School Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you the spirited debates that we’ve had in this 
legislature kind of remind me of some of those days that we had 
on the school board when we were there. We certainly valued 
Hildred’s contribution to the school board, Mr. Speaker, and 
some of the ideas that she had brought forward back then 
formed the framework of a number of things that we did on the 
school board, Mr. Speaker, that are still being done by the 
school division today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, politics is never far from Hildred and from Dennis 
and certainly not without their opinion, whether that’s 
Saskatchewan politics, Mr. Speaker, or the current situation that 
is going on in British Columbia. 
 
But they spend, Mr. Speaker, most of their time in Comox, 
British Columbia, but they have a number of reasons to return 
to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. They have a cabin at Emma Lake, 
just down the beach from my brother. But in spite of that, they 
still come back to Emma Lake, Mr. Speaker. And their son, Mr. 
Speaker, who works in Executive Council here in the building, 
we certainly value his contribution, Mr. Speaker, and his 
friendship. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d welcome all members of the 
legislature to welcome Dennis and Hildred here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to welcome a number of guests as 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4397 

well. Leslie Blyth, good luck on your retirement. Good seeing 
you. Anybody else didn’t get introduced? But I welcome 
everybody, and thanks for your patience. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to provide trapping 
licence exemptions for residents 65 years or older. The trappers 
are a very important group of people that maintain traditional 
values in Saskatchewan; the fur harvesting industry provides 
many economic benefits to the province, and the province has 
exemptions for fishing licences for residents over 65 years or 
older, but there are no age exemptions for trappers yet. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly call upon the Sask Party 
government to immediately show their support for 
Saskatchewan trappers and provide a trapping licence 
exemption for Saskatchewan residents over 65 years of 
age. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of the North. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Recognizing the North Central Hockey League 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there is a minor hockey league 
in northern Saskatchewan keeping kids busy playing the sport 
they love. The North Central Hockey League has teams from 
Montreal Lake, Pinehouse Lake, La Ronge, Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band, Stanley Mission, and Southend. There are a total 
of 16 teams in the novice, atom, and peewee divisions, and over 
250 hockey players in the league are now registered with 
Saskatchewan Hockey Association. Each division plays a 
12-game regular season schedule, followed by playoffs. 
 
I was fortunate enough to be invited to the atom and peewee 
final games in Stanley Mission on March 8th. I was asked to do 
a ceremony puck drop for the games, and I could feel the 
energy of the rink as the teams played. 
 
Hockey helps so many of our young people in the North, keeps 
them active and builds friendships that last a lifetime. It helps to 
build leadership skills and teaches our young people how to 
work hard and deal with challenges in their lives. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the North Central 
Minor Hockey League’s board, coaches, parents, rink 
attendants, and fans for all they are doing to keep our youth 
busy, healthy, and active. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

Fundraiser Held for Dome Café Chef 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, 
along with well over 300 community members including many 
members from both sides of the House, I attended a very special 
event for a very special friend to many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Trent Brears has worked as chef at the Legislative 
Building for over 25 years, developing strong relationships with 
many here, including myself. This year Trent was diagnosed 
with an aggressive form of lung cancer. Trent’s faced hardships 
before, losing his first wife, Bonnie, to cancer. Through this 
darkness, his faith in God and positive attitude rarely have 
wavered. 
 
Last night, it was an honour to speak at the fundraising event 
called Help Trent Kick Cancer in the Butt. Funds were raised to 
support Trent’s travel and additional expenses. 
 
Thank you to CJ Katz for emceeing and Ken McDonald for 
running the live auction, as well as country music artist Justin 
Labrash for sharing special music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2000 Trent led Saskatchewan’s first-ever 
culinary Olympic team in Germany. taking home three silver 
medals and two bronzes. No easy feat. He could have travelled 
the world with his career, Mr. Speaker, but chose to make 
Saskatchewan home for a stable life for his kids and his family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his wife, Liberty, along with son Bryce and 
daughter Erica, did an excellent job speaking at the event, 
acknowledging Trent as a loving husband and father, as they 
shared stories and meaningful scripture and prayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you to the chefs who donated their time to 
this incredible four-course meal, as well as the volunteers and 
attendees for making this event so special. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in providing 
our thoughts and our prayers to Trent and his family during this 
difficult time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Regina French Teacher and Advocate Retires 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize a constituent of mine, Serge Dubé, who recently 
announced his retirement after nearly 30 years of teaching in 
Regina. 
 
Serge is a leader in Saskatchewan’s francophone community, 
recognized for his enthusiasm for languages. Serge moved from 
Quebec in 1981 and has been teaching in Saskatchewan since 
1990. 
 
In addition to teaching French language to school-age kids, he 
has been sharing his love of language with adults through the 
Institut français at the University of Regina and through the 
French for Parents program where parents of the students he 
taught could develop language skills to help communicate and 
better support their child’s learning. 



4398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Serge has been well recognized for his passion for learning, 
winning the Inspiring Teacher Award in 2015. His love for 
teaching and positive leadership has been an inspiration for his 
students and his community as a whole. I would like to thank 
Serge for his contributions to education and in the promotion of 
French in Saskatchewan, and for his work enriching the lives of 
the students and parents he taught over his career. 
 
I’d like to call on all members to join me in congratulating 
Serge Dubé for his enthusiasm and a constant commitment to 
lifelong learning, and wish him the very best in his retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Early Childhood Intervention Program Week 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 
the House today to recognize this week’s early child 
intervention program, or ECIP, week in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it is difficult to put into words to describe the 
invaluable impact that ECIPs make on families and children 
across this province. Today and every day, we recognize each 
individual who works to enhance children’s development in the 
areas of speech and language, motor, cognitive, and social 
skills, and beyond. We know that the earlier children 
experiencing delays receive help, the better the outcome. 
 
ECIPs work with agencies and communities to ensure families 
and children receive the support they need for the success in 
school and across their lifetimes. This government understands 
the significance of ECIPs, Mr. Speaker, and I am proud to say 
that this year we are investing almost $4 million into the 14 
ECIPs across the province and the over 1,200 children and 
families they support. 
 
I want to again thank each ECIP across the province for playing 
a crucial role in the success of many individuals. Your work is 
so very valued, not only by those who directly support, but the 
province as a whole. I ask all members to join me today to show 
their appreciation for ECIPs across Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Young Entrepreneurs Participate in 
Aboriginal Youth Idea Challenge 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we 
heard earlier, today we are joined by members of the Aboriginal 
Youth Entrepreneurship Program under the mentorship of Joe 
Taylor. The students participated in the Aboriginal Youth Idea 
Challenge which took place this past January and February. 
AYIC [Aboriginal Youth Idea Challenge] is a business plan 
competition for Aboriginal youth between the ages of 16 and 35 
sponsored by Enactus at the University of Saskatchewan. These 
students were by far the youngest competitors. 
 
The challenge starts with a series of four day-long workshops 
which teach the participants the importance of a business plan 
and the steps and information required to take their idea from 
conception to reality. The Aboriginal Youth Entrepreneur 
Program was honoured to be three of the final five chosen 
finalists. Tasty Towne Catering from Kinistin Business Club, 

Sewer Vent Extension Kits (It Stops the Stink!) from One 
Arrow Business Club and the Eagle Feather Box Company 
from Mistawasis Business Club made their pitches the evening 
of the gala. The Mistawasis Business Club won the third-place 
prize of $1000 for their amazing product and pitch. 
 
[14:15] 
 
This business plan competition is a fantastic opportunity for 
these young students to meet, interact, and network with a 
diverse group of like-minded individuals. It also gives them the 
chance to showcase themselves, their schools, and their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
congratulating the students and the Aboriginal Youth 
Entrepreneur Program for competing with pride and winning 
such a great award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

History of the Shaunavon Courthouse 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Shaunavon is home to one of the oldest courthouses in the 
province. Shaunavon’s courthouse is one of five identical 
courthouses constructed in 1926 and ’27. The ground floor held 
the sheriff’s general office and the waiting room and the private 
office, and the one side was built to hold the vault. This first 
floor of the courthouse rooms the judge, the jury’s office, the 
witnesses, and the holding cells were located in the basement. 
 
Shaunavon’s courthouse officially opened . . . opening was in 
April ’27. The guest list for the opening banquet included 
members from government, members from the legal profession, 
and about 60 local citizens. Mr. Speaker, in 1958 the province 
asked the town if the courthouse could be used for the town 
hall. The town agreed and signed a lease for a dollar a year to 
rent it from the provincial government. 
 
Later the building underwent extensive renovations, and in 
1984 was declared a municipal heritage site. In 1995 after years 
of negotiations, the town, who had been paying rent for the 
building, officially purchased the building for one dollar, 
including all the furniture. Today the courthouse remains one of 
Shaunavon’s most impressive buildings and retains much of its 
original character. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone, when in the Shaunavon 
area, to stop by and see all the history and heritage of this 
unique building. And thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Saskatoon Athlete Wins Silver at National 
Badminton Championship 

 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the spirit of 
sport, I’m delighted to rise today to recognize a constituent of 
mine, Madison Ong. Madison, along with her badminton 
partner, Brandon Redekop, won a mixed doubles silver medal at 
the 2018 Yonex Under 23 and Junior National Championships 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4399 

in Burlington, Ontario on May 19th. This performance isn’t 
Madison’s first success at this tournament. She also received 
the Sportsmanship and Fair Play Award in 2016. 
 
And not only is she a talented badminton player, Mr. Speaker, 
she is also a gifted Ultimate Frisbee player. This year Madison 
was named on Canada’s world junior team and will be 
representing Canada at the 2018 JFDF World Junior Ultimate 
Championships held in Waterloo, Ontario. She is currently our 
only Saskatchewan athlete who’s represented on the roster, so 
we’re very proud, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And I ask that all members please join me in congratulating 
Madison on her silver medal at the badminton Junior National 
Championships, and we wish her all the best on her quest for 
gold with Team Canada at world’s for Ultimate this summer. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Status of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
was a good day for Saskatchewan. After a public outcry like we 
haven’t seen in a very long time, this government finally 
decided to repeal Bill 40 once and for all. And that’s a good 
thing to do. The people of this province have been crystal clear; 
they have no interest in seeing a sell-off of Saskatchewan’s 
Crown corporations.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if past behaviour is any predictor of future 
behaviour, this latest move doesn’t guarantee anything. We’ve 
seen this government’s privatization agenda in action for the 
last decade, and we know we can’t trust them with our Crowns. 
 
The Minister of Justice said that they need Bill 40 to scrap and 
sell off STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], our 
public transportation network that connected our province. 
Does the Premier believe he still has the ability to wind down 
and sell off any of our other Crowns without the provisions 
contained in Bill 40? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And we stand on this side of the House in support of the Crown 
protection Act that both sides of this House voted for, Mr. 
Speaker, a number of years ago. 
 
With the relation to trust, Mr. Speaker, in this government, I 
think the people across the province of Saskatchewan — and 
I’ve travelled most of it in the last year — do have a degree of 
trust in the government that they have elected to operate and to 
govern on behalf of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will continue to reach out to people across this province 
— as MLAs in our geographic areas, as ministers, as legislative 
secretaries — to engage with people across the great province 
of Saskatchewan to ensure that we continue to make good 
decisions, Mr. Speaker, decisions that they can be proud of on 
the economic files of government to ensure that we can 

continue to have the economic growth in our communities, Mr. 
Speaker, the population growth in our communities, and to 
continue to provide the services that the people of 
Saskatchewan expect their provincial government to provide. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question was of 
course about Crown corporations, and Saskatchewan people 
deserve clear answers and commitments on what this 
government’s plans are for Saskatchewan’s Crowns. Even with 
Bill 40 off the books, we know this government has been very 
creative in their privatization of our Crowns. And no wonder 
the doubt exists as we travel the province and hear people truly 
concerned about the future of SaskTel and other Crowns. 
 

They sold off STC. They told us it was a wind-down. They sold 
off ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], 
40 liquor stores, SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 
Network]. We know it was no accident that they removed 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] out of the 
Crown protection Act. 
 
Again, to the Premier: can he commit today, on the record, that 
Saskatchewan people can rest assured that all of our Crowns 
will remain under the ownership and control of the people of 
Saskatchewan under his watch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we support the 
Crown protection Act that was voted into law in this province 
by both sides, Mr. Speaker, supporting that over 10 years ago. I 
don’t know how much more clear we can be with that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we support the services, the services that our Crowns 
provide to people across the province of Saskatchewan, provide 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And we salute those that work within our Crown corporations 
that provide those services to our communities and our families 
across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we continue to promote a strong economic environment 
here in the province of Saskatchewan so that we can continue to 
have people in those communities, Mr. Speaker, to create jobs 
in those communities through the private sector to ensure that 
we have the growth in the communities, the growth in 
population, the growth in our economy and the opportunities, 
not just for the people that are moving here to our province, but 
the future for the next generation, Mr. Speaker — for my 
children, the members’ opposite children, and all of the next 
generation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are waking 
up to the news that we’re set to pay for another big ticket fix at 
Boundary dam. We’ve learned that SaskPower’s put out a 
tender for external engineering to help address shortfalls with 



4400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

the amine scrubbing technology. 
 
On top of millions paid in penalties to Cenovus each year and 
millions spent replacing amine each year and millions spent last 
summer replacing CO2 compressor coolers, we’re now spending 
millions on mobile amine reclaimer units because the processes 
still don’t work. Is anyone else seeing a pattern here? 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower ratepayers shouldn’t be the guinea 
pigs for a never-ending experiment, and they shouldn’t have to 
keep footing the bill for the never-ending fixes at Boundary 
dam. How much more will Saskatchewan people pay for these 
amine reclamation issues, and how many rate hikes will be 
needed to pay for it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to correct a number of things. I want to correct 
a number of things in the gentlest way that I can, Mr. Speaker, 
to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member says that it’s not working. In fact, that 
is not the case. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the CCS 
[carbon capture and storage] unit was online 100 per cent of the 
time in January, 100 per cent of the month of February, 99.7 per 
cent of the month of March, and 95 per cent of the month of 
April, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that the member raises is not new. In 
fact, the president of SaskPower wrote about this on a blog post 
in December of 2016, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is 
working with the vendor Cansolv, is also looking for some 
outside eyes as well. But I can report that the degradation factor 
of the amine solution is actually decreasing. This is certainly 
good news, moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate that these things 
that are happening will need fixing, and that it’s a learning 
process, but how much longer should taxpayers be on the hook 
for this journey that has no end in sight? The public investment 
in this project is staggering, and it balloons each year. 
 
Now we were told to expect a decision on the CCS expansion to 
Boundary dam 4 and 5 by December of last year. Well it’s 
almost June, and we’re still waiting. It should be clear. With the 
original business case blown out of the water, it makes no sense 
to move forward with expanding CCS to BD [Boundary dam] 4 
and 5. Will the minister commit today to stop experimenting 
with taxpayer dollars and guarantee that Saskatchewan people 
will not be paying for CCS expansion at Boundary dam 4 and 
5? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to make that commitment 
today because the due diligence hasn’t been done, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously, these are big decisions that we have to make, Mr. 
Speaker, and big decisions that we have to analyze before we 

can move forward in making those decisions. 
 
I find it odd though, Mr. Speaker, that in the first set of 
questions from the Leader of the Opposition, the questions 
about protecting the Crowns, well, Mr. Speaker, we support 
that. In fact, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower, as a Crown utility emits 
carbon dioxide. And if the point of all of this is to reduce 
carbon dioxide emissions, Mr. Speaker, then Boundary dam 3 is 
an important part of that solution, not only for the province but 
the entire world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact the United Nations indicates that in order 
for us to decrease global temperatures by two degrees, we need 
CCS across the world, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this project, 
the Boundary dam 3 has sequestered 2 million tonnes to date 
and, as I indicated, has been online more than 95 per cent of the 
time for the first four months of this year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is something that I think the people of 
Saskatchewan can be proud of. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last week we again pushed this 
government to do the right thing and get the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] to take responsibility for their drainage 
ditch. Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister tried to dump on the 
farmers in the area, but that’s really not fair. Those farmers are 
doing their part. But they are frustrated because for years 
they’ve been trying to work with the GTH, and the GTH has not 
been a good neighbour. 
 
Last week the minister said, “The plan is for the Global 
Transportation Hub to take ownership of that ditch, but 
currently it’s actually owned by the city of Regina.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn’t quite jive with a March 10th, 2014 letter 
from the city of Regina to the GTH, where they said, “The city 
confirms that the Global Transportation Hub Authority as the 
controlling authority will assume responsibility of operation and 
maintenance of the channel going forward.”  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the city handed over responsibility four 
years ago, but the GTH has shirked it ever since. How does the 
minister explain this contradiction, and when will the GTH get 
its act together and take responsibility for this ditch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
first I did not dump on the farmers, Mr. Speaker. What I pointed 
out is that there are a number of landowners that all have 
drainage projects in the area, including the Global 
Transportation Hub, the city of Regina, and neighbouring 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, and many of those projects, many of 
those drainage works are not in compliance, including the 
farmers. And so would the member opposite like us to take the 
same tack with those farmers as she’s requesting that we do 
with the city of Regina and the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. 
Speaker? That was what I was saying last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the actual drainage ditch, it is 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4401 

currently owned by the city of Regina. There’s an agreement in 
principle in place, but as with these issues, it’s with the lawyers, 
Mr. Speaker. The lawyers need to finish the legal work in terms 
of the contract, Mr. Speaker, and long term, the plan is for a 
watershed association involving all of those entities to be 
brought together and to work together and be in compliance 
going forward into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is blaming lawyers 
for the GTH’s failure to take responsibility? Now I wonder, I 
wonder if the former deputy minister to the premier, Alanna 
Koch, was called in to a meeting to deal with this WSA [Water 
Security Agency] issue because it’s likely the government only 
needed her services when it came to the scandal-plagued Bill 
Boyd. 
 
But to the matter at hand, in a December 2016 letter to a local 
producer, the WSA rightly puts the blame on the GTH when it 
comes to filing the proper paperwork to drain their swamp. But 
then the WSA threw up their hands in surrender, saying they 
can’t do anything. The minister won’t take responsibility. The 
WSA won’t enforce the law. The GTH won’t follow the law. 
Wow, Mr. Speaker, talk about the gang that can’t shoot straight.  
 
Either to the Minister of the WSA, when will you enforce the 
law? Or to the Minister of the GTH, when will you follow the 
law? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, would the member 
opposite like us to enforce the law equally across all of the 
landowners in the area? Because that would mean applying it to 
the farmers that she just accused the government of dumping on 
in her first question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an agreement in principle for the GTH to 
take over the ownership of that. But, Mr. Speaker, what I have 
been advised is that the lawyers for both sides, including the 
city of Regina, are working to finish the contract, Mr. Speaker. 
The GTH has engaged with contractors to begin maintenance of 
that ditch. Nobody is trying to shirk their responsibility, and 
certainly we are working in collaboration with all of the entities, 
trying to bring them all in compliance, Mr. Speaker, and form a 
watershed so that there is one entity moving forward that can be 
in compliance going forward. 
 
I think this is the proper approach. I think this is the right 
approach, rather than what the member opposite wants us to do, 
basically, Mr. Speaker, is apply the law unequally on the Global 
Transportation Hub or the city of Regina who actually owns it 
currently, and not apply it to the farmers that she’s advocating 
on behalf. We’re working with all of those groups together and 
want to see them all brought into compliance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Supports for Refugees 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thousands of people come to our province 
every year as refugees. These are folks who want to work and 
support their families but often need additional language or job 
training before they can land a good full-time job. Refugees 
enrolled in the Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada, 
or LINC, classes used to be eligible in some cases for the 
provincial training allowance, but now they’re cut off. 
 
That means they have to quit their part-time jobs and collect 
social assistance in order to get the English training they need to 
improve their skills and secure better jobs in the future. This 
simply doesn’t make sense. Why won’t the Sask Party invest in 
skills and job training for refugees who want to make 
Saskatchewan their new home? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is, as far as 
funding for refugees in year 1, that’s done by the national 
government, Mr. Speaker. There’s a program in place under 
which the Government of Canada funds job training and 
language training.  
 
After that, after year 1, then it becomes a responsibility of the 
province. And those newcomers are at that point entitled to all 
of the services that would be applicable for any other newcomer 
to the province, Mr. Speaker. So that would include a provincial 
training allowance. That would include adult basic education. 
Any of the resources or opportunities that would be available to 
any other newcomer or any other resident would also be 
available to refugees, Mr. Speaker. We take that seriously, and 
we have worked closely with newcomer communities in 
making sure that those services are available. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that this is a 
program that has been cut. We had this discussion in 
committee, and we have some serious questions about it. It 
doesn’t matter if it’s a provincial issue or a federal issue. 
 
The Sask Party government offers the training allowance. These 
folks live in Saskatchewan and need training, and it just makes 
sense to extend the PTA [provincial training allowance] to 
English-language students. Forcing LINC students out of the 
workforce and on to welfare is short-sighted and indicative of 
this government’s lack of vision. They’d rather pay for 
newcomers to sit idle on a Saskatchewan assistance plan than 
see them working and studying English at the same time.  
 
It defies logic, Mr. Speaker. How can the Sask Party justify 
forcing refugee families to go on to social assistance to access 
job training? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well Mr. Speaker, the reality is that 
this government in the last 10 years has seen, and this province 
has seen, over 160,000 newcomers come to this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Over 100,000 of those newcomers have come from 



4402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

outside of Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s a rate of growth that we 
have not seen and a rate of in-migration and international 
in-migration that we haven’t seen into this province since the 
1920s or ’30s. 
 
Members opposite can heckle all they want, Mr. Speaker, but 
that’s the reality and those are the facts. And those are facts that 
we are very proud of. We have worked closely with newcomer 
communities. We’ve worked very closely with the national 
government as well in designing what we feel, and I think, is 
regarded by many as the best provincial nominee program in 
the entire country, Mr. Speaker, one that’s seen year-over-year 
increases, reflecting the fact that the national government as 
well see this as one of the best provincial nominee programs in 
the entire country. 
 
So we’re going to continue to work with newcomer 
communities. We’re going to continue to welcome newcomers 
from outside of the country, Mr. Speaker. We think it’s the right 
thing to do, and we are very proud of the record on this side of 
the House for doing so. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Provision of Transportation Services 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for Kelly Wills, a 
58-year-old Gravelbourg man who uses a wheelchair, the 
sell-off of STC has been devastating. On April 19th he sent a 
letter to the Premier. He wrote: 
 

I’m a physically disabled individual struggling to keep a 
roof over my head, food in my stomach and medicine in 
my body while having the means to travel to my scheduled 
appointments. 
 
Your government first stole my means of transportation 
from Gravelbourg to Regina for my medical needs when 
you cancelled the STC bus. 
 
Now I have to beg for rides . . . I have already missed 
appointments because I couldn’t find a companion with 
transportation for the day. 
 
[In his letter, Kelly asked the Premier] . . . would you be 
willing to set aside 6-8 hours of your day to drive your car 
and wait all day for someone you barely know? 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what’s he have to say? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve said many times in this House, the decision to wind 
down STC was not an easy one and not one that this 
government took lightly, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, but the fact is that the subsidy had gone from, in 
1997 it was $6 per ride, all the way up to $97 per ride when the 
decision was made to wind down STC. Now that, Mr. Speaker, 
is just unsustainable and the ridership had continued to decline, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would mention, Mr. Speaker, that across 

Canada there is no other, there was no other provincial 
transportation system, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, STC when in 
existence, Mr. Speaker, served less than half of the 
communities in Saskatchewan.  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re hoping with the introduction of 
ride-share into the province, that this will also provide 
additional opportunities for these people to get assistance, Mr. 
Speaker. So we’re optimistic that that will take place. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s facts don’t 
hold water. The people in this Assembly know that an Uber will 
be no solution to get from Gravelbourg to Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us in the Legislative Assembly today is 
Michael Huck and Shirley Toth. Shirley’s kidneys have 
completely shut down, and she requires dialysis treatment four 
times a week. Each treatment is three and a half hours. Shirley 
used to commute from her home in Bethune to Regina utilizing 
STC. When the Sask Party destroyed STC, they had no choice 
but to sell their home in Bethune and to move to Regina. The 
financial costs were enormous, larger mortgage, and house 
renovations to make it wheelchair accessible. Shirley was 
forced to leave her rural community along with Michael and the 
social ties and relationships that it had. 
 
What does the Premier have to say to Michael and to Shirley? 
And will he finally do the right thing and restore public 
transportation and ensure that people living with disabilities in 
rural Saskatchewan aren’t prisoners in their own communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll say it again: it was not an easy decision, the 
decision that we made to wind down STC, Mr. Speaker. It was 
one that we did ponder over. We knew there would be some 
unintended circumstances that would happen after that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I will remind the member opposite, less than half the 
communities were saved. I had a friend, Mr. Speaker, who 
would leave my home community of Prince Albert and drive 
out to his . . . who was not serviced by STC, so he could pick up 
his parents and take them to appointments, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what he would do. That’s what he would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d remind the member opposite that when the 
opposition was in power in this government, Eldon Lautermilch 
who was then minister — Mr. Speaker, this is back when the 
subsidy was only $6 — he brought up the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that that was unsustainable. At $6 per ride it was unsustainable. 
And that was under a former NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
And 10 years later he was still saying it was unsustainable, Mr. 
Speaker, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4403 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, of course the 
Sask Party betrayed Saskatchewan people and weren’t straight 
with them about the sell-off of STC. But they deserve one heck 
of a lot better than a blabbering minister sharing facts that aren’t 
consistent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — That’s out of order. I would ask the member 
to withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize, that comment. 
They deserve better than a minister who’s putting facts that 
don’t hold water on the table, ignoring the reality of people like 
Michael and Shirley that are here today. 
 
My question to the Premier of Saskatchewan: does he not think 
that Saskatchewan people deserve better than responses like 
that? Will he not commit to restoring public transportation in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I know that that member, when he was running for leadership 
— which he lost, Mr. Speaker — that member when he was 
running for leader of that party, he promised a new 
transportation system which he said would only cost $10 
million, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to go 
to school to learn math to know that it would cost way more 
than $10 million to provide transportation services to every 
community in this province, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And maybe he should . . . [inaudible] . . . a little bit better 
before he asks a question like that. Mr. Speaker, that’s what he 
should be thinking about, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Strategies to Address Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Assault 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we were happy to hear 
that the Minister of Justice recognizes that regular reviews like 
the Domestic Violence Death Review Report are “necessary and 
essential” and that the government has accepted the 19 
recommendations laid out in that report. We are also happy to 
have heard that the Minister of Justice plans to add additional 
resources to the creation and implementation of a domestic 
violence strategy in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Justice to clarify when the 
domestic violence strategy development will begin and when 
they plan to have it completed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s under way now. I had 
indicated earlier when I did media on this, that we did not want 
to wait months or years for a comprehensive announcement, 
that we’d announce things as they were ready to go. So over the 
next few months you’ll hear announcements that we’re doing 
this, we’re doing that, this is our response to the specific issue. 

The issue that the member opposite raised is one that all 
members of this province understand and realize the importance 
of. We want to work with the providers all the way across the 
province. We want to make sure that they’re adequately 
resourced, that we’re not duplicating in some areas and 
undersupplying in some others. We want to make sure that we 
do everything we can to do the best for the victims in our 
province. And as a province, there should be nothing less that 
we do for them than the very best to make sure that they have a 
good quality of life going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, for months on this side of the 
House, we have been reiterating the need for both a domestic 
violence strategy as well as a sexual assault strategy for 
Saskatchewan. And yesterday in this House, the Minister of 
Justice said yes to the development of these strategies and 
committed to including recommendations from the Domestic 
Violence Death Review Report. We very much thank the 
minister for that commitment, and look forward to the ways that 
we can work together to implement that goal. 
 
The minister however was not entirely clear as to the timeline 
of the development of a sexual assault strategy. So I will ask the 
Minister of Justice today to clarify. When will the government 
begin the development of a sexual assault strategy for 
Saskatchewan, and when do they plan to have that completed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite take 
some issue when the two issues are answered together. The 
reality of it is, in many cases, it’s the same service providers 
that are dealing with the issues. 
 
We know that they are two separate issues, and we want to deal 
with them separately. But to the extent that funding flows to the 
same entities, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with and 
make sure that the agencies are funded. We will work and have 
announcements as we go along. We understand the needs that 
are there, and we’ll work and continue to do that. And we thank 
the members opposite for raising the issue. This is something 
that’s important to all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
[14:45] 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 



4404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 76, The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
 AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 
Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 115, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4405 

Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 121, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? I recognize . . . 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 122, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018, a bilingual bill, without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 122, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2018, and the bill be now read a third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative 
de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
122, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 



4406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
that it has considered certain estimates and to present its fifth 
report. I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 
in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 
in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the Chair . . . Which one are you? Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
114, The Vehicles for Hire Act with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and 
its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act, and that the bill and its amendments be 
now read a third time. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the minister that Bill No. 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be 
now read the third time. 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4407 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 112, The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be now read 
a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving 
Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes 
(Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 82, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017, and that the bill be now read 
a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the minister that Bill No. 82, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Standing Committee 
of Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its fifth report. I 
move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 



4408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 301. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled, 301. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 302 through 306. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 302 to 306. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll now leave the Chair for Committee of 
Finance. 
 
[15:00] 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — Okay. Members, I’ll call the Committee of 
Finance to order. The item of business before the committee 
this afternoon is Executive Council, vote 10. Before I call the 
vote on subvote (EX01), I will just make a few comments about 
the Committee of Finance for the benefit of the new members 
and members who perhaps haven’t had that much experience as 
to how this committee operates, and for our viewing public. 
 
The Committee of Finance is a committee that all members of 
the Assembly are members of this committee. This committee, 
the rules of operation are somewhat different than the standing 
committees. One of the things that differs from the standing 
committees, in the standing committees the individuals asking 
and answering the questions remain seated; in this committee 
the members asking the questions and the members answering 
the questions stand. A major difference is that only members 
can participate. Officials cannot participate in the committee but 
they do participate in the standing committees. 
 
I would just caution members not to interact with the officials, 
and I’ll caution officials not to interact with members. And the 
way we’ve operated this committee in the past is that when we 
have a question-and-answer segment, the Premier and the leader 
and other members who perhaps may be asking questions just 
interact between themselves. As I mentioned to both the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition, I would prefer when, 
if we enter into debate, that comments be made to the Chair. 
 
So with that, Premier, I would ask you to introduce your 
officials that you have here with you this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. As we’re 
nearing the end of the legislative session, that means that we’ve 
come to the point where estimates for Executive Council are 
given the full and proper consideration of the Assembly. And, 
Mr. Chair, I would just take this moment to introduce: to my 
left is Shannon Andrews, the chief of staff to the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan. To her left is the deputy minister, 
Kent Campbell. To my right, Mr. Speaker, is the special adviser 
to the Premier, Mr. Reg Downs. Directly seated behind me, Mr. 

Speaker, is Mr. Jarret Coels who is the executive director of 
House business and research. And immediately to Jarret’s left, 
Mr. Speaker, is Bonita Cairns who has just retired from her role 
as executive director of corporate services in Executive 
Council, but has agreed to come back here today for this 
Committee of Finance. Thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. We will now call subvote 
(EX01), central management and services. Premier, I would ask 
if you’d like to make a short opening statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
I failed to mention in the chair where the Attorney General is, 
we will cycle some ministers in and out of that chair, maybe 
starting with the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, as we require 
information throughout the afternoon that we’ll have the 
opportunity to spend here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m very fortunate to serve alongside these experienced and 
capable not only elected members, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Government of Saskatchewan, but all of the individuals that 
contribute to the government here in the province, the staff 
members that I introduced and the others that serve in this 
building and across the province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
thank them for the work that they put into each and every day 
that they arrive at their career, Mr. Speaker, but the work that 
they put into preparing for today. 
 
And I’d like to thank the Leader of the Opposition and the 
members opposite in advance for the questions that they’ll ask 
on behalf of the people of this province here today, Mr. 
Speaker, an important role in our governance system. 
 
Mr. Chair, we meet at a notable moment in the political history 
of our province, at least for our generation, as we gather in this 
Assembly during a time of change, beginning, Mr. Speaker, 
quite obviously with the chair that I sit in. We have a new 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you, as I said, it’s a great 
honour for me to succeed the previous premier for a decade in 
this province, Mr. Brad Wall who was an inspirational and 
visionary premier for nearly a decade on behalf of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, an outstanding party leader for 
more than 13 years, Mr. Speaker, and a hard-working MLA for 
nearly 18 years on behalf of those constituents in the 
community and constituency of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a new Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had . . . This is the eighth new Leader of the 
Opposition over the last decades, Mr. Speaker, but we’re 
confident that the new Leader of the Opposition is bringing the 
unity and stability to that side, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. And I think that’s a 
good thing for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to 
have a strong opposition in this province. 
 
We have a new Speaker in this Assembly, Mr. Chair, and I want 
to thank him for overseeing the proceedings of this House each 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4409 

and every day, with a very careful manner that he performs at. 
And I know he’s watching so I’ll mind my comments very 
carefully and they’ll be complimentary. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, and finally I think of note, this session was opened 
a few months ago with the Throne Speech read by a new 
Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Speaker, His Honour Thomas 
Molloy. His Honour is perfectly suited to the role of Lieutenant 
Governor in the province of Saskatchewan as an accomplished, 
compassionate, distinguished gentleman with deep roots in our 
great province. 
 
There has been a revitalization of sorts, I think I would put 
forward here, Mr. Speaker, with all of these new roles in this 
legislative session. And here’s something else I think that is 
very notable as well, and I’ve said it before, Mr. Speaker, but it 
bears repeating. The budget speech this year was delivered by 
our Finance minister, the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, 
the first female Finance minister in the history of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, only the second female 
Finance minister to deliver a budget in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And she delivered this budget, this 
budget address, in difficult circumstances. Being the MLA for 
the constituency of Humboldt, she delivered that budget just 
days after a terrible tragedy involving our Humboldt Broncos. 
Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite join us in 
expressing our gratitude to the Minister of Finance, the member 
for the constituency of Humboldt, for a job well done on that 
day. 
 
Mr. Chair, the budget released last month showed that the 
province’s finances are on track. We’re on track to balance, Mr. 
Speaker, the budget — Mr. Chair, my apologies — balance the 
budget within the three-year time frame that we set out last 
year. 
 
In this last fiscal year, Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, part of 
the purpose of these estimates, but Executive Council 
underspent its budget by nearly some $340,000, and that money 
was returned to the provincial treasury. We are operating today 
with 46 fewer staff members than the previous government did 
in 2007. That’s a 26 per cent reduction in the staff in Executive 
Council. Overall, salary expenses for political staff in this 
building are down more than $286,000, or down about 
twenty-three and a half per cent. 
 
Travel expenses incurred by the Premier’s office and by 
ministers and their staff have also been reduced. Compared with 
a decade ago when the members opposite were in government, 
the number of out-of-province trips is down some 62 per cent 
and the cost of out-of-province travel is down 67 per cent. 
Ministerial travel costs are down from nearly just over a million 
dollars, or about a million dollars, Mr. Speaker, in 2007, to just 
over $300,000 last year, a decrease of about 70 per cent. 
 
Overall, the Executive Council budget this year is down a 
further 1 per cent from last year’s budget. Last year’s budget 
was down 5 per cent from the year previous. So, Mr. Chair, the 
expenses have been controlled within the Executive Council of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and we expect that trend to 
continue this year and into the years ahead. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I won’t take up a lot of time here today. I 
want to thank the Leader of the Opposition and the members 
opposite for their questions in advance, and I want to leave the 
bulk of the time, Mr. Speaker, for those questions on behalf of 
the people of the province. So with that I will conclude my 
remarks, thank all of those involved here today, and I look 
forward to the discussion in the next few hours. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I’d just like to join the 
Premier in thanking everyone who’s here today, thank the 
officials who are joining us for this session and all of the 
officials who’ve been part of this season of estimates and have 
put in so many extra hours, late hours. I want to thank of course 
the folks at the Clerk’s table, the Pages, and Hansard. And this 
is work that is done by many, many people and the elected 
members may be the ones who show up on the camera here, but 
the work is certainly done with a lot of people behind the scenes 
who actually make it possible to make this even resemble like 
we know what we’re doing. 
 
You know, I also want to thank — speaking of resembling that 
we know what we’re doing — I want to thank my MLA team 
and the caucus staff that we have on this side of the House. I’ve 
been so happy to have their support in this new role and the 
work that we’ve been able to do this session. I think it’s been an 
exceptional session, as the Premier noted, something I’ve noted 
a few times as well. 
 
This is a season of change. I like to believe that change is just 
beginning but it is a season of change and it’s a great 
opportunity for us to reset a little bit. The Premier did say when 
I was selected for this role, he said he looked forward to 
working on areas where we agree and a vigorous debate on 
areas where we disagree. We’ve had a chance for some 
vigorous debate and the occasional moment of common ground 
over this last session, and I hope we can find more. And I do 
want to congratulate the Premier. We’re nearing the end of his 
first session. Congratulations again on his selection and on the 
work so far. 
 
To get forward now with the questions, Mr. Chair, I’ll start to 
turn my questions towards the Premier. We have a guest. Mr. 
Campbell here is the interim deputy minister to the Premier, as I 
understand. And I’m just wondering if a decision has been 
made when a permanent person for that role will be selected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I 
appreciate the question. Mr. Campbell began serving as the 
interim deputy minister to the premier, the previous premier, 
last September, and has been serving in that role up until today. 
We have not made a decision on making . . . on canvassing that 
position for a permanent position as yet, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re thankful that Mr. Campbell has served in this position for 
this period of time and we’ll ask him to continue to serve until 
we make a permanent decision with respect to who will serve as 
the deputy minister to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thanks very much. The predecessor to the 
Premier broke with long-standing tradition and selected 
someone who was quite partisan, quite involved in the Sask 
Party, as the deputy minister to the premier. Will this Premier 



4410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

be continuing with that tradition of sort of fostering candidates 
within the civil service, or will he be choosing someone who 
isn’t so partisan in their connections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I won’t 
speak to the decisions that were made by the previous premier 
with respect to his selection, but as we move forward with any 
opportunities that we have or decisions that I would be involved 
with, including the decision around who would serve this great 
province, Mr. Speaker, as deputy minister to the Premier, most 
assuredly I’d make that decision on who I feel . . . who a 
number of people feel, Mr. Speaker, within the government, in 
both elected and in the public service, Mr. Speaker, would be 
the very best in that position to serve on behalf of the people of 
the province. It won’t be a partisan decision in any way, Mr. 
Speaker. It’ll be a decision on who brings the best tools, the 
best qualifications to the table to operate the public service in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Speaking to the person who was in the role 
previously, Alanna Koch, who then ran for leader of the Sask 
Party, we note that her name is no longer listed in the 
government directory. Does she still work for the Government 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Koch is currently on paid 
leave from her position as deputy minister to the Premier. She’ll 
not be returning into that position as deputy minister to the 
Premier. We continue our discussions with Ms. Koch regarding 
the next steps, Mr. Speaker. There’ve been numerous 
discussions to date and they will continue, and we expect this 
decision or this situation to be resolved in the very near future, 
Mr. Speaker. But in the interim we’re fortunate with the strong 
public service we have, the steady hand of Mr. Campbell as he 
continues to serve as the interim deputy minister on behalf of 
the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Meili: — There was a word in there that I just wanted to 
make sure that I heard correctly. This is a paid leave. And was 
that paid leave . . . Was she on paid leave during the leadership 
or did it start to be paid leave after the leadership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. With respect to 
Ms. Koch, she was on unpaid leave for a period of time until the 
end of the leadership race, at which point she took, used up the 
holidays that she had banked over the years. And it’s just 
recently that she’s been on paid leave, Mr. Speaker, and as I 
said we’re very close to having this situation resolved, Mr. 
Speaker, for not only Ms. Koch but on behalf of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Campbell had served and continues to serve as a deputy 
minister to Intergovernmental Affairs here in Executive 
Council, Mr. Speaker. He continues to serve in that role as well 
as the deputy minister to the Premier because we have not 
backfilled that role, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Campbell is serving in 
both roles at the present time. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The person we’re discussing, Ms. Koch, if we’re 
looking at how long she’s been in that role, now in a paid leave 
position, so how much salary would she have now received 
during this period in which she’s not running for leader and also 
not providing a direct service? And also as you’re talking about 

resolution, is that resolution likely to be a new position or are 
you looking to settle a severance package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. April 6th was the day of return. 
I don’t have the exact figures of what that would be, Mr. Chair, 
with respect to the exact salary that would be paid from then. 
 
As I said, this is a conversation that we expect to come to 
resolution shortly. And we’ve been in discussions with respect 
to whether that would be a position, as there is much to offer, 
Mr. Speaker, to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
given the rich agricultural background of the individual, Ms. 
Koch, Mr. Chair. And so there is a discussion with respect to 
that opportunity, and if that opportunity is not able to occur, Mr. 
Speaker, then there would be the discussion around, as per the 
public service, any termination agreement within the public 
service. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much. It does appear to be quite 
an unusual situation and it is an unusual situation: someone 
within the public service having a leave to run for leadership 
and then should that leadership not be successful, having a 
position or a severance waiting for them. 
 
If you’re not able to provide those figures now, I’d ask that you 
would table those. And if you could tell me as well the annual 
salary that she did receive so we can also do some of that math 
on our own. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. That actually is not 
exactly correct. There’s individuals, and there’s examples on 
both sides of this House over the last number of years where 
individuals have chosen to take a leave from their position 
wherever that may be, in the private sector or in the public 
service or wherever that position may be, and run either in a 
nomination or run in an actual general election. And, Mr. Chair, 
there is always that pretense that those individuals quite often 
and in many cases have the opportunity to go back to their 
position. 
 
It’s not uncommon. There’s examples of just that on both sides 
of the House. I know of people that have went back to their 
previous occupation after running in a nomination, taking a 
leave in time to run in a nomination, to run in a general election, 
to run in a second general election, sometimes some four years 
later, and then at some later point in time went back to their 
previous place of employment. 
 
So that is not unusual, Mr. Chair, with respect to people having 
a career, taking some time away from that career on leave to 
serve in public office, and then returning to that career at a later 
date. 
 
Mr. Meili: — What’s truly unusual about this situation is the 
consideration of a severance, that someone in such a high-level 
position that they couldn’t return to after having chosen that 
role, the public would then be on the hook for a severance 
payment, and we’ll be very interested to see if that happens. 
 
I did ask a direct question, however, about tabling the amount 
of salary she’s received thus far, and also telling us now what 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4411 

her annual salary was or is, I should say, so that we’re able to 
do some of the math while we’re waiting for you to table those 
numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I appreciate the 
question. With respect to the annual salary, the annual salary is 
$267,948. There’s been no agreed-on termination compensation 
or anything in that nature. With respect to people leaving, 
taking a leave of absence from their position to run for public 
office, again, Mr. Chair, that actually is not just commonplace 
or not just, you know, common in the private and public sector, 
but it is in legislation that people can take a leave of their 
position whether it be in the public service or wherever that is 
and can return to that position at a later date. And that is . . . As 
I said, there are examples of that on both sides of this House. 
There’s likely people in this House today that have taken leave 
from their position, whatever their career was prior to serving in 
public office. But that is the annual salary that is available on 
public accounts, available through the order-in-councils that 
have been released, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Meili: — So we’re looking at at least 26,000, probably 
closer to 30,000 that’s been received since she returned to being 
on a paid leave, being paid, having run for leader of the Sask 
Party and now being paid to not provide services for the people 
of Saskatchewan. However, there was just one piece of the 
answer missing there. I asked for a better number than what I’m 
able to do in my head and the math. Can you just commit to 
tabling those numbers to date, and by when you can table those 
for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thanks very much. We would appreciate that in 
the usual standard of less than 24 hours. I do want to get on to 
some other topics although we can continue within . . . So I’ll 
ask for a time frame. That would be ideal, but I’ll ask for a time 
frame and within 24 hours seems quite reasonable. 
 
But we’ll continue on where we’ll talk a little bit more about 
money and politics. Recently your government made an unusual 
decision to vote against some recommendations that we made, a 
bill that we put forward that would change the structure around 
campaign financing here in Saskatchewan. We have a situation 
in Saskatchewan where you have high levels of corporate 
donation and union donation, a lot of that money coming from 
out of province, and also no cap whatsoever on the donations 
from organizations or individuals or whether those donations 
come from in or out of province. 
 
So my question, just the very first small one is, by when can 
you give me those numbers? And the larger question is, really 
what’s behind your government’s decision to really double 
down on keeping what has been described as the worst 
campaign finance structure in the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And yes, just maybe 
a couple of comments with respect to the question. We’ve been 
consistent throughout the 10 years of governance with respect 
to electoral finance laws here, and we operate under the same 
electoral finance laws that we have for a number of years, that 
the members opposite had operated under during their years in 
government as well. And we have never . . . We are not 

doubling down and saying that we won’t change those laws. 
We’re consistent, been consistent, in our support for the 
existing electoral finance laws that we have here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I do not hear on the street that these laws are out of date or in 
any way problematic. As we know, all registered parties must 
publicly report any donations that they have to Elections 
Saskatchewan, any expenses that they incur through a writ 
campaign of any type, whether it’s a by-election or a general 
election. So this information, both inflows into the party and 
their expenses, is transparent. It’s available to anyone that 
would care to look online on Elections Saskatchewan. As well, 
many parties do it on their site as well, that are involved in this 
process that we have. The information is also filed in the party’s 
annual report with Elections Saskatchewan each and every year. 
I think there was one filed just not too long ago. Any of those 
donations that are over $250, as we know, are recorded and are 
publicly reported as per The Election Act, that we have agreed 
with through our time in government. 
 
And you know, there are claims at times that there are a few 
large donors that fund one party or another. The fact of the 
matter is that there’s large donors that are to both parties, Mr. 
Chair. But the fact of the matter is as well, and I’ve said this in 
this House a number of times this past year, we filed —we’re 
proud to file as well — we had 26,000 individual donors that 
donated to our party in this past year. That was filed, as I said, 
with the public report as per the elections Act with Elections 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So with 26,000 donors, Mr. Speaker — both sides have larger 
donors and we can talk about who they are and that, Mr. Chair, 
if we choose — but this party here is proud to file an elections 
return with that number of individuals. 
 
Mr. Meili: — At the current time there is no cap whatsoever on 
the amount that a company or an individual can give to a 
political party. Does the Premier think that that’s appropriate, 
that an individual could give hundreds of thousands, millions of 
dollars to a party, having outsized influence on the outcome of 
an election compared to other individuals in the province? Do 
you think that’s appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you for the question, and with 
respect to hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars donated, 
those are donations that we’ve not seen on this side of the 
House from any individuals or corporations. 
 
I think what is important as we have this discussion with respect 
to electoral finance, and understanding that we operate under 
the same electoral finance laws for a number of years now, and 
we’ve always been consistent that we feel that disclosing who 
donates time and in-kind donations to any party that’s running 
to be the elected government here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, disclose where and how much those donations 
are above $250, that is done. 
 
As well, Mr. Chair, we feel it’s important to ensure that any of 
the expenses that are incurred, whether that be in a by-election 
or in a general election, that those are also disclosed for full 
viewing of the people of the province. 
 



4412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

With any of this conversation often comes the pretext or the 
thought that, well if you’re receiving a donation from someone, 
well then they must be buying time or they must be looking at 
influencing what you do as a government. And I would say this 
on behalf of the members of this side, Mr. Chair, that that most 
assuredly is not the case for members over here. 
 
We’re not influenced by people that will help in donating time 
or dollars. This is part of the political system we have. But we 
do assure all of those that are involved in any election, whether 
it be financially or time, is that we will provide the very best 
governance that we can. We will listen to all of the people that 
we represent, and we will endeavour to provide the most sound, 
the most honest, Mr. Chair, the most transparent, and the most 
engaging government that we can on behalf of the people of the 
province. That’s the commitment that we provide. I would hope 
that’s the commitment that all parties in this nation provide. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Now the Premier’s of course not wrong to state 
that the laws we have now are laws we’ve had for some time. 
However, when it comes to the word on the street, perhaps we 
walk down different streets. But we should be reading the same 
newspapers and reading the same reports and understanding the 
ways that laws have changed. 
 
And you spoke about a season of change as we came in here. 
Over the last decade, the majority of Canadian provinces and 
the federal government have made these changes, eliminating 
corporate and union donations, eliminating or adding caps on 
individual donations. 
 
I will continue with the question around appropriateness and the 
Premier’s beliefs. Didn’t really get a clear answer on whether 
you think it’s appropriate that an individual can give an 
unlimited amount to a political party. I’d still like an answer on 
that, but let’s add another one. Do you think it’s appropriate that 
an out-of-province individual or corporation or organization can 
give an unlimited amount to a political party within the 
province? Is it appropriate that an entity not even located in this 
province should be influencing the outcome of the election? 
 
Now we can talk later about influencing the actions of the party, 
but donations influence the outcomes of elections. Should we 
have what are essentially external forces influencing the 
outcomes of our elections? 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — What we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan is a system where any of those donations, any of 
those expenses are disclosed. They’re disclosed to the people of 
the province, the voting public of the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re disclosed to the voting public of the 
province of Saskatchewan, all of those that choose to have a 
look online and see who has donated to any political party, how 
those political parties have spent those dollars. 
 
With respect to out-of-province donations over the past 10 
years, over 90 per cent of the donations to this party — I’ll 
speak on behalf of this party — have been from within the 
province. There are donations that come from entities from 
outside the province, entities that have significant operations 
within the province of Saskatchewan, significant employed 

people in communities across the province of Saskatchewan in 
some of our sectors that we have here, whether that be the 
energy sector, whether that be even the agriculture sector or our 
manufacturing sector or our mining sector here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. So those entities that will donate from outside 
the province for the most part to this party are entities that have 
significant interests in people that live in our communities 
across the province. 
 
That being said, parties can choose not to take these dollars if 
they have an ideological belief that they don’t want the help 
from an individual or an entity, whether it be from in the 
province of Saskatchewan or outside, Mr. Chair. That is the 
prerogative of the party, if they choose to do or to not receive 
those donations. We on this side have received donations, as I 
said, over 90 per cent from individuals and organizations within 
the province and a few donations from outside over the last 10 
years. But those are from entities that have significant, in many 
cases, significant interests with employees in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a fair question, Mr. Chair, as we . . . Well maybe I’ll leave it 
at that. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Premier, the matter of disclosure is 
something that of course we’re in favour of. We certainly want 
to know who’s donating to whom. That, however, that 
disclosure does nothing to prevent individuals or agencies with 
donating large sums and influencing the outcomes in a way 
that’s disproportionate to what’s available to others within the 
province, and even having external agents such as companies 
that are not located here in the province contributing a large 
sum. We’ve seen millions over the last decade to the Sask 
Party. There’s nothing disclosure does to prevent that. 
 
However, you talked about whether we believe that that’s 
something that should change. The fact of the matter is that the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that’s something that should 
change. The vast majority of Saskatchewan people, when 
polled, say that we shouldn’t have corporate or union donations. 
The people of Saskatchewan recognize that this isn’t a fair 
situation, that they’re not competing at a fair level, that they’ve 
got very wealthy individuals or corporations that are able to 
influence elections in a way they can’t. What do you say to 
those people who say this isn’t a fair system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — The system that we have of disclosing our 
donations over $250 and disclosing the expenses that candidates 
or parties may have in our general elections is the same for all 
sides. And it’s a fair system here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a system that we’ve operated under, as I 
said, for a number of years. It’s also a system where the people 
of the province can see who is participating with each of the 
parties that are filing within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a system where I said we have over 90 per cent of our 
donations to the Saskatchewan Party coming from within the 
province. And those from outside that choose to donate, in 
many cases have significant interests in people that are 
employed in communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that’s all available online, Mr. Speaker, either at Elections 
Saskatchewan or other places online for the people of the 
province to see who is donating to the governing party in the 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4413 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s also the way, in the case of the members opposite, where 
people can look on the website and they can understand that 
they also have people with interests in Saskatchewan but 
organizations that have also . . . are national in scope, such as 
the Canadian Labour Congress that provided $35,000 to the 
members opposite. Or the United Steelworkers that did $37,000 
donation. Or Unifor, Mr. Chair, who provided a $54,000 
donation. Or the UFCW [United Food & Commercial Workers] 
who provided $81,000. Or also in there is over $7,500 that’s 
been provided by John Horgan’s provincial British Columbia 
NDP, and that’s come up in this House before, Mr. Chair. 
 
But I think this is an opportunity that the people of the province 
have to see who is donating to all of the parties that participate. 
All of our donations are online as are the members’ opposite 
and I encourage the people of the province of Saskatchewan to 
go have a look at those lists. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you. The people of Saskatchewan have 
been looking and seeing what’s happening from a disclosure 
point of view, and they’re not happy. The majority don’t agree 
with the system. We have a system that’s been described by 
experts around Canada as the worst system of campaign finance 
in the country. 
 
And one of the things that that disclosure shows us members is 
. . . One of the things that that disclosure shows us is that in 
2016, 53 companies who donated a total of $1 million to the 
Saskatchewan Party won $100 million in contracts from 
Crowns and executive government. So we talk about influence. 
We talk about removing influence. Now whether that actually 
results directly, whether this is something where this 
government looks and says, here’s the companies that support 
us; they’ll get the contracts, or whether it just looks that way, 
this sends a very clear message to the people of Saskatchewan 
that there is a real problem with campaign finances. 
 
So I ask the question, Mr. Premier: would you be open to 
changes in the legislation that modernized us, that got us in line 
with the rest of the country and helped avoid even the 
perception of any influence based on people who donated to the 
party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I actually don’t 
agree with the pretext of that question. And I had clarified that 
earlier in my answers that the commitment that we make on this 
side of the House is to provide that open and engaging 
government on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. But under those thoughts, under those thoughts, 
those names that I just read off would . . . The question would 
very quickly come back at the Leader of the Opposition and the 
members opposite. Are they beholden to the four union 
organizations that I said have given them well over $100,000, 
or are they beholden, most notably on a day like today, when 
we are as a nation investing in a pipeline to Canada’s coast, are 
they beholden to the position of John Horgan and the British 
Columbian NDP with respect to that infrastructure project that’s 
in the national interest? 
 
Mr. Meili: — I hear from the member that it goes both ways. 
And it certainly does, which is exactly why our party put forth 

legislation that would eliminate corporate and union donations 
for all parties. We’re in no way beholden to any company. And 
you also must note, you also must note, Mr. Premier, when 
thinking about this, that we are not in a position to give out 
$100 million in contracts to 53 companies that donated to our 
party. 
 
So there’s a very important distinction there, that we have a real 
perception out in the public that this place is bought and sold. 
And you know what? That damages each and every one of us. 
That cheapens the work of each and every one of us when that 
perception is out in the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now I want to just ask a question which . . . We had a 
situation here in this province where some of that money, that 
corporate out-of-province money, those big dollars that were 
flowing into Sask Party coffers, were also flowing into the 
pockets of the former premier. So I have a question for the new 
Premier: have you restarted the practice of taking top-ups from 
the Sask Party to pad your own salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — No. This Premier will not be taking a 
stipend from the party. Mr. Chair, I have not done that nor will 
that be the practice of this Premier. 
 
With respect to being bought, the question again comes right 
back to the Leader of the Opposition with respect to, he is 
running to be the premier of this province on behalf of the 
people of the province. And if he was to become premier, I 
think the people of the province would like to know whether or 
not they would represent them on economic issues like 
narrowing the differential on our energy products that we ship 
to Canada’s coast, or would he represent the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan? Or because of a donation from John 
Horgan and the British Columbia NDP [New Democratic 
Party], would he be beholden and bought by John Horgan and 
the BC [British Columbia] NDP? 
 
Mr. Meili: — The Premier seems to have forgotten that just a 
few days ago we voted against corporate and union donations or 
any donations from out of province in this province. This 
Premier voted to keep them. 
 
Now something else that this Premier did . . . And I just want to 
say I’m glad to hear it. I’m glad to hear you’re not taking the 
top-ups from the party. That was never an acceptable practice. 
 
Now something that was another change in practice under the 
previous premier was around legislative secretaries. We had the 
elimination of extra funding for legislative secretaries. 
Something you chose to do just a few days ago was add not 1 or 
2, not 3 or 4, but 13 legislative secretaries. 
 
So I guess my question for you, Mr. Speaker, what’s the 
value-add to the province of those added legislative secretaries? 
And are we going to be able to see that work? Is that going to 
be provided to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to follow up on 
the previous topic quickly and then some comments with 
respect to the engagement of our legislative secretaries. There 
was a vote the other day in here, Mr. Chair, but they still took 
the money from John Horgan and the BC NDP. That needs to 



4414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

be noted and it needs to be on the record. They still took the 
money from the union organizations from across Canada. They 
still took those dollars, Mr. Chair. 
 
The legislative secretaries here in the province of Saskatchewan 
that were appointed the other day will have a $3,000 annual 
stipend to their salary, and they will work very hard for that on 
behalf of the people of the province. Now all MLAs on both 
sides of this House, I know, engage with respect to their 
geographic area that they represent, their constituency, as I do 
in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook and through my 
office and through the opportunities that I have there. 
 
And I know all members — I’ll speak for on this side of the 
House, but I believe across the House — do engage within their 
constituency as an MLA should. And I think we can all note 
times when maybe that didn’t happen, and very quickly the 
people in the particular area chose someone else at the next 
opportunity. So it is important to engage within our 
constituency, but it’s also important for us to engage on the 
number of sectors and the number of ministries that we have 
across government with the stakeholders that we have across 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:00] 
 
If there’s anything that I learned — and I know a couple of the 
members opposite would likely concur with this — in my 
travels over the past year through a leadership race, Mr. Chair, 
as well as the travels that I’ve had the opportunity to partake in 
as leader of the party and Premier of province, is that we need 
to continue with the type of engagement that we had for that, 
for those months, into the future. 
 
Ensure that . . . We won’t make all good decisions, Mr. 
Speaker. At times we’ll have to change some things, but ensure 
that we are making the very best decisions that we can by 
talking to people across the province of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s what this engagement will be about with these individuals 
in the caucus. 
 
We have individuals that will engage with teachers and with 
students and with parents across the province in communities 
across Saskatchewan and ensure that that information and those 
opinions of those people is coming directly to the Minister of 
Education’s office. We have an individual that will engage with 
our agriculture stakeholders, our stakeholders in our 
communities and pertaining to servicing the most vulnerable in 
our communities through Social Services. Mr. Chair, these are 
important engagement initiatives that I feel strongly need to 
continue. 
 
With respect to the remuneration of $3,000, the full 
remuneration for legislative secretaries is about $14,000. And 
they’re not receiving the full remuneration. They’re receiving a 
portion of that because we are in a challenging financial times 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, that the engagement that 
they’re going to perform is well worth the $14,000 and beyond, 
but they’re willing to do it for much less than that on behalf of 
the people that they serve across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So this is an important role as we move forward, to ensure that 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and the relevant 

ministers and ministries, that we are getting the very, the most 
current, the most direct information that we can possibly get. 
Mr. Chair, this is a decision that I made. This is a decision that I 
think is important in our service to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I am proud of the legislative secretaries that 
we have appointed this time. This is not a new initiative. We 
have had legislative secretaries in the government previous and 
we will into the future. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thirteen is the largest number that has ever been 
seen in this province. Suddenly there’s a need for 13 legislative 
secretaries, at the same time as there appears to be, from this 
government’s point of view, a need to cut the wages of workers 
by 3.5 per cent. Mr. Chair, there’s still a lot of discussion going 
on about cutting various contracts by that exact amount. 
 
And so what I would like to know is, how do you explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan — who you’re expecting to be 
accountable, who you’re expecting to take a hit on their wages 
— that the members here are going to get an increase in wage, 
but no accountability? Because the question that was asked was 
a very clear question: in what way are we going to see the 
work? In what way are they going to demonstrate the value for 
money of that added duty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — To begin with there are some inaccuracies 
in the premise of the question. First of all the three and a half 
per cent is a return to our 2016 wages here in this Assembly for 
all members, so it’s been zero over those years, taking the three 
and a half last year. I believe it works out to, over the past four 
years, point four per cent a year over the past four years on 
average, Mr. Chair, with respect to that. 
 
With respect to our legislative secretaries, who will see the 
work that the legislative secretaries are doing are the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s why they’re appointed, is 
they will be out in communities on their relevant files, engaging 
with people and gathering that information to ensure that we 
have that information being brought right from our 
communities, right from those front lines of people offering 
services, engaging with those people to ensure that we have that 
information brought right into the minister’s office, right into 
the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. So that is the 
people that will see the work that the legislative secretaries will 
be performing. 
 
And I would put forward this, with respect to the $3,000 
remuneration that these legislative secretaries will have, is a 
little bit under $40,000 for all of them over the course of a year. 
I believe the member from Saskatoon Centre had stated in the 
scrum the other day that he received $12,000, a little more than 
$12,000, when he served as a legislative secretary. So under 
those remuneration packages, I can see that we could only have 
three. We would only be able to have three under those 
packages to keep that within the $40,000 limit that we’ve put 
forward, Mr. Chair. With the remuneration package that we’ve 
worked with members on this side of the House, we’re able to 
actually provide 13 and greatly enhance the engagement that we 
will have with people, organizations, those organizations that 
the Government of Saskatchewan needs to continually be 
involved with. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The Premier appeared to get a little confused on 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4415 

that question. I was asking about the workers all across this 
province who you’ve been telling need to take a pay cut. How 
should they take this news that the members in here, 13 of these 
members, are getting a big raise without any accountability, that 
they won’t be able to see how that work was done? You’ve 
continued to not be accountable to that question as well, 
yourself. I’ve made it very clear: what will we see for the work? 
 
Now I’m going to move on a little bit, however. And you can 
answer that if you like — I would appreciate it — but I’m going 
to move on to a couple other topics. One, trappers across this 
province would like the same treatment as people who fish for 
sport. When they turn 65, people in this province, fishing 
licences are free. However trappers when they turn 65 would 
also request that they no longer have to pay their trapping 
licence. Now is that something the Premier would be open to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d spent a 
little time on this a number of years ago, and so I do have some 
recollection, but I was greatly helped out by a colleague of mine 
with the exact wording. There is no licence requirement for a 
traditional sustenance use of the fur resources for those that are 
exercising their treaty and Aboriginal rights. Commercial use, 
including the sale of the pelts, is not considered part of these 
rights, and a licence is then required when those pelts are being 
used for commercial use. And we would make the point that the 
licence for northern trappers is half the cost of the trappers in 
the South. I met with the trappers on a number of occasions 
over my time serving as Environment minister. 
 
I would also put forward that a portion of the revenues from the 
sale of those licences are used to support initiatives such as the 
humane trapper education program, which is administered by 
the Northern Saskatchewan Trappers Association, that directly 
benefits youth that are interested in becoming or involved in 
continuing their families’ participation in trapping. And the 
resources allocated for these initiatives have exceeded the 
revenues derived from the sale of licences. 
 
In the case of recreational fishing licences, here in the province, 
those that are 65 years or older do receive a fishing licence for 
free, here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s our 
province’s senior. 
 
But as I said, the sustenance licence, when practising our 
Aboriginal treaty rights, for trapping and fishing for sustenance 
is free. But in the case of commercial use, there are licences that 
are required for that. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Now the question really applied to folks over 65. 
Looking at the very minimal income that would actually be 
connected to commercial trapping, would it not make sense, 
recognizing the importance of having elders out on the land 
working with younger folks, having them have that access to 
this traditional way of life? Would it not make a lot of sense to 
remove that as done in fishing for folks over 65? 
 
The Lac La Ronge Band is partnering with the federal 
government to build a wellness centre on the reserve in La 
Ronge, and this would be a great opportunity for the provincial 
government to join into this partnership and be part of a project 
that would assist a lot of people in accessing primary care 
where it’s much needed. Would your government consider 

something as forward-thinking as partnering on a health and 
wellness centre on-reserve? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a 
conversation that has occurred under the previous premier with 
Chief Cook-Searson. A number of ministers were involved. I 
think the current Minister of Finance, a couple of Health 
ministers, and others were involved in that meeting where they 
did have a discussion with respect to a wellness centre, Mr. 
Speaker, on-reserve in the community to, you know, address 
those health needs most close to home which is always, always, 
always the goal. 
 
The meeting was left with respect to there would be an 
openness to partnerships if we were able to have conversations 
with the federal government. And this question is best placed to 
the federal government, being an on-reserve initiative. And this 
is not . . . The federal government has not come forward in any 
way to be a partner with this project as we speak. 
 
This raises a similar concern that was raised in Yellowknife last 
week at the meeting of the western premiers and the territorial 
premiers with respect to the partnership that we have with the 
federal government when it comes to health care and providing 
health care in the provinces. What started at about a 50/50 
partnership, we’re down to about a 21 per cent federal share in 
our health care funding here in the province. And I would just 
quote one paragraph out of the communiqué that came out of 
that meeting, and it says: 
 

Western Premiers also expressed concerns over the 
declining federal share of overall health funding and called 
on the federal government to meet with provinces and 
territories on appropriate long term arrangements. The 
health needs . . . are not well served when provincial and 
territorial governments do not receive [their] fair and 
sustainable funding through the Canada Health Transfer. 

 
Mr. Chair, this is a conversation that the relevant ministries, the 
previous premier, have had with the community. It’s a 
conversation that I would say would be ongoing. It’s a 
conversation that we would look to the federal government to 
be a partner in any services that would be provided on-reserve 
in the community, Mr. Chair. But I think it should also be noted 
the initiatives and the effort that have been put forth by the 
current ministers of Health as well as previous ministers of 
Health, to ensure that people across this province do have 
access to primary health care services, to their physicians, to 
their medical professionals, their nurse practitioners, and to 
emergency rooms, in many cases, in communities across the 
province. 
 
This has been a commitment by this government over the last 
decade. It’s a commitment that remains. This is one of the 
services that the people of the province expect the provincial 
government to provide. And there’s always a need to do better 
and to work more closely with communities, more closely on 
the services that are required that do evolve over time to some 
degree, but I think it’s also important to acknowledge the effort 
and the initiative that has been put forward over the past decade. 
 



4416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much. Worth noting that 
especially in a community such as La Ronge you would have 
provincial patients able to access the on-reserve primary care 
clinic, and always that we are treating patients who live 
on-reserve in provincial facilities as well. So really an important 
opportunity to partner. 
 
Another area in the North where we have some real struggles 
with health care services is in the community of Creighton. The 
closest large centre for services is Flin Flon, but folks from 
Creighton are often sent to Saskatoon for many of their medical 
appointments and procedures. It would appear to most to be 
much more cost effective to have people able to access that care 
in Flin Flon. You mentioned the recent meeting in Yellowknife 
with the western premiers. Is this a discussion that this 
government could take on in a similar way to the way things are 
arranged with Lloydminster, making sure that northern patients 
are able to access the nearest and best available services rather 
than those that are only delimited by provincial boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — With respect to services, health care 
services and long-term care services in the community of 
Creighton that are, in many cases, being provided in the 
community of Flin Flon to some degree, there has been some 
concerns in years gone by from individuals that the minister and 
Ministry of Health in Saskatchewan have continued to 
endeavour to work their way through. It’s a little bit of a unique 
situation in these communities, as they are so close. They’re 
separated by an interprovincial border. But the expectation of 
the Canada Health Services is that the individuals will receive 
the same level of care on both sides of those interprovincial 
boundaries. 
 
In this instance the minister and the ministries of Health have 
engaged directly with Manitoba, the ministry of Health in 
Manitoba. And there’s a little bit of uniqueness in the fact that 
this particular facility in Flin Flon is an agreement that the 
Ministry of Health has with that particular facility.  
 
Nevertheless, the ministers’ offices and the ministry continue to 
work with individuals that may have a concern with respect to 
the services that are being provided on either side of that 
interprovincial boundary. They’ll continue to do that into the 
future and continue to work with not just the community of 
Creighton and Flin Flon, but with communities across the 
province of Saskatchewan so that we do have access, or the 
greatest access possible to the services that people expect in 
their communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This has been an effort on behalf of the people of the province 
by this government over the last decade. These are numbers, 
you know, that we’ve heard before, but with 900 more 
physicians working in the province, some of those specialists 
getting ready to move into a children’s hospital in Saskatoon, 
some of those working in the community where I live and 
communities that I serve in the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook and rural areas of the province, providing 
access to those people that in years gone by had to drive to 
communities like Prince Albert and Saskatoon to receive just 
basic health care services, a nurse practitioner or a physician 
visit. 
 
So we have come a long way over the past decade. There’s 

always more work to do. And in the case specific to Creighton 
and Flin Flon, the minister’s office, the Ministry of Health are 
very much engaged with the community as well as Manitoba 
Health services. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Keeping in health care, we had a promise a few 
years ago from your predecessor promising zero waits in the 
emergency department by the end of 2017. Now the end of 
2017 has come and gone, and so has that goal. The goal has 
changed to a reduction of waits by 35 per cent by March 31st of 
2017. 
 
Now speaking to colleagues within emergency medicine, 
they’re telling me the story of what’s actually going on in 
emergency rooms, where you’ve got patients being seen in 
hallways, in converted janitor closets, patients with chest pain 
being assessed while still sitting in waiting room chairs. 
 
And just to put some numbers on that, since ’13-14 we’ve seen 
an increase in physician initial assessment in Saskatoon, up by 
20 per cent. We’ve seen time waiting for an in-patient bed up 
by 13 per cent, ED [emergency department] length of stay for 
people that are admitted up by 15 per cent, and non-admitted 
length of stay up by 12 per cent. So clearly we haven’t made it 
to zero, and in fact we’ve gone backwards. Those waits have 
gone longer. 
 
This was a major hoshin, for lack of a better word, in the former 
health region and in the health system overall to reduce ED wait 
times. Why has this gone so badly? Why are wait times actually 
getting worse? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And the 
Leader of the Opposition raises, you know, a valid point. There 
is some data that is concerning as we move along, as 
demographics change, as the usage of our facilities change as 
we move along. But we do remain, you know, committed to 
providing the very best care that we can, including in our 
emergency rooms, with respect to our emergency room wait 
times and some of the statistics are there. 
 
We must also acknowledge, Mr. Chair, the increase in 
population that we’ve had over the last decade. There has been 
investments to follow along with that increase. Investments, as I 
said, in 900 more physicians operating, working across the 
province, providing access to those services in communities 
right across the province, including in our larger centres.  
 
We’ve increased the number of acute care beds in our larger 
centres as well by some 15 per cent, now 204 additional beds 
operating in our largest acute care facilities. We’ve invested in 
new acute care facilities, not only in our largest centres here in 
the province of Saskatchewan but in a number of our rural 
communities as well across Saskatchewan. We’ve invested a 
further 19 million that has been allocated specifically to reduce 
wait times here in our province. 
 
Mr. Chair, four accountable care units are up and running here 
in the province, and now we have three units at the Pasqua 
Hospital here in Regina as well as one up at St. Paul’s Hospital 
in Saskatoon. Since these have been established, I think it’s 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4417 

relevant to note as well that wait times, since the three units at 
the Pasqua Hospital have been established, the wait times for an 
in-patient bed at that facility have been reduced by 35 per cent. 
Wait times at the St. Paul’s facility in Saskatoon since the 
introduction of the accountable care unit has been reduced by 
24 per cent. There are plans to implement three new 
accountable care units to be up and running by the end of this 
year, Mr. Chair: another one at the Pasqua Hospital here in 
Regina, as well as two more at the St. Paul’s Hospital in the 
community of Saskatoon. 
 
That being said, we need to continue to work on this initiative 
because it is an initiative that’s important to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And at some point in time many of 
us do end up in an emergency room with our children or 
ourselves, and this is a service that we need to continue to work 
hard on, on behalf of the people of the province and work 
diligently on to ensure that we’re providing the very best health 
care possible, not only in our larger centres but in communities 
across the province of Saskatchewan. And providing that care is 
an initiative that we have been committed to on this side of the 
House for the past decade and will continue to be committed to 
in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you very much. I think, with all due 
respect, the wait times for question responses are up by 20 per 
cent as well. 
 
Just in terms of that initial promise, right, you said much of this 
had to do with the growth in the population. Clearly in 2012, 
the population was already growing. Clearly you would have 
made that promise with, in mind, the idea that the population 
would continue to grow. So that just makes that initial promise 
of zero wait times, I mean it’s not really a reasonable promise in 
any setting, but particularly reckless in that context. 
 
Now my question for you today is, with the failure to meet 
those targets at the end of 2017 of zero, or even the 35 per cent 
anywhere, and the actual increase in wait times in our largest 
city, largest patient population, is that goal of reaching a 60 per 
cent reduction in wait times by the end of 2019, is that just out 
the window? Is that clearly a irresponsible pipe dream, or do 
you actually maintain that that’s the commitment and that’s 
what you’ll achieve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, thank you. We set targets in this 
province, and we continue to make every effort to address the 
targets that we set out. We set various targets specific to health 
care over the years. Some we have achieved in the time allotted, 
some we have not. But nevertheless, we will continue to set 
targets and continue to take initiatives to make every effort to 
achieve those targets. 
 
In this case, we will be monitoring and assessing this very 
closely over the next short period of time as we approach that. 
And we do have, we do have confidence that the accountable 
care units that are up and running, the ones that will be up and 
running prior to the end of the year will be very beneficial in 
reducing our wait times in our facilities here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But we will not apologize for setting a target and making efforts 
and taking initiatives to meet those targets. In particular in 

health care, the investments that have come to fruition over the 
past decade in health care must be noted in this province, as 
they are made on behalf of the people and communities across 
this province. 
 
I mention the physicians that are working across this province 
in our urban centres, in our rural communities. Over 900 
physicians now working, an increase of over 900 physicians 
working and providing care to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the original 995,000 people and the additional 
165,000 that have chosen to make this their home over the past 
decade. Over 3,700 nurses now working in our facilities across 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And investing in new facilities as well, as I believe there’s 13 
long-term care facilities and a few of those are integrated care 
facilities with acute, attached acute care facilities. We see a new 
hospital in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan Hospital in North 
Battleford. We see a new hospital in Moose Jaw as well, Mr. 
Chair. And these are investments that the people . . . Oh 
Humboldt, don’t let me forget Humboldt, Mr. Chair. 
 
These are investments that the people of the province expect of 
their provincial government. And to set targets to provide better 
care to the people of the province is something that has not 
come about lightly by members on this side of the House. And 
we’ve made every effort to achieve those targets or at least 
achieve the services that are being provided to the people of the 
province. 
 
This is in contrast to years prior, Mr. Chair. This is in contrast, 
when we had a NDP Health minister in this province that said 
that they wouldn’t be setting targets because they might not be 
able to meet them, they might not be able to meet them. Well 
we should never be frightened from setting targets on behalf of 
the people of the province to improve the services, even when 
you don’t meet that target 100 per cent, if you get 92 per cent of 
the way to that target, Mr. Chair. 
 
I think it should be noted that the care and the services that are 
provided to the people that we serve in this Assembly, in 
communities across this province, is as important as any target 
that is put forward, and we improve that care on behalf of the 
people, we’ll continue to do it. We’ll continue to put forward 
initiatives that will give us every opportunity to provide the 
services that the people of this province expect of their 
governing party. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Yet clearly this government doesn’t have a 
problem setting targets. For example, for emergency department 
waits, they set a target of zero by the end of 2017. Then they 
changed it to 35. Well they changed it to 60, and now they 
changed it to 35. They’re setting targets all the time, the same 
target, moving their goal posts because they’re failing to make 
any progress whatsoever because they’re actually moving in the 
opposite direction. Now that’s a pretty disappointing approach 
to setting targets. It’s not enough to say, here’s what I want to 
achieve. They actually have to have a plan to get there. 
Otherwise it’s just a wish. 
 
And when it comes to surgical waits, in less than three years the 
number of people waiting more than three months for their 
surgery has grown by over 7,000 people. We’ve got 4,500 more 



4418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

people waiting more than six months for their surgery. Just a 
couple of years ago we were at 100 per cent of our benchmarks; 
we’re now at 76. We’ve fallen below the national average on 
several wait time benchmarks. 
 
This government injected money into the wait times initiative 
up until 2015, and then that ended. And at the same time as that 
ended, we see this big spike in wait times for surgery. So once 
again, you set the targets, you put the investment in. When it 
comes to emergency departments, no movement whatsoever. 
 
Surgical wait times, you actually had some success. What’s 
happened in the last three years? Why weren’t you able to make 
the systemic change necessary to maintain those decreases in 
wait times? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And 
again with respect to the question, there have been strides that 
have been made, strides that have been made in this province 
over the last number of years, over the last decade, in our 
surgical wait times here in Saskatchewan through a number of 
different initiatives that have been invested in by the governing 
party on behalf of the people of the province that have brought 
our surgical wait times in this province to some of the shortest 
in the nation. Despite having increased in recent years, we 
remain in this province with some of the shortest wait times in 
the nation. As I said, we’ve had an increase in our population, 
an increase in our demand at our health care facilities, as we 
have an increase in the aging demographic of people in the 
province as well. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, when you compare the record in 
the province to a decade ago, we are down. On those waiting 18 
months, we are down 87 per cent. Those waiting more than 12 
months, we’re down 79 per cent. Those waiting more than 6 
months, we are down 57 per cent. And those waiting more than 
3 months, we are down 41 per cent. We have the shortest wait 
times when it comes to bypass surgery, bladder cancer surgery, 
unlike the members opposite who didn’t set targets. They did 
not set targets with respect to wait times, with respect to 
recruitment. 
 
There are initiatives that have been put forward by this 
government over the last number of years. I talked about, 
earlier, the 900 more physicians that are here. Some of that is 
going to be supplemented, as we go through the next number of 
years, by an initiative that was invested in by members on this 
side of the House, the governing party of the province of 
Saskatchewan, in ensuring that we went from 60 training seats 
at our College of Medicine to 100 for our doctors here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Our residency seats, the good doctor 
I’m sure is aware of this, were from 60 to 120, Mr. Chair. This 
was an important investment to ensure that we are able to have 
sustainable medical professionals provided to the communities 
across the province. 
 
Another initiative that this government put forward was the use 
of private surgicentres here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
One line, Mr. Chair, the one line where individuals waiting for 
surgery would ensure that they’re in line, they get to the front of 
that line that would either go to a hospital, to a public 
surgicentre, or to a private surgicentre, Mr. Chair. And it’s 
important to note that over the last number of years there has 

been just under 70,000 — 70,000 — surgeries that have been 
performed at these private clinics. 
 
[16:45] 
 
There’s also private MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] that 
are being performed now here in the province of Saskatchewan 
— 1,155 private MRI scans were purchased by patients, 1,155 
additional MRI scans were provided to the people of the 
province, to the public system, to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan for no cost, Mr. Chair. A total of over 2,300 
MRIs that have been utilized involving private MRI scans here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So understanding the success and the number of private 
surgeries that have occurred here in Saskatchewan, 
understanding the number of private MRIs that have not only 
been provided and paid for, but the free MRIs that have been 
provided and shortening those wait times here in the province 
of Saskatchewan, I think the people of the province would like 
to ask the Leader of the Opposition, if he was ever to become 
premier of the province, would he continue with private 
surgicentres here in the province of Saskatchewan? Would he 
continue in setting those targets and being able to think outside 
the box when it comes to utilizing the private surgicentres with 
the one public lineup, to shorten the wait times in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Meili: — Now the question was, of course, around surgical 
wait times and what would be done to improve the slide in 
those numbers. We didn’t hear an answer, of course. Let’s see if 
we get somewhere on this one. 
 
We had an interview with the then future premier with the 
Leader-Post, where he was asked, should the portion of mental 
health spending be increased to 7 per cent of the health budget, 
as is the national average? Excellent question. This is an 
underfunded part of our health care system. A growing concern 
is mental health across the province — more and more people 
struggling all the time with depression, anxiety, and other 
mental illnesses. And I was pleased to see the now Premier’s 
answer: yes. However, that yes didn’t seem to carry over into 
the budget, because the number is now 5.3 per cent in the 
2018-19 budget. We do not see that increase to 7 per cent. Why 
has the Premier not followed through with that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Not to miss out 
on the opportunity to point out when a question isn’t answered, 
the question wasn’t answered with respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition, whether he would continue with the successful 
practice of and implementation of private surgicentres in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’ll continue to set targets here in the province. 
We’ll continue to endeavour to meet those targets here in the 
province. And you know, this begs a question from the 
members opposite because it was stated in this House on May 
the 25th, 2016 by the member from Regina — the other 
leadership candidate, member from Regina Rosemont; I should 
never forget that — with respect to his call for the government 
to implement the Fyke report here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Well, the Fyke report actually calls for the 
closure of 50 of Saskatchewan’s 70 hospitals here, Mr. Chair. 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4419 

And I think that’s important to note, that this is how often there 
are differences of opinion across this floor. Although we may 
be just a few metres apart, there’s very much a difference in 
opinion on how we treat our communities and the investment 
that we provide in the province of Saskatchewan. You contrast 
that with the investment in long-term care facilities, the 
investment in rural physicians, rural nurse practitioners across 
the province of Saskatchewan, because I don’t think one of 
those 20 remaining facilities are going to be in towns and 
villages across the province. 
 
Also with respect to the wait times here in the province and, 
Mr. Chair, with respect to an article that was out in December 
13th, 2017, Saskatchewan continues with the second-shortest 
wait times in the nation of Canada. This has come about 
through initiatives and investments like private surgicentres, 
Mr. Chair, like private MRIs, and like focusing on these 
initiatives that are important to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to mental health and addictions investment here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, the Leader of the Opposition 
notes that through health care we have $284 million invested in 
mental health and addictions through the Ministry of Health — 
$284 million invested in mental health services, about 5.3 per 
cent of their budget. Across government in mental health and 
addictions we’re at about $367 million in this most recent 
budget year, up $11 million I may add as well, this most recent 
budget year, a commitment to ensuring that we continue to 
provide the services to the people of the province that need 
them. And you’ll see continued initiatives and efforts and focus 
on this in the months and years ahead if we are given the 
opportunity to continue to govern on behalf of the people of the 
province. 
 
Inside the Ministry of Health, these investments support for 
example $46 million directly into addiction services here in the 
province. They also support 1,200 mental health full-time 
equivalent positions across the province. They also support 390 
addiction full-time equivalent positions across the province as 
well as 360 addiction treatment beds across the province, 232 
acute in-patient beds for mental health services in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and 1,224 community residential beds across 
the province of Saskatchewan. There’s construction not too far 
from where I live in the community of North Battleford, in the 
Saskatchewan Hospital there as well, an investment in a 
community but an investment more broadly in mental health 
services on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Not recognized, but important investment on behalf of those 
same people that we represent, investment outside the Ministry 
of Health, unrecognized investment in mental health services 
include 30 million education and mental health resources in our 
education system, into our schools across the province of 
Saskatchewan; half a million dollars in anti-bullying initiatives 
across the province of Saskatchewan; $2.4 million to our police 
and crisis teams and mental health custody services in the 
province of Saskatchewan; as well as our Farm Stress Line, 
provided through the Ministry of Agriculture to our rural 
residents involved in agriculture across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

So while the Leader of the Opposition rightly points out there’s 
more work to do when it comes to mental health services in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we also must recognize the work 
that is occurring within the Ministry of Health, the increase of 
over $11 million this past year, but also recognize the work that 
is occurring outside of the Ministry of Health as we continue to 
provide this ever-so-important access to mental health services 
here in the province, here in the province and here in 
communities across the province of Saskatchewan. And this 
will be a focus of the government as we move forward. 
 
Mr. Meili: — That was a really long time to not answer a 
question. And it’s always . . . I always kind of enjoy when the 
Premier gets into asking questions though. I like to see him 
auditioning for the role of Leader of the Opposition. You know, 
personally I think he’s a natural for it. 
 
Now I do want to come back to the question, however. Seven 
per cent was the promise from the Premier. Nine per cent is 
where most provinces are going. Why is this Premier not going 
to keep up with that commitment that he made and increase the 
mental health budget to 7 per cent of our health budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — This is a priority of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. As we move forward, we are going to make 
every effort to increase the funding on behalf of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan with respect to mental health and 
addictions and would make every initiative that we can, 
increasing it this year as well with some federal dollars, some 
provincial dollars. We’ll continue to ensure that any federal 
dollars that arrive, that they are invested efficiently to provide 
the very best services that we can to the province of 
Saskatchewan and continue to supplement them, supplement 
those federal dollars with provincial dollars as we move 
forward. 
 
The goal is to move our province’s mental health and addictions 
funding to 7 per cent here on behalf of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And we will work towards that goal 
over the months and years ahead, ensuring that we are in 
constant communication with the people across the province to 
address the needs that they have, whether it be with mental 
health and addictions, whether it be the access to other primary 
health care services in their communities across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Health care has been a priority of the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the last decade. That has showed with the 
increase in funding to the global health care budget that we 
have had in the province over the past decade, and that 
commitment continues to all the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ll continue to work with them to 
provide the very best health services that we are capable of. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The Premier has noted that he likes to set targets 
and that he thinks that’s a valuable thing. By what year will we 
see mental health being 7 per cent of our provincial health 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — With respect to the commitments that were 
made on the leadership campaign, we didn’t make any 
commitments to close some 50 of our 70 hospitals, Mr. Chair. 
That was members opposite that were talking about 



4420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

implementing any type of a disastrous Fyke report that would 
cause that heartache on the people of the province.  
 
But we will continue to increase our mental health and 
addictions investment here in the province of Saskatchewan on 
behalf of the people of the province as finances permit. The 
goal is to get to 7 per cent of our health budget here in the 
province, and we’ll make initiatives to do that as our finances 
permit into the future. 
 
It’s also important to note, of the $284 million that we have in 
mental health and addictions funding today, that is a 52 per cent 
increase over what the members opposite invested in this when 
they had the opportunity in 2007. A 52 per cent increase in 
mental health and addictions funding, just in the Ministry of 
Health, never mind the funding outside the Ministry of Health. 
Over $360 million across government in programs that are 
provided in other areas of government to people, the same 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a strong investment. This is an investment that we need 
to continue to be committed to into the future. We have a target 
of 7 per cent. We’ll endeavour to make decisions, make 
investments, as we do in other areas of health care on behalf of 
the very people we serve, Mr. Chair, but that target will be met 
as our finances can allow. 
 
[17:00] 
 
Mr. Meili: — You know, I’m going to continue on. I see I’m 
not going to get a clear answer on that one, so we’ll continue on 
to another question. 
 
In that same interview during the leadership you told the 
Leader-Post when asked about access to reproductive health 
services, including abortion, you said: 
 

We trust those in medical practice and will not interfere 
with their obligations or oath. There is no plan to 
implement restrictions on abortion services. 

 
However during the same race you told an anti-abortion group 
that parental consent or parental notification for minors seeking 
abortion services is something you would consider. There have 
recently been demonstrations asking for this legislation in 
Saskatchewan. Now there’s some inconsistency in his 
comments, so my question is, is this a conversation you’ve had 
as a caucus and are you considering proceeding with either 
parental consent or parental notification legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — To clarify the comments with respect to the 
interview — and I don’t have them in front of me, but if 
memory serves me correctly — the words that I used was a 
conversation around parental notification is what I would be 
open to. So that is the comments that I recall, from memory, 
making. 
 
The fact of the matter is my first instinct was to indicate that if 
the Leader of the Opposition would like to know of our caucus 
conversations, he should come on over and join it, Mr. Chair, 
and he could be privy to those conversations. Apparently that 
was the incorrect answer, as I’ve been guided by a number of 
people here is that opportunity is not open, Mr. Chair. But I 

would advise the House those conversations are not occurring, 
Mr. Chair, and there’s not an intention to move forward with 
that. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I’m going to continue on with that interview. We 
discussed this a little bit yesterday, but didn’t get an answer 
from the Premier so I want to discuss it again. We had in that 
same interview, a question: do you support needle exchange 
programs and/or safe injection sites for drug users? And the 
answer from the then would-be premier was a flat no, stating 
that the province would continue to provide current services for 
people who are suffering with substance abuse. 
 
Now aside from the fact that current services do include, 
although in a limited fashion, they do include needle exchange 
programs, there’s a need for some updating on his information. 
I guess my major question is here, does the Premier understand 
the way in which harm reduction prevents HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] and hep [hepatitis] C transmission, 
prevents overdoses, and helps to connect people to treatment? Is 
he really wanting to say that there’s no interest in looking at an 
evidence-based approach to preventing negative outcomes and 
helping people get off drugs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’ve been 
fortunate enough to get a copy of precisely what I did say. And 
the statement was, “No. The province will continue to provide 
current services for the people who are suffering with substance 
abuse.” 
 
With respect to those comments, I am aware that needle 
exchanges are operating in communities across the province, in 
a number of different communities. I’m also aware of some of 
the controversial discussion among community members in the 
province on whether or not they should be occurring, and in 
communities close to where I live, Mr. Chair. 
 
But my comments were more with respect to safe injection 
sites, and as we move forward with that we’ll look to the 
Ministry of Health, the Minister of Health, with the guidance 
that they would have, understanding that there are the same 
opinions across the nation. And there’s differences in 
geography, differences in some of the challenges that we have 
here in rural areas of the province of Saskatchewan versus some 
of our urban areas and how we provide those services again on 
behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. So those 
are the exact comments that I had in that particular article and to 
continue with the services that are provided today on behalf of 
the people. 
 
Mr. Meili: — So just to clarify. The comments from the 
Premier are a little bit vague. So are you suggesting that 
because of some of those opinions out in communities, that 
you’d be looking perhaps to decrease the availability of needle 
exchange programs for people who are using? And secondly are 
you, in that comment, saying that you would be discussing it 
with the Minister of Health? Are you actually suggesting that 
there is some openness to exploring safe injection sites? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — With respect to the needle exchange, I’d say 
no. As I said in the article, we’d continue with the current 
services. And I’m referencing people that I talk to in 
communities, people that I know others talk to in their 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4421 

communities. 
 
With respect to safe injection sites, we are always open to, you 
know, ensuring that we’re providing the most effective services 
on behalf of the people of the province. It’s not the current 
initiative or the current direction of the provincial government 
of Saskatchewan, but we’re open to conversations with people 
across the province as ultimately those are the individuals we 
represent. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I’m certainly pleased to hear an evolution in the 
Premier’s position there, and certainly would recommend that 
he continue to dig into the evidence around the best ways to 
decrease harm related to drug use. 
 
Looking at some other harms in our province, one of the things 
that has changed significantly in recent months: since 2016, 
prices for a wide range of goods — of basically all items since 
2016 — have increased by approximately 5 per cent. That’s the 
highest rate of increase in Western Canada, much higher than 
Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, in fact the highest of all 
provinces. 
 
And that has been largely attributed to the increase in PST 
[provincial sales tax], where this government chose to double 
the amount that they were taking in from the PST. And I’m just 
wondering if you are able to give any commentary on that 
increase in prices, the increase in cost, the decrease in 
affordability of life for Saskatchewan people, and what your 
plans are to help counter that fairly significant spike. 
 
And I am quoting a chart here, happy to share that with you if 
you’d like to see it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Notwithstanding 
challenges in last year’s budget and in our initiative, our effort, 
and our move, we’re moving away from our reliance in this 
province on natural resource revenues. And the efforts that we 
made and the tough decisions that we made in last year’s budget 
in the start of our three-year plan to balance it, which this 
budget that we’re discussing here today is year two of that. And 
as the Minister of Finance had indicated on budget day, and 
many of us on this side of the House many times since then, 
that we are on track to achieve that balance next year on behalf 
of the people of the province to ensure the sustainable 
investment, again on behalf of those people we serve. 
 
The affordability in the province of Saskatchewan is an 
initiative that, again, that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
worked very hard on over the past decade, very hard to increase 
our export wealth here in the province and create jobs, over 
60,000 jobs in communities across the province — all the while 
reducing the income tax burden on Saskatchewan people with a 
focus on those low-income earners here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, understanding that oftentimes they may be 
single-parent families, things of that nature, people that really 
do need those dollars, Mr. Chair. 
 
So in the province of Saskatchewan, our residents have the 
second-lowest provincial tax and utility burden in the country at 
nearly every income level we have. We’ve removed in that 
lowest income level, 112,000 people off provincial income tax, 
the income tax roll completely, Mr. Chair. And it’s important to 

note that, as those are the people that most importantly need a 
hand up in this province. And those are the people that we have 
provided that opportunity in an income tax reduction here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also as we go through a number of different income levels here 
. . . And it’s important for the people of the province to 
understand the affordability matrix that we have here. But with 
all of the PST changes and all of the tax changes that were in 
last year’s budget — which were difficult decisions, Mr. Chair 
— we have one of the highest tax-free thresholds yet in the 
nation of Canada. 
 
A single person earning 40,000 in income still will pay $700 
less than they did a decade ago, a 20 per cent reduction in their 
income tax bill. A family of four with a $50,000 income will 
pay $2,300 less than they would have a decade ago. That’s a 77 
per cent reduction in their income tax bill. A family of four with 
a higher income of about $75,000 will still pay $1,800 less than 
they did a decade ago — $1,800 less, a 31 per cent decrease. 
 
Mr. Chair, when you look across the nation in many other 
jurisdictions, numbers like this don’t show up in many cases, as 
income taxes provincially and federally have been increasing. 
 
In addition to that, they’ve been adding other taxes, Mr. Chair, 
which I’m sure we’ll have an opportunity to possibly talk about 
because I know there will be a question on the economy and the 
growth of our economy, and the challenges and the headwinds 
that we’re facing. 
 
But to carry on, Mr. Chair, a family of four with $100,000 
income is still going to pay $1,900 less than they did in 2007, 
again a 20 per cent reduction. Mr. Chair, this is a fair question 
to have in this Assembly, and to talk about the affordability, of 
where Saskatchewan ranks very, very, very well in the nation of 
Canada versus some other parameters that can affect 
affordability, Mr. Chair. But they’re only one parameter in the 
entire affordability complex, if you will. 
 
And one of those is again a discrepancy and a clear choice 
between members opposite and members on this side. We put in 
a formula a number of years ago that ensured that our minimum 
wage in this province would continue to grow. It’s a formula 
that we consulted on at the time. It’s a formula that we continue 
to believe in. 
 
Members opposite are looking to implement what I’ve heard is 
a $15 minimum wage bump here. Now, Mr. Chair, I think it’s 
important for us to note that the leadership campaign of the 
current leader advocated for a $15 minimum wage. He’s asked 
some questions about it. He hasn’t committed to it. We’re going 
to ask if he will. 
 
But a few weeks ago, the member from Regina Rosemont asked 
about youth employment, here in this House, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. A Maclean’s magazine article from January of 
this very year notes that youth are the clear losers from a higher 
minimum wage. Their commentary has been supported by the 
Financial Accountability Office in Ontario, who calculated that 
a net loss of approximately 50,000 jobs due to minimum wage 
changes in that jurisdiction mostly affected young teens and 
young adults. The Bank of Canada, CFIB [Canadian Federation 



4422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

of Independent Business], the Fraser Institute all echo this. 
They all echo this. 
 
So this side, the governing party, on behalf of the people of the 
province, will continue to focus on affordability, with a focus 
on the affordability of those that need it. Our low-income 
earners here in the province of Saskatchewan are paying far less 
income tax than they ever did under the New Democratic Party 
in 2007, Mr. Chair. And it’s important now for us, for the 
Opposition Leader to provide to the people of the province: will 
he cost youth and young adult jobs here in the province by 
standing behind a $15 minimum wage? 
 
Mr. Meili: — You know, the Premier has a better time sticking 
to the script than he does sticking to the question that was 
actually asked. I asked about prices and the way they’ve 
climbed, and didn’t hear a thing about it. 
 
[17:15] 
 
I did hear however how income tax apparently is dropping. 
Well it seems that the Premier is actually committed to making 
sure people have less income. Why this Premier would stand up 
and actually brag about the fact that we have the lowest 
minimum wage in the country makes no sense to me. 
 
But let’s get back to the question at hand, and the rising prices. I 
heard a laudable commitment there. A laudable commitment, 
but laughable when you actually look at the application to a 
progressive approach to taxation.  
 
Just last year when this government decided to increase the 
PST, increasing it by a per cent — adding it to things like 
children’s clothes, and restaurant meals, construction, various 
kinds of insurance, now we’ve seen it added on to used vehicles 
— at the same time as they chose to decrease income taxes for 
the wealthiest people in the province, what happened as a result 
of that? If you were in the bottom decile of earners, your taxes 
went up by 2 per cent of your income. If you’re in the middle of 
earners, your taxes went up by 1 per cent of your income. If 
you’re in the top 10 per cent of earners, your taxes went down. 
They went down. 
 
This is your commitment to progressive taxation? This is your 
commitment to making sure that people who are making less 
money are actually able to afford life? Why did the Premier 
make such a choice? Why did your government make such a 
choice to increase taxes in a way that disproportionately make 
life more expensive for lower income people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And again, you 
know, these numbers that came up in question period, I’m not 
just exactly certain where they are actually coming from. 
Because the fact of the matter is, is something quite different 
when it comes to the affordability of Saskatchewan residents, 
most notably the affordability of those low-income residents 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One additional change that we made last year was we enhanced 
the low-income tax credit by $100 per adult, or $40 per child, to 
ensure that that made up for any changes that may come with 
respect to changes that were in the budget, with respect to 
taking the PST from 5 to 6 per cent, Mr. Chair. 

I have another document that I’d quote from, and from 2003 to 
2016 Saskatchewan had the largest decrease, after-tax decrease 
in those earning low incomes here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We had a decrease of 28 per cent of the 
population in the province of Saskatchewan being classified as 
low-income earners. This is an effect of a strong economy, but 
it’s also an effect of a government that is paying attention to the 
affordability factors, all of the affordability factors, to ensure 
that not only are people working here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but those that need a hand up that did not . . . 
Those low-income earners are not paying provincial income 
tax, Mr. Chair. And I went through the numbers on the 
reductions that they had under the members opposite. 
 
With respect to who is paying tax here in the province, those 
earning less than $40,000 in the province of Saskatchewan 
make up about 56 per cent of our taxpayers here in 
Saskatchewan. And they submit about 6 per cent of the actual 
tax burden here in the province of Saskatchewan. Those 40 to 
$100,000 make up about 36 per cent of the taxpayers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They submit about 48 per cent of the 
gross tax that the province receives. And those earning over 
$100,000 make up about 8 per cent of our province, Mr. Chair. 
The fact of the matter is, is that 8 per cent pays for about 46 per 
cent of the total of the tax income that the province of . . . tax 
revenues that the province of Saskatchewan has. 
 
I think it’s also important to note that we’ve worked very hard 
on this affordability complex, Mr. Chair. And it’s also 
important to note that some of the debate that happens in this 
House with respect to taxes is important and it does matter. 
Because should the Leader of the Opposition ever actually 
happen to be the Premier of the province, Mr. Chair, he has 
committed — he has committed, as has his counterparts across 
the nation — in quickly implementing a carbon tax on the 
industries, jobs, communities, and families across the province 
of Saskatchewan. This is a tax that has proven not to work. It 
does not reduce emissions. There is nowhere in the world where 
a carbon tax on its own has actually reduced emissions, Mr. 
Chair. What it does do is it moves those emissions and those 
jobs to other areas of the world that don’t charge it, Mr. Chair. 
 
So it’s important to note that while it’s been the governing 
party, on behalf of the people of the province, over the last 10 
years that has worked hard to reduce income taxes — in 
particular on those low-income earners in the province — to 
expand the economy, to provide jobs for those people that live 
in communities where all of us live across the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we will not be implementing those 
ineffective taxes that are hard and move jobs out of this 
province, Mr. Chair. 
 
It’s always members on this side of the House that will continue 
to engage with people across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And when it comes to initiatives or headwinds from our federal 
government, we will stand with the people in the industries in 
this province and the jobs that we have, each and every time. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Just to remind the Premier, because he seems to 
get lost somewhere in that trajectory, the question was around 
why the increase in PST? Why the increase in PST and the cut 
in income tax, which resulted in lower income folks paying 2 
per cent more of their income in taxes? That’s including the 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4423 

low-income tax credit. 
 
Add to that the impact of having added that PST to 
construction, to construction labour. Now we’ve got a $12.6 
million decrease in construction activity from March 2017 to 
March 2018. We’ve seen a slowdown in the restaurant business. 
And this is what I see, and I know my members over here have 
been talking to businesses throughout their communities. We’re 
hearing from businesses saying that their business is down. 
There are fewer customers; they’re having to lay people off. 
 
Mr. Premier, I guess I’m asking you. Mr. Premier, why have 
you chosen in a time of economic downturn to put tax in a place 
where it would actually slow down economic activity, slowing 
down the construction business, slowing down the restaurant 
business, in a time of economic downturn? What in the good 
name were you thinking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — The decisions that were made in last year’s 
budget and continue through this year’s budget, Mr. Chair, have 
been, you know, fully discussed in communities across this 
province. I had the opportunity in some 130 communities across 
the province of Saskatchewan to discuss this directly with the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan and to hear their input 
with respect to the changes we made. 
 
But those changes were made for very specific reasons, to shift 
our reliance, our revenue reliance in this province away from 
being reliant on natural resource prices. The price of oil, the 
price of potash, the price of some of our ag commodities should 
not determine our ability to hire 3,600 more nurses here in the 
province or 900 more doctors or to invest $30 million directly 
back into our classrooms. That should be determined by the 
people of the province that expect those services and should not 
be determined on the price of a barrel of oil or potash revenues. 
And that is the initiative that we put forward, was to start to 
reduce our reliance on those natural resource prices. 
 
The people of the province asked some other questions as well. 
And they understand the initiative that we have put forward 
here to continue to shift that reliance, not only to ensure that we 
can continue to invest in those services that people expect but 
ensure that that investment ability will be there for decades to 
come, but balancing the budget. And we’re on track to do that, 
Mr. Speaker, with this year’s budget. That’s something I’m 
proud of. 
 
As a new Premier of this province, I’m proud to serve with 
these members and to engage with people across the province. 
And it’s something the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
want, and I can’t say that for governments across the nation of 
Canada. There are not a lot of governments that are making 
what are sometimes tough decisions to ensure that we can 
sustainably invest into the next generation and leave that 
opportunity, the opportunity that we’ve had over the last 
decade, for my kids and your kids and other kids across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the other question that comes up from time to time is how 
the Leader of the Opposition, should he ever have the 
opportunity, pay for his two and a half billion dollars that he’s 
put out there that he’ll spend, Mr. Chair. How will that be paid 
for? And the only economic opportunity that he has put forward 

is to impose a carbon tax on the people of the province to pay 
for the promises that he has, ensuring $18 million, I think, in 
agriculture for some initiative that I’m not sure farmers are 
going to like a whole big bunch, Mr. Chair. 
 
But with respect to something much more current, much more 
current — and even up to and including some decisions that 
were made today —we have a dynamic across Western Canada 
and across the nation that has caused our federal government to 
invest and invest heavily in a transportation mechanism, a 
pipeline, in the Trans Mountain pipeline, to provide product to 
Canada’s coast, product that for the most part is going to come 
out of the province of Alberta. But the opportunity to enhance 
our access to that coastline with this product will start to 
diminish the differential that we experience in this province, 
increase our economic opportunities. 
 
So the question I have in representing the people of the 
province — of which I said we will do always, Mr. Speaker, 
represent people and industries, the jobs across the province of 
Saskatchewan — is, has the Leader of the Opposition reached 
out to his federal counterpart, Mr. Singh, and talked to him? 
Because he has come out blatantly against this infrastructure 
project. Has the Leader of the Opposition, on behalf of the $2.6 
billion that we’re missing in our economy each and every year 
in this province of which he would hope to represent, has he 
reached out to his federal leader and said whoa, whoa, whoa, 
whoa, just hold on here a little bit? You might not be on the 
right side of this? Has he done that, Mr. Chair? That’s a 
question that I would have. 
 
Has he reached out to Mr. Horgan, his provincial counterpart 
and leader in the province of British Columbia, and said hey, 
hey, hey, you know what you’re doing here is you’re getting in 
the road of a good project that’ll put people to work at Evraz 
steel in Saskatchewan? It’ll increase the economic opportunities 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a 
nation-building project. It’s in the interest of all Canadians, in 
particular those in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 
Columbia. Has he reached out to his counterparts, Mr. Speaker, 
and represented the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Meili: — The Premier went so far on that question I think 
he needs a travel scout for future ones. Now this question was 
of course about PST and PST that’s been added to children’s 
clothes, PST that’s been added to restaurants, PST that’s been 
added to construction. We’ve had a very clear message from 
those industries, from insurance, from restaurant industry, from 
construction industry, that that is harmful for their business, for 
their bottom line. 
 
Another new introduction this year of PST was onto used cars. 
And I just can’t help going back to this quote from your friend, 
Mr. Wall, who said at the time that he was elected that 
“Government should avoid doing dumb things. And the idea of 
charging the PST on the same used car over and over again 
seems pretty dumb.” 
 
And you know, when I looked that up, I also looked up 
donnaharpauer.ca, a website that talked about the first hundred 
days of the Sask Party government, a list that has not, as my 
colleague said, aged well. Eliminating the PST on used cars was 
one of the top things there. Creation of Enterprise 



4424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Saskatchewan — a memory. Set election dates — well 
sometimes. Stronger balanced budget legislation — yes, not so 
much. Paying down the provincial debt — no, I think it’s 
doubling the provincial debt seems to be the final message. 
 
So I guess, you know, there was those heady days of the early 
days of the Sask Party government with so much hope, with so 
many plans to not do dumb things. What happened? Where’s 
your vision? Why are you now going back on that early 
promise, adding PST to used cars? Where are you taking us, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, it’s important to note, these were 
difficult decisions that were made in order for us to shift our 
reliance away from being reliant on natural resource prices here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, to ensure that the services that 
we’re providing across the province are sustainable into the 
future, (a) by balancing our budget, (b) by ensuring we’re not 
governed by the price of a barrel of oil or any of the exports that 
we have here in the province. And it’s working. 
 
Over the past decade, 10 years ago, under the members 
opposite, 32 per cent of the provincial revenues came from 
natural resources here in the province. This past year, 10 per 
cent, 10 per cent are from natural resources. In all of this time, 
in reducing our reliance on natural resources from 32 per cent 
under members opposite to 10 per cent, we’re also able to . . . 
Each of the members that I went through in their different tax 
groups pay less tax than they did a year ago as well, Mr. Chair. 
 
[17:30] 
 
We have been focused on the tax burden on the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ve been focused on shifting our 
reliance on resource revenues here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that has made for some difficult decisions. 
And some of those decisions we have changed over the course 
of that decade. And I think it’s important to note that from time 
to time political parties and leaders will change their policy 
platforms. 
 
And I will point one out. In 2011, the NDP under then leader 
Dwain Lingenfelter, they ran on a policy of resource revenue 
sharing with First Nations across the province of Saskatchewan. 
They didn’t win that election. They didn’t do very well in that 
election, Mr. Chair. But near the end of 2015, the then leader, 
Mr. Cam Broten, he very quietly reversed that policy and he 
said the NDP no longer supports resource revenue sharing with 
the First Nations. He aligned the NDP with the already position 
of . . . and the only position of the province, the people’s 
government and the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, as 
we believe that resource royalty is used for highways and the 
schools and hospitals for all members of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So at the time that Cam Broten quietly tried to reverse that 
policy, he called it the . . . The now Leader of the Opposition 
was very critical of that. He called it an embarrassing step 
backwards and it was inconsistent with party policy. He openly 
criticized the then leader of the NDP. Since becoming leader 
this past March, he hasn’t said too much about revenue sharing 
with First Nations. 
 

So the question that we have today is: will the Leader of the 
Opposition clarify, is he with the NDP caucus and the 
Government of Saskatchewan, or does he continue with his 
opposition? 
 
Mr. Meili: — Once again the question was around PST, as 
have the last several questions been, but none of the answers. 
There was a statement made, however, that I think requires 
some correction, that folks who are lower income pay less tax 
than they did prior to last year’s budget. The opposite is true. 
They’re paying more tax and a higher percentage of their 
income in tax. 
 
Now the restaurant and construction industries have been very 
clear that that introduction of PST has been damaging for their 
business, as has the insurance industry. And we’re seeing the 
way in which decisions by this government are harming the 
economy, and that’s resulting in more people out of work — 
43,000 people unemployed today in Saskatchewan; 1,800 fewer 
jobs, year over year, with the most recent numbers compared to 
last April. We’ve got more and more people out of work. And 
that’s a real problem when we’ve heard no plan. We’ve only 
heard a comment from this government saying, well things 
were good five years ago. Right now people are out of work and 
they need help. 
 
You know, I want to talk about some very particular people 
who are out of work, the people who used to clean this building 
and who were let go by this government, and the people who 
are about to be out of work who we see every day when we go 
to the cafeteria. 
 
This government, the members opposite, walk through the halls, 
walk down there, say hello as they’re getting their meals, when 
they know that their decision has been to get rid of the cafeteria 
services and make the people who are serving them every day 
be, instead of there on the lunch line where they’ve been 
working with us for years and years, on the unemployment line. 
Where’s the moral compass? Is it Compass Foods? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, with respect to privatization of 
cleaning services here in the Government of Saskatchewan, it’s 
actually saved the taxpayers of the province three and a half 
million dollars. Important to note that 49 former employees 
continue to work with organizations that are still cleaning those 
facilities, and five of 13 contract businesses are actually 
employee owned. 
 
And I find this interesting as this is the economic answer that 
the member opposite comes forward with, is to ensure that we 
are hiring more civil servants, more into the public service here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
A quick tutorial on how this province has grown over the past 
decade is we have had the opportunity to add value and volume 
to the exports in the province of Saskatchewan. We have come 
from some $16 billion in exports in 2007 to about $30 billion 
the last year or two here in the province. That has created over 
60,000 jobs across the province of Saskatchewan. That has 
caused reason for people to move here from all over the world. 
Over 100,000 people have moved to Saskatchewan from around 
the world. But it has also created the opportunity for our next 
generation to stay here as they have a career that they can 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4425 

choose in a community across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s something we haven’t always had here in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, under years of an NDP government. So these 
again are challenging decisions that this government makes 
with respect to ensuring that we are utilizing the public dollars, 
the public taxpayer dollars, and stretching them to the greatest 
opportunity possible. 
 
But we will continue to advocate for a strong economy and 
strong, strong, strong job growth across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve done that the last decade and we’ll continue to 
put initiatives forward over the next decade that will continue 
with that, including two tax growth initiatives in this budget. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The people who cleaned this building, the people 
who make the meals here, these are steady jobs. They’re decent 
jobs. They’re not high-paying jobs. And I just don’t understand 
why this government would talk to the people who clean their 
offices, make their meals and say, you know what? We just 
can’t afford those jobs even though they’re in the lower end of 
civil service jobs. We need you to go. How do you look them in 
the face? How do you look yourself in the mirror? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I look in the mirror each and every morning, 
Mr. Speaker, and I look in the mirror and I commit to 
representing the people of the province of Saskatchewan. The 
very same question can come to the Leader of the Opposition 
and members in that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How do they look at people in the energy industry, the mining 
industry, and the agriculture industry and stand and say they 
want to tax that industry with an ineffective carbon tax that will 
move jobs to other areas of the world? How do you look at 
those people across the province of Saskatchewan, is how I ask. 
How do you wake up in the morning, look in the mirror and, 
Mr. Speaker, and look at those people? 
 
How do you look at the people at Evraz, Mr. Speaker, and tell 
them that I haven’t reached out to Mr. Singh, our federal leader 
who doesn’t want a pipeline built in this nation? How do you 
look at the people at Evraz when you haven’t talked to Mr. 
Horgan, your NDP counterpart in British Columbia who’s 
holding up this pipeline which is in the national interest, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the people of not just the province of 
Saskatchewan but provinces like Saskatchewan to continue to 
be contributing members, contributing financial members of 
this great nation of Canada? 
 
So the question comes right back to the Leader of the 
Opposition and members opposite: how do they look at the 
hard-working people of the province of Saskatchewan when 
they stand on their soapbox and say, what you really need here 
is a carbon tax? 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Chair, it really is hard to see that room, the 
rest of this room, clapping, pounding their desk in favour of 
firing the people who cook the meals in this building, in favour 
of firing the people who clean the offices in this building. It’s 
embarrassing. 
 
And the plan we heard last year, that they were going to just cut 
everybody’s wages by 3.5 per cent, that was the big plan. That’s 

how they were going to get us out of debt, save $350 million. 
They didn’t succeed in doing that. That plan didn’t make sense 
so now the plan is, let’s get rid of 1,250 jobs in the civil service. 
 
Mr. Chair, there’s so much work that needs to be done. You go 
into any public service field, into Health, into Social Services, 
front-line work needs more support, not less. Why is this 
government looking around and saying, you know, the best 
thing for Saskatchewan people is to lay them off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that there 
are still people, you know, working, cleaning the facilities 
across the province of Saskatchewan. It’s important to note that 
there will still be people working in the cafeteria here, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
I guess the question again comes back to the Leader of the 
Opposition. Who was working in the 52 hospitals that they 
closed across the province of Saskatchewan? Those people were 
laid off and left this province, Mr. Speaker. Who was working 
in the 176 schools that the NDP chose to close in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, more recent and relevant to that, who will be 
working if the members opposite ever got their way and 
supported Justin Trudeau and we had a carbon tax imposed on 
the industries in this province? The thousand workers that are 
directly employed at Evraz steel, Mr. Speaker, when that 
company could make a decision to move to the United States or 
to China, Mr. Speaker, who will be . . . How will these 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, look those members in the 
face, and who will have those jobs, Mr. Speaker, as we move 
forward? 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Chair, traditionally these estimates are a 
chance for us to get clear answers from the Premier, for him not 
to sit down and let the ministers answer, for him to actually 
come and listen to the questions and respond. The showboating 
for 10 minutes at a time and not giving us any answers at all, 
it’s really embarrassing. You know what? We’ve got some 
more questions to ask though, and we’ll keep trying. We’ll keep 
trying; maybe we’ll get an answer at some point. 
 
You know, there was a very major change this year in the way 
that this government reports their finances. They introduced 
actually including the pension accrual numbers in their 
summary statements. Now this was the recommendation from 
the beginning. When you go to summary statements, that’s what 
that means, a summary. You include everything. Now up until 
now because of interest rates, to include that pension numbers 
would have actually made it appear as though the deficit were 
higher. 
 
For the first time those numbers were actually positive and 
suddenly this government found religion. Oh, those need to be 
in the summary statements. It has to be there. You know, there 
was a former minister of Finance, I think he’s now working as a 
special adviser, Ken Krawetz. He said to the CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] in 2013, “It’s been the position of 
this government that we do not include the pension liabilities.” 
 
Now I guess my question is, why did the Premier suddenly find 
religion on this? Why did he suddenly change his practice? 



4426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

Because to all observers the only real explanation is you made 
the numbers look better, and made it look like they had less of a 
deficit than they actually do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And this 
shift from GRF [General Revenue Fund] reporting on the 
government financials, Mr. Chair, the shift from reporting on 
the GRF basis to a full summary basis is a shift that has 
happened and occurred over a number of years, Mr. Chair. For 
many years, this government, under members opposite, as well 
as the first number of years under a Saskatchewan Party 
government, reported on a GRF basis, as well as they reported a 
summary financial. The auditor had called for us to shift to a 
summary financial reporting basis, of which we did over a 
number of years, Mr. Chair. 
 
I think it’s important to note, with respect to the pension 
adjustments that were included in a line item in all of the 
summary documents and were moved up into the full body of 
the document — but they were not moved up in the release of 
this budget for any reasons that the member opposite puts 
forward — they were actually moved up in Q3 [third quarter] of 
last year, Mr. Chair. And it’s important to note that the pension 
adjustments were moved into the full accounting of the 
summary financials in Q3 of last year. This is part of the 
transition to a full reporting on a summary basis. It’s a 
transition that has went over a number of years, and it’s the way 
that we are reporting in this year’s budget, starting with Q3 of 
last year. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The Premier is correct to note that it was added 
in Q3 of last year, which is at the time when the numbers were 
actually going to increase the bottom line, and make it appear as 
though the government wasn’t running as much of a deficit last 
year as they actually did, that they hadn’t failed, that they 
hadn’t blown the contingency fund entirely, that they hadn’t 
failed to find the savings in the decrease in people’s wages that 
they promised they would. 
 
So I guess my question to you again, Mr. Premier, is can you 
give us any other reason, except that it looked good in Q3 of 
last year, that you actually made this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — In Q3, Mr. Chair, when the pension fund 
was included in the full summary statement, it didn’t make any 
difference in that particular budget, Mr. Chair. This is part of 
the full evolution to summary financials that has evolved over a 
number of years, Mr. Chair, and the evolution is, for all intents 
and purposes, close to or complete now. 
 
[17:45] 
 
So this is a decision that has been made over the last number of 
years to report the finances of the province of Saskatchewan on 
a full summary basis. There’s challenges in this as well, as we 
move forward, Mr. Chair, with respect to what that actually 
encompasses across the province of Saskatchewan in some of 
the entities that we have. 
 
But I think what the people of the province are more concerned 
with than precisely different accounting methods that we abide 
by over time is the fact of the matter that every initiative has 
been put forward by members on this side of the House and our 

Finance minister and treasury board to ensure that we are 
accountable with the people of the province’s money — that’s 
whose it is — and ensuring that we are on track to balance the 
budget here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what the people of this province are concerned about, is 
that their children will have the opportunity to sustainably 
invest in infrastructure projects in schools, not close them. They 
want to invest in replacing and building new schools in the 
province, and hospitals, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the people of 
the province want. They don’t want it just this year or next year; 
they want it for decades to come so that their children have 
every opportunity to enjoy the growth that we’ve had over the 
last decade. That’s what members on this side of the House are 
focused on. That’s what members on this side of the House will 
continue to focus on on behalf of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Chair, after a year of . . . or a decade, should 
I say, a decade of record revenue, now what do we have? We 
have record tax increases, record debt, and record 
unemployment. And now that record debt doubled in the last 
five years, and set to triple by 2022. What is this government’s 
plan to deal with that growing debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, it’s important to know . . . And I 
went through the numbers on the taxes paid, and I was 
comparing actually to the taxes that were paid by Saskatchewan 
residents under the members opposite, a decade ago. They’re 
down in every income category, Mr. Chair, and that’s important 
to note as we move forward with initiatives that are being put 
forward by the members opposite, like lack of representation 
when it comes to getting our products to market, like imposing 
silly and ineffective taxes like carbon taxation on the people of 
the province. 
 
But the fact of the matter is this: we can do some comparisons 
with respect to debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] across the 
nation where Saskatchewan fares very, very well. We’re third 
lowest, Mr. Chair. And this is all hidden in the budget 
documents, but we’re 26.1 per cent of our debt-to-GDP here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, below us being Alberta, but 
they’re very quickly going to catch us with a stat that I’ll bring 
up here closely. They’re at 14.3, and British Columbia at 25.6. 
Ranges as high, Mr. Speaker, as 74.6: the larger provinces, 
62.6; 66.9 in Manitoba; Ontario, 45.1, Mr. Chair. I think it’s 
important to note that Saskatchewan’s trajectory to balance the 
budget next year will give us every opportunity to continue to 
hold our debt-to-GDP ratio at a low level, and continue to 
advocate on behalf of increasing the GDP number as well, Mr. 
Chair, as we have opportunities here in this province. 
 
Where we are today with this budget — a $365 million deficit 
this year, on track to balance next year — is we’re running, Mr. 
Chair, about two and a half per cent of our revenues in deficit 
here this particular year. Just next door to us, under an NDP 
rule, they’re running over an $8 billion debt there this year, Mr. 
Chair, deficit which will be added to their debt and very quickly 
change the numbers on their debt-to-GDP. That’s 18.4 per cent 
of their revenues in that province, Mr. Chair, and it’s important 
to note. 
 
2.5 per cent of revenues is our deficit this year, on track to 
balance. 18.4 per cent, I believe my memory, in the province 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4427 

next to us, on track to balance with their virtual budget that was 
released not too long ago that is dependent on a pipeline that the 
member of the opposition refused to advocate for, Mr. Chair. 
 
So the fact of the matter is, is the trajectory and the effort and 
the initiatives that we are putting forward on behalf of the 
people of the province with the budget that’s in this year, in our 
second year of our three-year plan to balance, we’re on track to 
balance that budget next year. That’s what the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan want. That’s what they’ve told all of 
us in our travels, Mr. Chair, and we’ll continue in that initiative. 
And we’ll continue to represent people across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Meili: — By the time he gets done his answers, we’ve 
forgotten what the question is, and apparently so has he. Now 
the Premier’s memory has been a pretty significant question in 
recent months, a pretty significant question in recent months. 
And I want to ask a few questions about the Premier’s memory. 
 
We had the issue where Mr. Boyd had the irrigation plan for 
which he was charged and convicted of environmental 
infractions. And in the lead-up to that, those infractions, in the 
lead-up to those charges, he was applying for a permit through 
the Water Security Agency, for which the Premier was the 
minister at the time. And so I have a few questions that remain 
and that have still not been answered. 
 
One, there was a question of how often you had the kind of 
meeting that took place during that series of events, where you 
had the deputy minister to the Premier, deputy minister of 
Agriculture, deputy minister of the Environment, and the 
Minister of the Environment himself, coming together to look at 
an individual’s application for a Water Security Agency permit.  
 
So my question is to the Premier, and I’ve asked this before, but 
the team over there has chosen not to answer. How often or how 
many other times did you have a meeting of that magnitude that 
involved the deputy minister to the Premier during your term as 
minister of the environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, with respect to how often senior 
officials in the Government of Saskatchewan would meet on the 
application — any application essentially that I’m aware of — 
is not ever, Mr. Speaker, and nor did we in this case. There was 
a meeting with respect to the environmental violations that 
occurred, sometime later. There was never a meeting with 
senior government officials with respect to any application in 
this case or any other case, to my knowledge. 
 
I think it’s important to note here, because what’s being put 
forward in this House, a number of times been put forward in 
the rotunda, that there’s some sort of favour curried or anything 
of this nature that happened, just simply isn’t the case. If that 
was the case, somebody probably wouldn’t have been charged. 
But in this case there were four charges laid on this individual 
when there was a violation. He pled guilty to two of those 
charges and he was assessed one of the largest penalties, one of 
the largest penalties under this environmental law. 
 
And further to that, a very . . . A step that I have not seen taken 
or that I cannot recall taken, is when some of these inferences 
are put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, we saw 
actually a letter written from the president of the Water Security 

Agency to clarify some of the concerns that the Leader of the 
Opposition was putting forward. And I’d like to read a few of 
them into the record, Mr. Speaker. And it goes on, this letter to 
Mr. Meili from Susan Ross, the president of the Water Security 
Agency, and I quote: 
 

I would like to clarify some misunderstandings on this file. 
I noted that in the legislature and in the media you state 
that Mr. Boyd was treated differently and used back 
channels to advance his application for a water rights 
licence. This is not the case. I can assure you that Water 
Security Agency officials are professional public servants 
and acted appropriately throughout this case. 
 
Mr. Boyd inquired about the steps to obtain a water rights 
licence and was referred to the water rights licensing 
division, as is the normal case. He was provided with 
information and application forms. It was simple, and all of 
this is reflected in the emails being referred to in the 
media. 
 
Water Security Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture, and 
the Ministry of Environment officials acted in coordination 
and took the appropriate actions in bringing forward this 
file, which ultimately ended up in enforcement actions 
against Mr. Boyd. He was treated as any other citizen 
would have been, had he or she taken the same actions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that to the record. 
 
Mr. Meili: — It’s certainly not the officials that we’re 
concerned with. It is the former member and this Premier who, 
as the minister of the Environment, also met with Mr. Boyd to 
discuss the project in question. And we’ve asked this a few 
times, but I think it bears asking again because we still haven’t 
got an answer. And the Premier has had time to consult his 
staff, even to call his old friend Bill and ask. 
 
Who was at that meeting when you sat down with Bill Boyd? 
Was it just the two of you? Were there other people? Were there 
staff with you, or were there associates of Mr. Boyd at that 
meeting with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, this was not an official 
meeting. It was a meeting that Mr. Boyd presented me with 
some plans. And I had advised him to get in touch with the 
officials, the officials that are governed by the president of the 
Water Security Agency that provided the informative letter to 
Mr. Meili with respect to how they have handled this particular 
case. So that happens in this place, Mr. Speaker. I’ve met with 
members opposite throughout my years as being a minister, of 
being an MLA in this Assembly, Mr. Chair, and I’ve met with 
members on this side as well. 
 
So that meeting, I believe it happened in, I think it was last 
year’s session, spring session. It had happened, just a meeting 
where Mr. Boyd had showed me the project that he was going 
to embark on. And I had put him in touch with the Water 
Security Agency or told him who to get in touch with through 
the Water Security Agency and others to ensure that he could 
provide the proper permits, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Meili: — The question remains. And yes, it’s been 



4428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

remarked in the media that it’s fairly unbelievable that the 
Premier would not be able to identify whether or not the two of 
them were alone or whether there were others in the room. So 
I’ll ask the question again: was it just you and Mr. Boyd or 
were there other people either with him or with you? And were 
any notes taken at that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I’ve answered the question to the best of my 
recollection, Mr. Speaker. I don’t recall all of the meetings that 
I attend as a minister of whatever file I’ve served. It was over a 
year ago, Mr. Chair. I’ve recalled the events as best I recollect 
them. There are not records of this meeting, as we have 
checked, Mr. Chair. So I’ve recalled the events as best as I 
recollect them. 
 
But the fact of the matter is this individual was put in touch 
with the relevant organizations and advised that he could obtain 
the relevant permits there. Again, Mr. Chair, the member 
opposite puts forward that something untoward has happened 
here. If something untoward is saying to any individual, as I 
would across the province, that you need to get in touch with 
the Water Security Agency, apply for the relevant permits for 
whatever project you’re looking at, if that is something 
untoward — guilty. 
 
Mr. Meili: — It’s extremely improbable that one would 
remember the details of the conversation and not be able to 
recall whether or not there were more than two people in the 
room. Extremely improbable. 
 
And I do want to come back to the Leader-Post survey that we 
discussed a little bit earlier. There was another question, fairly 
straightforward question: will you sell the GTH? And the then 
would-be premier said: 
 

We should look at opportunities to move the management 
and quite possibly the ownership of the Global 
Transportation Hub to an entity that can ensure that it will 
become the asset to our economy that was originally 
envisioned. 

 
I’d like to know if looking at opportunities to move that 
management and possibly the ownership is something that the 
Premier has proceeded with since he was chosen to fulfill this 
current role. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I stand by those 
comments with respect to this facility that was envisioned under 
the members opposite when they were in government and was 
executed under the current government, and the need for the 
free flow of goods in and out of the province and the 
opportunity for a generational investment that will truly benefit 
the economy in the province of Saskatchewan and that will 
happen over a generation. 
 
[18:00] 
 
I can confirm that that need is as important today as it has ever 
been, and I stand by those comments. You know, as we move 
forward through the months and years ahead, we will be 
looking for partners, for opportunities I would say, with respect 
to achieving just that vision and just that goal with respect to 
the Global Transportation Hub. 

What I can confirm is that we have not had secret meetings in 
hotels here in the city of Regina, secret meetings with the city 
of Regina in hotels, Mr. Chair. Those have not occurred, or to 
my knowledge those have not occurred, Mr. Chair. We have not 
had other engagements with other private entities with respect 
to the Global Transportation Hub and moving it in the near 
future. But I think it is worthy of the conversation on ensuring 
that that facility can become the generational investment that 
will benefit the economy, not just in Regina and the 
surrounding area, but the economy of the province. And there 
are opportunities for that as we move forward, and we’ll be sure 
to engage in those opportunities as they arise. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Premier, unfortunately you haven’t given us 
much cause to trust in your memories of meetings. I do have 
another question on this. Again it wasn’t answered whether or 
not you were currently looking at opportunities to move the 
management. My question is if you were, if you were going to 
sell the Global Transportation Hub, to whom could you sell it? 
What sort of entity would be required for it to be able to 
maintain the special tax status, the free trade zone that it 
currently is? 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, as I had indicated, we’re not 
currently in discussions with respect to the sale of the GTH. I’m 
not here to answer hypotheticals on what if or what could be. 
But if the member opposite and the provincial NDP are 
interested, we would be more than willing to have those 
discussions. If they would like to take on ownership of the 
Global Transportation Hub, maybe we’d take Tommy Douglas 
House as a partial payment or a down payment, Mr. Chair, but 
we can have those discussions if the interest is there. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Now we do know that the RCMP has 
investigated actions around the GTH and that those have been 
referred to Manitoba prosecution. Has the Premier or any of his 
government received any information? Have they been in touch 
with you with any indication of when a decision will be made, 
where we are in that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — No. 
 
Mr. Meili: — We’ve also got some questions around social 
housing where we haven’t had an answer. A question that’s 
been posed many times to the Minister of Social Services is 
around the vacancy rates for social housing, where there are 
apparently 3,000 units that are vacant. How many of those units 
are actually accessible and could be used by people with 
disabilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — As has been explained in this House and in 
the rotunda by the minister and myself as well, I believe, it’s 
important for us to clarify that no one is being removed from 
the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. We’ll be pausing 
the program as we move forward. And vacancies across the 
province have increased in our major centres. Vacancies have 
increased and our Saskatchewan Housing Corporation does 
have a vacancy of about 13 per cent at current. 
 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4429 

The fact of the matter is, is when it comes to accessibility for 
those that may require housing here in the province, is 
disabilities are different. And so it is looked at on a 
case-by-case basis. And if the individual qualifies, there are 
opportunities to adjust that particular unit to that particular 
individual’s disability to ensure that, you know, an 
understanding that not all disabilities are the same. But it’s 
worked on on a case-by-case basis, understanding the specific 
disability of the qualified applicant of the time. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Should people’s circumstances change — for 
example, if they should gain employment and no longer require 
social assistance but then lose that employment or have some 
other difficult circumstances — and they’ve been off for more 
than three months, they’re no longer eligible. They wouldn’t be 
allowed back on the program. 
 
This is a real concern as we see too many times when people 
are on social assistance that there are barriers to leaving that. 
This just introduces one more barrier where anyone who 
chooses to seek work, succeed for a while, might find 
themselves without the kind of support they need. Why has this 
government actually made the welfare wall worse? Why have 
they made it harder for people to take the risk and get work, 
knowing that they will no longer have rental housing support if 
they’re unsuccessful? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Chair, we continue to invest $46 million 
in the rental housing supplement here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And when individuals have the opportunity to 
become wilfully employed in this province, Mr. Chair, then 
they’ll be covered by the low income tax rates that we have here 
in the province of Saskatchewan to give them every opportunity 
for a hand up and to succeed in whatever career they’re able to 
participate in here in the province. Mr. Speaker, if anybody, 
whether you’re on a rental housing supplement or not and 
become unfortunate enough to lose your employment here in 
the province, we have ample supports in place to ensure that we 
are taking care of those people in our communities across the 
province. 
 
We’ve invested. We have invested heavily in Social Services, 
Mr. Speaker, up again 4.8 per cent this year. That’s on the heels 
of a large increase from last year. $1.18 billion in Social 
Services, Mr. Speaker, as I said . . . or Mr. Chair, up 54 million. 
We continue to invest and increasing the dollars that are going 
to our front-line CBOs [community-based organization] here in 
the province with a $10 million lift in CBO funding here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, it’s important to note that this again is one of the 
investments that the people of the province expect of their 
provincial government, is to invest in our communities’ most 
vulnerable, those that may have fallen on hard times for a short 
period of time or those that need ongoing support, Mr. Chair. 
And we most certainly do that with over a billion dollars 
invested in this year’s already challenged budget as we talked 
about, in investing in ensuring that those most vulnerable in our 
communities have the services that they require. 
 
This is a time for us to reflect a little bit I think, Mr. Chair, as 
well, as we hear a mixed message coming from the members 
opposite when they talk about investing or spending in social 

services, corrections, policing, justice, and health care. Actually 
they have said that that does not represent an investment. And 
that was put out on an NDP tweet here a number of months ago, 
that that investment, that $1.18 million is not an investment in 
the people in our communities, an investment in our 
communities’ most vulnerable, Mr. Chair. 
 
And then every day we see the NDP, including today, come in 
here, march into this Assembly and ask for more spending in 
exactly these areas, more spending in health care, more 
spending in social services, more spending in the rental housing 
supplement. And when we increase the spending in these areas, 
which we have each and every year, Mr. Chair, they criticize it. 
So there’s no winning in this place, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to questions from the opposition. They want you to spend more, 
invest more. When you do, they don’t call it an investment, Mr. 
Chair. It’s an ironic situation to say the least, Mr. Chair, and if 
we have the opportunity to get an economic question we’ll talk 
a little more about the differences we have between the two of 
us. 
 
Mr. Meili: — This year when the budget came out there was a 
stack of press releases, as there always are, and for the second 
year in a row that stack of press releases had one about Social 
Services that was boasting about the highest budget in Social 
Services in the history of the province. And you know what? 
That could’ve been a great thing. That could’ve been an 
indication that there was an investment, that they were 
following through on some of the promises made on the poverty 
reduction strategy, promises we have not seen followed through 
on. 
 
But that wasn’t the case. What we saw was an increase because 
of an increase in utilization. There are more people, between 
SAP [Saskatchewan assistance program] and TEA [transitional 
employment allowance] and SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability], requiring supports. What this is, is a 
press release boasting about more people living in poverty. 
 
How is it that this government can look at that after having cut 
special diet supports, cut supports for people who die on social 
assistance, cut their funeral supports, cut the rental housing 
supplement, and still having to spend more on utilization of 
these programs? How can they look at that and boast and call 
that progress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we will be there when there is 
utilization pressures here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve proven that with $125 million increase to our Social 
Services budget over the last two years. 
 
But I would put forward this — and this is exactly what I’m 
talking about, Mr. Chair — is when there is investments made 
and called for, rightfully so in some cases in this Assembly, 
when that investment is made, it’s not acknowledged. It’s got, 
well that’s for utilization or that’s for some other reason. 
 
Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is over $10 million is provided 
in this budget, a very challenging budget again, directly to our 
community-based organizations providing front-line services 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Has provided two of 
those CBOs, through talking to them, understanding the 
challenges that they have, and through a commitment of 



4430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2018 

members on this side to ensure that they could have the lift that 
they had asked for so that they can continue to provide the 
services that they do in the communities across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This includes another $24 million, Mr. Chair, in this year’s 
budget and a very challenging budget. And a further increase is 
aimed at supporting at-risk children in the province of 
Saskatchewan and adults with intellectual disabilities. That 
includes $700,000 for children and youth with exceptional 
medical behaviour challenges. That includes four and a half 
million dollars for extended family members caring for at-risk 
children and youth, keeping them connected not only to their 
family but to their community and their culture. 
 
Mr. Chair, these are important investments. These are 
investments that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
have asked for. It includes almost $10 million to continue 
moving people from the Valley View Centre to new 
community-based homes across the province, some of which 
I’ve had the opportunity to visit. And the people in those homes 
with those intellectual disabilities, and their families, many 
times they’re moving closer to the community where they were 
raised, Mr. Chair. And their families are closer, are so thankful 
for the opportunity to have those loved family members close to 
them where they live, close to the community where they were 
raised. 
 
That’s happening with almost a $9.9 million investment in this 
year’s budget, Mr. Chair, and it’s happening across the 
province. It includes $9 million provided for services for 
children with intellectual disabilities aging into adult care, Mr. 
Chair. That has been raised in this legislature, in this session, in 
previous, as well as for adults with intellectual disabilities 
whose needs have increased and who are in crisis. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, there have been investments made. There have 
been investments made in this budget — this second, this 
budget, albeit a tight budget. But as we plan to balance our 
budget next year, we have a commitment to the people of the 
province to make the decisions necessary to ensure that we can 
continue on our three-year plan to balance, Mr. Chair. 
 
And it’s important to acknowledge that in the scope of those 
tough decisions, we have been able to continue to invest in the 
core services that the people of this province want their 
provincial government to invest in. To continue to invest in 
health care and health care services that we have in all 
communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To continue to invest in education, we’re investing directly into 
our classrooms in this year’s budget with $30 million directly 
into the classrooms, into people that will ensure that our 
children, our next generation, have every opportunity to 
succeed in their education and succeed in their career choice 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, with an economy that 
will be strong into the future. 
 
We’ve continued to invest in our communities in the most 
vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, with a $125 million investment 
directly into social services over the last two years. Investing in 
our community-based organizations, investing in those people 
in our communities, moving them back closer to their 

communities, Mr. Speaker, all the while continuing in our 
second year on our plan to balance our budget on behalf of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, so that the next 
generation, our children have every opportunity that we’ve had 
in the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And I am pleased that this 
budget continues to keep us on track on that plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[18:15] 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you again for 
the opportunity to ask some questions here. Certainly many 
more remain. Many serious concerns remain about the direction 
of this government, however we’ll move on today. 
 
I do want to say thank you, a special thank you to Bonita 
Cairns, a long history of public service, and thank you for 
coming back today, coming out of retirement to help us out 
today. Thanks to all the officials, everyone who’s here today, 
and thank you to the members on this side for all the support in 
preparing for the questions today. And thanks to you folks too. 
Have a great night. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would also like 
to just close with a few thank yous. First and foremost I’d like 
to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the questions that he 
asks on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
as the Leader of the Loyal Opposition here in our great 
province. And I appreciate the questions that are asked, Mr. 
Chair, each and every day in this House and I thank him for the 
effort and the sincerity in which he asks questions of this 
government, of myself, and of others in the province. 
 
I do also want to thank all of my colleagues on this side of the 
House as well as the opposition colleagues in this place, and in 
the effort that they make in representing the people that they 
represent in this building, the people that live in their 
constituency and in their community. 
 
As well, I want to thank the House leadership teams as I know 
it’s been an easy road to get to today in ensuring that all of the 
hours and the committee meetings are put together and bringing 
everyone together, ensuring they’re in the right room at the 
right time and talking about the right thing. So I do want to 
thank both House leadership teams as well as all the staff in this 
building and across the province and, well the Legislative 
Assembly staff that ensure that we can conduct the 
government’s business each and every day. It’s greatly 
appreciated in the lead-up to today’s estimates, Mr. Chair, and I 
would be remiss if I did not thank them. 
 
And last but most certainly not least, thank all of our families 
that allow us to serve in this Assembly on behalf of the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Are there any other members that would like to 
enter into the debate? Seeing none, we will proceed to vote the 
estimates and we will ask the officials to excuse themselves, 
please. 
 
We will proceed to vote the estimates. Is subvote (EX01), 
central management and services in the amount of $5,430,000, 



May 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4431 

is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX07), Premier’s office in the 
amount of $479,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX04), cabinet planning in 
the amount of $1,107,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX05), cabinet secretariat in 
the amount of $451,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX03), communications 
office in the amount of $1,319,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX08), House business and 
research in the amount of $255,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX06), members of Executive 
Council. This is a statutory amount of $133,000, for 
information purposes only. 
 
Subvote (EX10), Intergovernmental Affairs in the amount of 
$1,883,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX11), francophone affairs in 
the amount of $690,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX12), Lieutenant 
Governor’s office in the amount of $707,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2019, the following sums for 
Executive Council: $12,321,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. There being no further business before 
the committee, I would invite a member to move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this Assembly be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
1:30 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 18:23.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 
  Lawrence ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4391, 4395 
  Duncan ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4391, 4393 
  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4391, 4393 
  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4392, 4395 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4392 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4394, 4396 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4395 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4395 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4395 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4395 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4396 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4396 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4396 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4397 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing the North Central Hockey League 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4397 
 Fundraiser Held for Dome Café Chef 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4397 
 Regina French Teacher and Advocate Retires 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4397 
 Early Childhood Intervention Program Week 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4398 
 Young Entrepreneurs Participate in Aboriginal Youth Idea Challenge  
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4398 
 History of the Shaunavon Courthouse 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4398 
 Saskatoon Athlete Wins Silver at National Badminton Championship 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4398 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Status of Crown Corporations 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 
 Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 
 Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 
 Supports for Refugees 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 
 Provision of Transportation Services 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4402 
 Strategies to Address Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4403 
 



 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4406 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4404 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4406 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4404 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4404 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4406 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4407 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4407 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4408 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4408 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4409 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


