


















































March 12, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 12, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 49; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3349 
 March 12, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Please be seated. It’s my duty to inform you of the 
resignation of your Speaker, Mr. Corey Tochor, effective 
January 5, 2018. The letter of resignation was previously tabled 
as sessional paper no. 107. In accordance with the rules and 
pursuant to the provisions of The Legislative Assembly Act, the 
election of Speaker will now take place immediately. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 
Clerk: — Members, it’s my duty to commence proceedings for 
the election of Speaker. Pursuant to the procedure specified by 
rule 43, seven members have declared their candidacy for 
election to the office of Speaker. When I state the members’ 
names, I will ask he or she to rise to be acknowledged. The 
members are, in alphabetical order: Ms. Danielle Chartier, the 
member for the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale; Mr. 
Mark Docherty, the member for the constituency of Coronation 
Park; Mr. Glen Hart, the member for the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood; Mr. Delbert Kirsch, the member for the 
constituency of Batoche; Mr. Warren Michelson, the member 
for the constituency of Moose Jaw North; Mr. Eric Olauson, the 
member for the constituency of Saskatoon University; Ms. 
Colleen Young, the member for the constituency of 
Lloydminster. 
 
In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will now bring 
in the ballot box. The ballot box will then be inspected. The 
sealed ballots will be opened, the list of candidates distributed 
to all members and posted in the polling booths. We will now 
proceed to the setting up of the Chamber for the casting of the 
votes. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I will now ask members who wish 
to cast their ballot to proceed to the registration table on both 
sides of the Chamber. There you’ll receive a ballot paper, and 
then you will proceed to the polling booths according to the 
plan that has been placed on your desk. May I remind all hon. 
members to please print the first and last name of their 
candidates on the ballot paper. The balloting will now proceed. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, if I could bring the 
Assembly back to order. Members, if there are any members 
who have not voted and wish to do so now, would you please 
identify yourself and vote now. Seeing none, all members 
having voted, the House will now recess to the call of the bells 
while the Clerks-at-the-Table count the ballots. The bells will 
ring for three minutes to recall members to the Chamber when 
the result of the ballot is ready to be announced. 
 
 [The Assembly recessed from 13:46 until 14:03.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my duty to inform 
you that a second ballot will be necessary. The list of candidates 
for the second ballot has been prepared, and in accordance with 
the rules, by excluding the name of the candidate who received 
the fewest votes on the previous ballot. 
 
The list of candidates for the second ballot is as follows, in 

alphabetical order: Danielle Chartier, Mark Docherty, Glen 
Hart, Delbert Kirsch, Eric Olauson, and Colleen Young. If any 
hon. member whose name I have just read to the Assembly 
wishes to withdraw as a candidate on the second ballot, will he 
or she rise and please state that intention now. 
 
We will now prepare the Chamber for the second ballot. The 
list of candidates will be posted in the voting booths, and the 
sealed ballots opened. We’ll just pause a moment while we 
reset the Chamber for the ballot. 
 
We’ll now proceed to have the registration tables brought back 
down to the centre and then we’ll commence voting. 
 
Members, we are now ready to proceed with the next ballot. 
You may come forward to receive your ballot papers. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, if there are any members 
who have not voted, I’d ask you to do so now, please. Seeing 
none, all the members having voted, the House will again recess 
to the call of the bells and the Clerks-at-the-Table will count the 
ballots. And as before, the bells will ring three minutes to recall 
the members to the Chamber when the results of the second 
ballot will be announced. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 14:14 until 14:23.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, it is my duty to inform 
you that a third ballot will be necessary. The list of candidates 
for the third ballot has been prepared and again, in accordance 
with the rules, the name of the candidate who received the 
fewest votes on the previous ballot will be eliminated. 
 
The list of candidates for the third ballot are as follows, in 
alphabetical order: Danielle Chartier, Mark Docherty, Glen 
Hart, Eric Olauson, and Colleen Young. 
 
We’ll now proceed to prepare for the third ballot. The list of 
candidates again, as in the past, will be posted in the voting 
booths. I remind all hon. members to please print the first and 
last name of the candidates on your ballot. We will now 
proceed to set the Chamber up. 
 
Members, I will now ask you to proceed to collect your ballots 
and cast your vote. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, if there are any members 
who have not voted, please do so now. Seeing none, all 
members present having voted, we will now recess to the call of 
the bells and the Clerks-at-the-Table will count the ballots. 
 
 [The Assembly recessed from 14:27 until 14:35.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my duty to inform 
you that a fourth ballot will be necessary. The list of candidates 
for the fourth ballot has been prepared, and in accordance with 
the rules we’ve excluded the name of the candidate who 
received the fewest votes. 



3350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

The list of candidates for the fourth ballot is as follows, in 
alphabetical order: Danielle Chartier, Mark Docherty, Glen 
Hart, and Eric Olauson. 
 
We will now prepare the Chamber for voting. In the meantime 
if any member whose name I have just called wishes to 
withdraw their candidacy, please identify themselves now. 
Seeing none, we’ll proceed to the fourth ballot. 
 
I’ll now call on our registration clerks to enter the Chamber and 
prepare for the next ballot. 
 
Members, we’re ready to proceed to the vote on the fourth 
ballot. Please proceed to the registration tables to collect your 
ballots. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — I now call upon any member who has not voted to do 
so now. Seeing that all members have voted, we will now 
proceed to count the ballots. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 14:45 until 14:56.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, it is my duty to inform 
you that a fifth ballot will be necessary. Members, there was a 
tie of votes for two members having the smallest number of 
votes, consequently the names of these two candidates will be 
excluded from the next ballot. The names of the candidates in 
alphabetical order for the final ballot are, in alphabetical order, 
Mark Docherty and Eric Olauson. We will now proceed to set 
up the Chamber for casting the next ballot. 
 
I’ll now ask the registration clerks to prepare the Chamber for 
the next ballot. Members, the Chamber is now ready to proceed 
to the next vote. I invite you to cast your ballots at this time. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — I now call upon any member who has not cast a 
ballot to do so now. There being none, the Clerks-at-the-Table 
will proceed to count the ballots. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 15:17 until 15:28.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that you have elected as your Speaker Mr. Mark 
Docherty, member for the constituency of Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
The Speaker: — This is actually the reason I ran, is to put this 
on. Okay. Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish to 
express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 
the high honour the Assembly has conferred upon me. While I 
leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I 
leave behind all political partisan biases in order that I may 
discharge with impartiality to all, and to the best of my ability, 
the various important duties pertaining to the high office of 
Speaker. 
 
It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of the Assembly and secure for each member the right 
to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 

preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 
hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 
facilitate the transaction of the public business in an orderly 
manner; and above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in the 
decisions you entrust in me. 
 
With that, thank you so much to all members of the Assembly. 
It’s a great honour bestowed upon me and I will do my best and 
thank you. I’ve got a tricorne. I’ll have to take a chair. Thanks. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I ask for leave to make remarks regarding 
your election. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 
members of the Assembly for granting leave. And first of all, 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members on this side of the 
Assembly, our most sincere congratulations on your election. 
And we appreciate your remarks now very, very much. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I know, working with you — we were elected in the same 
year, in 2011; we served as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]; we served in cabinet together, served on various 
committees — that you will now, in this service, bring great 
honour. And I look forward to serving with you in this capacity 
over the next number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you leave no doubt that you understand how 
important the role of Speaker in our parliamentary democracy 
truly is and that you intend to carry out your duties in a spirit of 
impartiality and fairness. And I think this Assembly is 
confident, all of us are confident, that you will be true to that 
word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today you join a small but illustrious group in our 
province. You are the 26th Speaker of our Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. And if you look back at that 
history, that very rich history, I think you’ll find that our 
province has been well served by Speakers in years gone by. 
Certainly we were well served by your immediate predecessor, 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview, who was firm but had a 
collegial presence in the Chair for nearly two years. We thank 
the member and we wish him the very best. 
 
And while I’m at it, I would also like to mention the member 
and thank the member from Cannington, who was the Speaker 
when I was first elected and provided valuable advice to myself 
as a raw rookie of the day, as he had years and years and years 
of experience at that point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express my deep gratitude to the other 
members in this Assembly that put their name forward. Thank 
you. Mr. Speaker, I think you will agree that you had some 
tough competition today, and it speaks well of this Assembly 
that so many commendable individuals came forward on both 
sides of this House to take part in this election. So thank you 
again to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. We had the 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3351 

member from Saskatoon University. We had the member from 
Lloydminster. Where else are we here? The member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, Batoche . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you so much for putting your name 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Chamber where we consider legislation 
that has real impact on the lives of the people who sent each of 
us here, the citizens of this great province of Saskatchewan. 
This is a Chamber where we pass laws on behalf of those very 
citizens that we all represent. I think Bismarck famously 
observed that, and I quote, “Laws are like sausages, but it’s 
better to not see them being made.” It’s a true statement. And 
he may have been referring to the debate that accompanies 
law-making, law-making in this House as well. 
 
The discussion in this Assembly, and other assemblies just like 
it, can sometimes get loud and the odd time it can even get a 
little scrappy. And from the outside, this may not seem all that 
edifying or it may not even seem that dignified from time to 
time, and maybe even from times it seems that way from the 
inside as well. 
 
But it was early in the 19th century that the British prime 
minister, Lord Grenville, declared, and I quote again, “I can 
hardly keep wondering at my own folly in thinking it 
worthwhile to leave my books and garden even for one day’s 
attendance in the House of Commons.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any of us in this Assembly 
want decorum to unravel to the point where we may prefer to 
stay away. We have a job to do, each of us on behalf of the 
people that we represent across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And you have an honourable job, Mr. Speaker. It’s to uphold 
the rules of this Assembly on behalf of each of those people in 
our province, to oversee the debate in an even-handed, in a fair, 
but all the while in a judicious manner. This is your obligation, 
but it’s really a shared responsibility by all of us that preside in 
this provincial legislature. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we resume our business in the Assembly 
today, I would urge all members on both sides to be mindful of 
our obligations to one another and, more importantly, to live up 
to our obligations to the people of Saskatchewan who expect us 
to attend to their business with enthusiasm and with diligence. 
But we would prefer to do so in a respectful manner that 
provides some confidence that our business is actually getting 
done at the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of the members in 
advance for their co-operation. I wish to express our gratitude to 
the folks supporting you, Mr. Speaker, the Clerk of the 
Assembly, and your team. And thank you to our 
Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff for the terrific work that they 
perform here each and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, congratulations on your election, and 
we very much look forward to working with you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Meili: — I ask for leave to make remarks regarding your 
election. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sunny day outside 
for those of us who haven’t spent hours deciding who the next 
Speaker will be, and it’s a new season. We have a new Speaker 
in that Chair. We have a new Leader of the Opposition, three 
new members about to join us, a new Lieutenant Governor soon 
to be named, and a new Premier. And this new season I think is 
a great opportunity for us.  
 
I want to thank all of the members who put their names forward 
and were part of this important process. That role, that Chair 
means so much to the decorum, to the due process for us to be 
able to represent, in the good democratic way that we should, 
the people of this province. 
 
I do want to make a special thanks to the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale from our caucus for the passion that you put into 
your work at all times, but especially today, as you cared so 
much about this role and you care so much about the work of 
this House. Thank you for that. 
 
And I just want to also extend my thanks to the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview for your work. You have been a great 
welcomer to new members, and I’ve always appreciated that. 
We also had a little bit of a discussion over here and when 
you’re done, we’re ready to welcome a new member for 
Saskatoon Eastview on this side of the House. 
 
And you know, at the opening of this session, it is a new 
season. It’s a season of political change. And I know the people 
of Saskatchewan will be watching closely as we do our work, 
and they’ll be watching to see how we conduct ourselves in 
these new conversations and these new roles. And of course that 
conduct is up to us, the members. The Speaker can’t decide how 
we behave. 
 
And the call is on us to make sure that we do what we need to 
do. And this is my commitment and the commitment of our 
caucus is that we will be here in vigorous debate. We’ll be here 
working hard. We’ll also be doing everything we can to make 
sure that we stay focused on the ideas, on the issues, and not on 
the personalities, try to make your work just hard enough, but 
not so hard that it’s not enjoyable. And we’re looking forward 
to working with you. Congratulations. Let the speaking and the 
listening begin. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to thank both the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Premier for their words. And I was remiss in 
not thanking everybody that put their names forward to run, and 
again I’m honoured to be here. 
 
So let’s continue on. First time reading this.  
 
All stand; we’re going to rise for the prayer. You can all rise. 
It’s okay. 
 
[Prayers] 



3352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Vacancy in Swift Current Constituency 
 
The Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the Assembly that a 
vacancy has occurred since the last sitting, the constituency of 
Swift Current, due to the resignation of Mr. Brad Wall. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
and consider all stages of Bill No. 118, The Swift Current 
Constituency By-election Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 118, The 
Swift Current Constituency By-election Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Government 
House Leader may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 118, 
The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 118, The Swift Current Constituency 
By-election Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move second reading of this bill. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 118, 
The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 118, The Swift Current Constituency 
By-election Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 118, The 

Swift Current Constituency By-election Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 118, The Swift 
Current Constituency By-election Act be committed to the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills and the said bill be considered 
in Committee of the Whole on Bills later today. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
and consider all stages of Bill No. 119, The Melfort 
Constituency By-election Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 119, The 
Melfort Constituency By-election Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Government 
House Leader may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 119, 
The Melfort Constituency By-election Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 119, The Melfort Constituency By-election 
Act be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move second reading of this bill. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 119, 
The Melfort Constituency By-election Act be now read a second 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3353 

time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 119, The Melfort Constituency 
By-election Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 
119, The Melfort Constituency By-election Act be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 119, The Melfort 
Constituency By-election Act be committed to Committee of the 
Whole on Bills and that the said bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills later today. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
and consider all stages of Bill No. 120, The Kindersley 
Constituency By-election Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce and consider all stages of Bill No. 120, The 
Kindersley Constituency By-election Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Government 
House Leader may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 120, 
The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 120, The Kindersley Constituency 
By-election Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move second reading of this bill. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 120, 
The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 120, The Kindersley Constituency 
By-election Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 
120, The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 120, The 
Kindersley Constituency By-election Act be committed to the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the said bill be 
considered in Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
[16:00] 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
The Chair: — Members, we’ll call the Committee of Whole on 
Bills to order. The business before the committee is three bills. 
The first item is Bill No. 118, The Swift Current Constituency 
By-election Act. Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Clause 1, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



3354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 118, The Swift Current Constituency 
By-election Act. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the committee report the bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the bill be reported without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
The Chair: — The next item of business is Bill No. 119, The 
Melfort Constituency By-election Act. Clause 1, short title, is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 119, The Melfort Constituency By-election 
Act. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the committee report the bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report the 
bill without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
The Chair: — The last item of business is Bill No. 120, The 
Kindersley Constituency By-election Act. Clause 1, short title, is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly, enacts as follows: Bill No. 120, 
The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the committee report the bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee report the bill without amendment. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Actually, Mr. Speaker, the Chair of committees. 
Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by committee to report Bill No. 
118, The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 118, The Swift 
Current Constituency By-election Act be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3355 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 119, The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 119, The 
Melfort Constituency By-election Act be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 120, The Kindersley Constituency By-election 
Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency  
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 120, The 
Kindersley Constituency By-election Act be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan is here for Royal Assent. Please all 
rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 16:10 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — This Legislative Assembly at its present 
session has passed several bills which in the name of the 
Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which bills I 
respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 118 - The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act 
Bill No. 119 - The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
Bill No. 120 - The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:13.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a 
motion to recess for the swearing-in ceremony of the new 
members. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Government 
House Leader may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly recess for the administration of oaths 
of allegiance for the new members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That this Assembly recess for the administration of oaths 
of allegiance for the new members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands recessed to the 
call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 16:14 until 16:33.] 
 



3356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Okay. This Assembly is now reconvened. I 
hereby inform the Assembly that pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly, a by-election in the constituency of Swift 
Current, which was assented to today, March the 12th, 2018, 
Mr. Everett Hindley is authorized to take his seat as a member 
for the constituency of Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you Mr. Everett Hindley, member for the constituency of Swift 
Current, who has taken the oath, signed the roll, and now claims 
the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Hindley, I want to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that your time here will be one 
that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
I hereby inform the Assembly that, pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly in a by-election in the constituency of 
Melfort which was assented to today, March the 12th, 2018, 
Mr. Todd Goudy is authorized to take his seat as a member of 
the constituency of Melfort. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you Mr. Todd Goudy, member for the constituency of Melfort, 
who has taken the oath, signed the roll, and now claims the 
right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Goudy, I want to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that your time here will be one 
that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
I hereby inform the Assembly that pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly, a by-election in the constituency of 
Kindersley, which was assented to today, March the 12th, 2018, 
Mr. Ken Francis is authorized to take his seat as a member of 
the constituency of Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you Mr. Ken Francis, member for the constituency of 
Kindersley, who has taken the oath, signed the roll, and now 
claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Francis, I want to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that your time here will be one 
that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have said many 
times in this Assembly that members that represent their 
constituents and people across this province do not serve here 
alone. We serve at the pleasure and with the support of our 
families. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m certain I speak for every 
member of this Assembly when we would acknowledge that we 
would not be serving here today without just that tremendous 
support that we all receive from our families, in particular from 
our spouses, the most significant people in our lives, really the 
unsung heroes in our lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 25 years now I have been blessed to be 
married to my wife, Krista, who is most notably my best friend. 
She’s my partner and a wonderful mother to our two children. I 
think Winston Churchill put it best, and I quote that as watching 
The Darkest Hour here the last couple of days. But I quote 
Winston Churchill that “My most brilliant achievement was to 
persuade my wife to marry me.” And it’s true for Winston and 
it was true for the present Premier of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My wife, Krista, is a successful pharmacist. She runs her own 
business in the community where we were both raised of 
Shellbrook, and today she’s taking a little bit of time away from 
that work as Krista and Leone Ottenbreit, the wife, the much 
better half and the wife of the Rural and Remote Health 
minister, teamed up to organize a breakfast for some of the 
spouses of the MLAs on the government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to introduce the folks who 
attended this event here this morning. Some have left but many 
are here yet. As I said previously, my wife, Krista; Leone 
Ottenbreit; Candace Bonk is here, the wife for the member from 
Moosomin. If you could give a wave as I call your name. We 
have Valerie Kirsch, the much better half of the member from 
Batoche. We have Debbie Michelson, the wife of the member 
from Moose Jaw North. We have Sandy Morgan, the 
long-suffering spouse of the Minister of Justice. We have 
Giselle Nerlien, the wife from the member from 
Kevington-Wadena. We have Linda Stewart — oh, Linda — 
the wife of the Minister of Agriculture. We’re all on your side, 
Linda. And Lisa Danyluk, the partner of the member from 
Regina Coronation Park and our new Speaker. Anita Hindley, 
the wife of the newly elected member for Swift Current, and 
joined with Anita are the parents of the member for Swift 
Current, Tom and Pat Hindley, as well as a brother and sister, 
Taylor and Erica. We have Karen Francis, the wife of the newly 
elected member for Kindersley and their children Dacey, Dylan, 
and Dexter. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there was a sign out that 
said, Vote For Dexter’s Dad in the most recent by-election. We 
may have an upcoming politician here as well. We have the 
member from Melfort’s wife, Tannis, and their children, Mary, 
Sara, Rachel, David, and Hanna. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests had a terrific time this morning. It was 
a good opportunity for us to get to know one another better and 
likely commiserate with one another as supporting our spouses 
in this legislature. And of course, Mr. Speaker, they represent a 
larger group of spouses who do so much in keeping the home 
fires burning while we’re all busy here, and at the most notable 
as we enter our spring session. 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3357 

But they do much more than that, Mr. Speaker, because most if 
not all of the spouses of the members on this side of the House, 
and likely the opposite side as well, they have their own careers 
in the communities where they reside. They have their own 
interests to pursue in addition to raising families in many cases, 
and extra duties at home while we’re away. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us owe these folks and our 
spouses a very special thanks. We are in their debt. We could 
not represent our constituents; we could not attend to the 
people’s business in this House without their love and without 
their support. I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome our guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, to you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly I do want to just 
acknowledge, I see Orville Bilous has come down from North 
Battleford. I see Kerry Peterson down from Parkside — good 
area, up in north of Saskatoon area there. Mr. Speaker, I see the 
previous MLA from Estevan, a close friend to many on this side 
of the House, Doreen Eagles. Al Brigden, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see a number of familiar faces, but I do want to point out one 
as well, Mr. Speaker, that is a friend to many, has been very 
busy the last number of months and years, and that’s the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Party. It’s Patrick 
Bundrock, and I want to wish him all the best. And I ask all 
members of the House to welcome all of these Saskatchewan 
people to their Legislative Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I’ll try not to make it too extended. This has been 
a long day. But I do want to recognize a few people who are in 
the House with us today, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery we 
have a number of people who are supporters and were 
participants in the recent NDP [New Democratic Party] 
leadership race on both campaigns. And it was a very vigorous 
and fun competition, and I want to thank everyone who was 
part of that for their involvement. 
 
And I also want to recognize the folks from CUPE [Canadian 
Union of Public Employees] 5430, health care workers who are 
here today. I know my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale 
will say a bit more, but I was really happy to join you the other 
day at your annual convention, and great to see them here in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I’d also like to introduce . . . Well I’ll add my comments to 
Doreen Eagles. Great to see her, a woman who has been a 
leader in politics, and two other women who are leaders in 
politics here. Today we have the former leader of the 
Saskatchewan Green Party, Larissa Shasko in the east gallery. 
And in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have Tara Jijian, the 
Acting Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
And lastly, I’d like to introduce, also in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, two people who are very special to me, Wally and Lea 
Meili of Moose Jaw, my parents. I thank them for all of the 
support and encouragement along the way for being such a 
great support to me and Mahli and such great and proud 
grandparents of Gus and Abe. With that . . . [inaudible] . . . 
introduce them to you. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. I’d also like to join with the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming all the 
family, all the spouses, the guests. Your support has been 
immeasurable to a number of people. I’d like to thank you on 
behalf of, again, this legislature, the efforts that you put in 
supporting everyone. 
 
I’d also like to join with the Premier in welcoming my spouse, 
Lisa Danyluk. Thank you for giving me a nice little nudge in 
order to go forward on this endeavour. Thank you again, and if 
you’d join me in just saying thank you one more time to 
everybody for, again, supporting all the members. Thank you. 
 
Holy smokes, where are you from? I recognize the member 
from Kindersley. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all the members of the Legislative Assembly here 
today, I would like to take this opportunity to again introduce 
my family seated in the west gallery. I have my spouse, Karen, 
who is currently the CFO [chief financial officer] of our land 
and environmental company. And we have Dacey and Dylan 
who are attending studies at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], and our baby is in grade 10 in Kindersley 
currently. So thank you guys for coming. Appreciate your 
support. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming the folks 
today from CUPE Local 5430. CUPE Local 5430 is a provincial 
health care union which resulted from the merger of five CUPE 
health locals this last summer. The member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote and I had the opportunity this morning to sit 
down with these folks and hear a bit of their challenges and 
struggles in health care. And then at about noon they presented 
about 2,000 signed postcards. I don’t know if they actually got 
to present to the Minister of Health, but they went to his office 
to deliver the 2,000 or so postcards which express their concern 
about wage rollbacks, freezes, and concessions, and the impacts 
that they believe this will have on the already under-stressed 
health care system. 
 
I’d like to introduce . . . Today we’ve got Bruce Chubb who is 
from Battleford. We have Linda Vancuren from North 
Battleford, Edward Sawatsky from Big River, Sabrina 
Parenteau from Chitek Lake, Rebecca Reynard from Regina, 
Laurie Hughes from Manor, Susan Coad from Weyburn, 
Heather Daniels from Yorkton, Chelsea Schlechter from 
Yorkton, and we have Guy Marsden who is here supporting 
them in a staff role. 
 



3358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members . . . I’d like to thank them 
for their time and their willingness to share their stories and 
their concerns with us as an opposition and sharing that with the 
government as well. But with that I would like to ask all 
members in joining me in welcoming these folks to their 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all the members of the Legislative Assembly here today, 
I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you my 
wife who I’m so proud to have here today, and my children: my 
oldest daughter, Mary, my second daughter, Sara, and then 
Rachel and David and Hanna and my son who’s not here today, 
Joel. But at church if I ever mention their names from the 
pulpit, I owe them a . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Did I not 
say my wife’s name? Tannis. But I would owe them a Blizzard; 
so I’ll take you all to Dairy Queen later. But I would ask also 
. . . My mother and father are here today, and Harold Lutzer too. 
I see him. So I’d ask that all the members would welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly here today, I’d 
also like to take this opportunity to introduce a few guests in the 
west gallery. Some have been introduced already. First of all, 
my wife, Anita Hindley, has joined us here today. My folks, 
Tom and Pat Hindley from Melfort, my brother, Taylor Hindley 
from St. Brieux area, and my sister Erica Hindley also from the 
Melfort area. Some good country up there. Thanks so much to 
my folks and to my wife for coming down to this today, and to 
my brother and sister. It means a lot. 
 
Also some other folks from Swift Current, some close friends of 
mine who have helped out over the past few weeks and have 
been, in some cases, friends for a long time. Tyler Bragg is 
here. Also Murali Krishnan, Amanda Farnswarth, Ryan Switzer 
and Wade Sutherland and Caterina Coletti, and finally, Nola 
Smith and Tye Hapke sitting up in the top row there. 
 
I just want to thank everybody for coming to the Assembly 
today, and I’d ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since we are 
introducing spouses today I thought I would be remiss if I did 
not welcome my partner and my husband of 20 years to this 
Legislative Assembly. I think he wasn’t here the last time when 
I mentioned that we had been married for 20 years and that 
perhaps I was difficult to live with at some times. There was 
some nervous laughter and maybe some agreement. So, Guy, 
there are folks that do agree with me, or agree with you rather. 
But kidding aside, thank you for all the work that you do and 
the support that you provide that allows me to do this work. I 
invite all members to join me in welcoming Guy to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to 
education in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Saskatoon. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who oppose the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Frontier, 
Eastend, Claydon. I do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our 
children’s classrooms. Over this last year, despite taking in $67 
million in additional education property tax, the government 
saw fit to cut $54 million out of our children’s classrooms. 
That’s a decision that has had terrible impacts across this 
province. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
teachers, families, students, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Melville and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to provide a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert: that the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is 
the primary link that connects the southern part of the province 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3359 

to the North; and that the need for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
crucial infrastructure project. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action and begin immediately the plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert, using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. Oh 
sorry, I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
about International Women’s Day. On the 8th of March, I 
joined with others across the globe in protesting against gender 
inequality. I was pleased to attend an event at the U of S, where 
the University of Saskatchewan students’ union, Women in the 
Legislature, and Young Women in Business co-hosted a panel 
on women in leadership. Alongside four young women who 
work as professors, entrepreneurs, and professionals, I was 
honoured to share my experiences and interact with so many 
inspiring participants. I was also pleased to see some young 
men in attendance at the event acting as allies in building 
women up. 

Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day was well documented 
this year; #iwd2018 was trending on Twitter, and my Facebook 
feed was flooded with messages and images of mothers, 
daughters, friends, and mentors — powerful women — who are 
publicly appreciated in honour of this special day. It is 
important that we take a moment to recognize International 
Women’s Day in light of the structural inequalities that women 
still face in our province, in our country, and across the globe. 
Women face barriers in the workplace, sexism and 
discrimination, violence and under-representation in many 
fields still dominated by men, such as politics. 
 
In honouring International Women’s Day, I call on all members 
to join me in celebrating the successes of women in our 
communities and to recognize the work we still need to do to 
achieve gender equity. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Agriculture Safety Week 
 

Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
proclaimed Agriculture Safety Week in Saskatchewan. As 
someone who is still actively involved in agriculture, I can tell 
you first-hand that agriculture is one of Saskatchewan’s largest 
and most vital industries and is crucial to our economy and 
well-being and way of life in this province. Unfortunately, it 
can also be hazardous if proper safety precautions are not in 
place. Every year an average of 13 people are killed on 
Saskatchewan farms. Most accidents occur in the farmyard, and 
of all serious injuries, 14 per cent involve youth. Three-quarters 
of farm fatalities involve machinery such as grain trucks, semis, 
tractors, and combines. 
 
To help promote safety of Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers, 
our government supports organizations such as Agricultural 
Health and Safety Network and the Saskatchewan Farm Stress 
Line. We also support Saskatchewan Association of 
Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions and the important work 
that they do in educating rural children about farm safety. 
 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Safety Week is held in conjunction 
with Canadian Agriculture Safety Week. The AgSafe ribbon 
campaign raises awareness about farm safety and celebrates 
AgSafe families. We must continue to strive and reach the very 
important goal of eliminating injuries and fatalities in the 
agriculture sector. 
 
On behalf of all members, I extend well wishes, and hope that 
all producers are safe out there this spring. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to join with 
the member from Moosomin in recognizing Agriculture Safety 
Week. Even before this land became a province, producers and 
the whole agricultural industry have been key contributors to 
the Saskatchewan economy and our way of life. This 
long-standing tradition of hard work and perseverance 
continues today. 
 



3360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

Like many others in this Assembly and across this province, I 
grew up on the farm. And we know, sometimes all too well, 
both the joys but also the dangers that can come with life on the 
farm. You learn from an early age that everyone has a role to 
play in getting the work done. Generations, young and old, 
work together preserving the farm and the way of life for future 
generations, but sharing the work also means that there are risks 
for the entire family as well. 
 
[17:00] 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Agricultural Week is 
focusing on supporting senior farmers. We know that for those 
working in agriculture, sometimes tragically, the risk of injury 
and death increases with age. That’s why support and 
awareness of safety measures and practices become all the more 
important. I think of the important role that family members and 
neighbours play in checking in with and looking out for their 
fellow producers, be it during snowstorms, in the middle of the 
night, during calving, or during the long hours of seeding and 
harvest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
Agriculture Safety Week here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Maple Creek Trans-Canada Visitor Reception Centre 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise today to talk about the success of the Maple Creek 
Trans-Canada Visitor Reception Centre. The centre does a 
wonderful job of greeting visitors to the region, offering them 
information about the local attractions and events happening 
throughout the province and local communities. 
 
Last summer the town of Maple Creek and the Cypress Hills 
Destination Area teamed up with the Ministry of Central 
Services and the Tourism Saskatchewan opportunity . . . the 
centre for the summer. The visitor reception centre had a lot of 
success with almost 24,000 visitors coming through the doors 
between May and September. During the same summer, local 
area attractions and businesses saw visitations and sales 
increase, which is a big attribute to the centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the wonderful opportunity attending the 
grand reopening last June, and I am very delighted to see that it 
was a success. I would like to thank the town of Maple Creek 
and the Cypress Hills Destination Area for working together to 
ensure the continuation of the centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members to join me in congratulating the 
town of Maple Creek and the Trans-Canada Visitor Centre on a 
successful reopening. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Recognition of Canadian Silver Medallist 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan was well represented at the recent Winter 
Olympics and our athletes performed extraordinarily well. 
 

I want to acknowledge the achievements of one athlete in 
particular with ties to my constituency, Brigette Lacquette. A 
defensive player for the Canadian Women’s Hockey Team, 
Brigette was a member of the Cote First Nation. She has played 
for Team Canada in different capacities since 2008, when she 
first began playing in the Under-18 National Women’s Team. 
 
Brigette also participated in the Tony Cote First Nation Winter 
Games with the Yorkton Tribal Council. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Women’s Hockey Team performed exceptionally 
well at the Olympics, earning a silver medal for their country. 
Brigette is the first First Nations woman to play on the 
Canadian Olympic Women’s Hockey Team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brigette has acknowledged her obstacles as she’s 
overcome that eventually brought her to PyeongChang. As a 
young woman and First Nations hockey player, she faced many 
challenges. Mr. Speaker, it is important that we continue to 
encourage young women and First Nations to pursue 
opportunities in sports and provide safe environments for them 
to play. 
 
I ask everyone in this Assembly to join me to congratulate 
Brigette Lacquette in all her incredible accomplishments. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Induction Into the Prince Albert Council of Women  
Hall of Fame 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
the pleasure of congratulating an exceptional educator and 
friend of mine, Jeannette Eddolls. She was inducted into the 
Hall of Fame this month by the Prince Albert Council of 
Women. 
 
Though she was surprised to hear she had been nominated, she 
is very deserving of such recognition. As a retired teacher, 
principal, and administrator in the Saskatchewan Rivers School 
Division, Jeannette dedicates her time to her community and is 
still actively instructing in classrooms at SUNTEP 
[Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program], the 
First Nations University of Canada, and many more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between her instructor duties, she is volunteering 
and focused on her work as Chair of the Catholic Family 
Services, as well as Grandmothers for Grandmothers. She 
believes that if she has the time and the health, it is important to 
give back and contribute to building and supporting her 
community. 
 
This is not her first recognition as she has also received a 
YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] Women of 
Distinction Award, the Citizen of the Year in 2014, as well as 
the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal in 2016. She is an 
exceptional role model for women at any age, and I’m proud to 
have her serving in our province. 
 
I ask all members, please join me in congratulating Jeannette 
Eddolls on her induction and thank her for her service to 
education in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3361 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Milestone  
at Boundary Dam 3 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the carbon 
capture and storage process at SaskPower’s Boundary dam 
power station has reached a significant milestone. Over 2 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide have now been prevented from 
entering the atmosphere, the equivalent of taking 500,000 
vehicles off the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Boundary dam CCS [carbon capture and storage] 
is another example of groundbreaking innovation happening 
right here in Saskatchewan. The project allows SaskPower to 
provide electricity to 100,000 people while drastically reducing 
the emissions of the coal-powered plant. 
 
Boundary dam 3 began operating in 2014, and Saskatchewan 
has since become a global leader in CCS technology. Leaders 
from over 30 countries around the globe have visited the facility 
and, Mr. Speaker, the United Nations has said that this 
technology is vital for efforts to address climate change 
worldwide. 
 
With 1,600 coal-fired plants being built worldwide, this 
technology is still crucial to help with the greenhouse gas 
emissions. It is also an important tool to meet our local goals as 
SaskPower continues to implement a strategy to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 40 per cent from 2005 levels by 
2030. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of this Assembly 
join me in congratulating SaskPower on reaching this 
significant milestone. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Just before question period, I’d like to make a 
quick statement in regards to decorum. So let’s start off this 
session . . . Spirited is okay, but let’s be respectful and let’s be 
role models for some young people watching.  
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 

Shared Priorities of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And in that spirit, I 
mentioned earlier that this is a new season for this House, and 
it’s an excellent chance for us to take a new approach to how 
we do politics. 
 
When I was elected as Leader of the NDP, the Premier tweeted 
to me. He said, “I look forward to working with you on areas 
where we agree and to a vigorous debate on areas where we 
disagree.” This is a welcome sentiment and it’s one that I share. 
Because for all of our points of disagreement on the approach, 
every member in this House is here to serve the people of this 
province. So I commend the Premier on the signal of this 
constructive approach, and I’m eager to work with this 
government wherever possible to make lives better for people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I ask him: what points of 
agreement does he see across the aisle? And because my caucus 

colleagues and I stand ready and committed to serve the people 
of Saskatchewan, what are the issues where the Premier sees us 
finding common ground? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I think there’s numerous 
places where we could work with the opposition. And we look 
forward to the opportunity to work with the opposition within 
the constraints, the budgetary constraints that we have as we 
look forward through . . . as we enter into our year 2 of our 
three-year plan to balance here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we must always remember that we need to balance that 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve put forward this three-year 
plan to balance on behalf of the people of the province so that 
we can continue with the investment that we have enjoyed the 
last decade, continue with that investment not just out over the 
next year, not just out over the next couple years, Mr. Speaker, 
but ensure that we have the fiscal ability to continue with that 
investment for the next generation and set it up for the 
generation after that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of initiatives that I look 
forward to working with the Leader of the Opposition and the 
opposition caucus in general — most notably, Mr. Speaker, as 
we see with an issue with a fentanyl overdose this past weekend 
in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward with 
some of the crime issues that we have, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
mental health and addiction . . . The sources of those crime 
issues quite often are mental health, addictions, alcohol abuse, 
things of that nature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we look to really approach these in a more holistic manner if 
you will, Mr. Speaker, not just from an enforcement point of 
view — enforcement will be part of it — but also, Mr. Speaker, 
from some of the root sources that are affecting, some of the 
challenges that we see in communities across our province right 
now within the confines, the budgetary confines that we have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
 
Mr. Meili: — In terms of things that both sides of the aisle can 
agree on, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there’s concern among all 
of us about the latest job numbers showing there were 7,800 
fewer people employed this time than a year ago. Compare that 
with 46,000 new jobs in Alberta, our unemployment up by 1.4 
per cent. We’re the only place except Newfoundland that didn’t 
see an increase in employment. We saw ours go down. 
 
These numbers, these numbers further prove that this 
government’s approach of responding to tough times by cutting 
health, cutting education, cutting key services deeply — it hurts 
people and it hurts the economy. 
 
Now the Premier is signalling that he wants to double down on 
this failed approach and cut 1,250 public sector jobs. Past 
efforts at shrinking the civil service have shown no savings. It 
hasn’t worked before and it won’t work now. But it will hurt 
workers. It will hurt their families and it will hurt struggling 



3362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

local economies. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: with the loss of these 7,800 jobs, 
will the Premier concede that now is not the time to put more 
people out of work; now is not the time to push ahead with 
further cuts to public sector jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I do acknowledge the recent 
job numbers, but I also acknowledge that over the past decade, 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we were up 62,000 jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, that has attracted people to fill those careers from all 
around the world, Mr. Speaker, living in communities — the 
community of Spiritwood, the community of Climax, the 
community of Frontier, Mr. Speaker, as well as cities such as 
Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Regina. And with those 62,000 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, people have brought their families, resulting 
in over 165,000 people living in communities across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do acknowledge the solid management that we 
have put forward, Mr. Speaker, to ensure the management that 
private companies take each and every day across the province, 
Mr. Speaker, goes into our Crowns and into our executive 
government as we manage those numbers through attrition and 
through retirements over the next two years, Mr. Speaker. There 
are dollar figures that are set to ensure that we have the proper 
and responsible management that the people of the province 
expect of their provincial government, Mr. Speaker, and those 
financial targets will be met through attrition and retirement, 
Mr. Speaker. No one will be losing their job. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about the last 
decade. We’re talking about the last year, a year in which 3,800 
jobs were lost in agriculture alone. And, Mr. Speaker, the jobs 
go away but the work doesn’t. We all depend on the services 
provided by public employees. A report last week described the 
way in which Social Services clients, people in vulnerable and 
difficult circumstances, are having to wait hours on the phone 
before they get any attention to their pressing concerns. 
 
In many areas — health, justice, education, addictions 
treatment, services for children with special needs — 
Saskatchewan people are not able to access help when it’s 
needed. Existing staffing levels are already too low. And 
increased overtime costs, those are rising while the access to 
services is getting more and more difficult. Cutting jobs in these 
fields, it doesn’t save money but it does put added hardship on 
those most in need. How, while eliminating positions, will the 
Premier make sure that these already overburdened departments 
are able to do the work, to deliver the services that people need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
do need to re-emphasize that these targets, these financial 
targets will be met through attrition and retirements. No one 
will be losing their jobs. It will be in executive government, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as the Crown corporations — not front lines, 
Mr. Speaker, in our classrooms or in our health care centres, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a matter of fact, in our classrooms we have reinvested, Mr. 
Speaker, as we had promised through this leadership campaign, 
with 400 EAs [educational assistants] in our classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker, in the next budget year. But we’ve bumped that up, 
Mr. Speaker, in this last quarter with seven and a half million 
dollars so that our school divisions can start that process of 
putting those educational assistants into our classrooms to 
ensure that the next generation has the supports that they 
require. 
 
[17:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this also is about the last decade as well, with 
increases in our health, education, and social services 
investments up some 72 per cent, Mr. Speaker. These are 
significant numbers that have included hiring 750 additional 
doctors, over 3,400 nurses. And these are numbers that we have 
all heard, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly before. But we hear 
them again because they are true and they are real people that 
are offering services in communities right across this province. 
 
Before I was elected, Mr. Speaker, I worked on a volunteer 
committee in my community trying to attract physicians, trying 
to attract health care professionals into our community. And 
through recruitment of physicians, recruitment and training of 
nurse practitioners, we now have those services in communities 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this very much is about the last 10 years, and it’s about the 
next 10 years and what we can continue to provide to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier mentioned the 
reinvestment in education, something he talked a lot about 
during his campaign for leadership — a promise to return $30 
million to our education system. But this government cut $54 
million from education in the last budget. You may forgive 
teachers and parents if they don’t take to the streets to celebrate 
the return of half the funding that had been taken away only 
months earlier. 
 
And then we learn that this promise was pro-rated, that it’s only 
7.5 million. It’s only for a quarter of the year, meaning $46.5 
million was still cut from public education. A massive shortfall 
in the funds that are needed, with more students, fewer teachers, 
more complicated classrooms. Why does the Premier think it’s 
adequate to return only a small portion of the money that was 
removed? How can he celebrate such a half-hearted — or 
perhaps in this case, quarter-hearted — commitment that 
doesn’t even bring us back to the level of 2016? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, not a month ago, the 
Premier stood in the rotunda of this building and announced 
seven and a half million dollars in mid-year funding to support 
educational outcomes in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. That 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3363 

translates into an annualized amount of $30 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And contrary to what the Leader of the Opposition has 
said, we have got kudos; we’ve got compliments from almost 
every school division in this province, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to our commitment to public education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard this when we were out on the campaign 
trail — all the leadership candidates did — and this $30 million, 
Mr. Speaker, in annualized funding demonstrates this 
government’s commitment to public education. And in addition 
to that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue our ongoing 
dialogue with teachers, with school board trustees, and with 
parents to make sure that we’re meeting the requirements, to 
make sure that we’re meeting the needs of the children in the 
classroom. This is going to be a continuing and ongoing 
dialogue, Mr. Speaker, but certainly the $30 million in 
annualized funding that’ll be in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is a 
clear demonstration of this government’s commitment to public 
education. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And in the spirit of the 
day, I want to welcome the new Education minister to his new 
role. And I know that this minister knows as well as I do that 
the Premier didn’t say a thing about fractions when he was 
vying for the role of premier. No, Mr. Speaker, he promised a 
whole number. 
 
The Sask Party cut $54 million from government funding in 
2016 from our classrooms, and that’s before taking into account 
growth, contracts, inflation, or the Sask Party hikes to both the 
PST [provincial sales tax] and power rates. Our K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] system is growing by about 2,500 
students every year. Will the new Minister of Education show 
that he stands by not only the Premier’s commitments but also 
his own? And will he admit that instead of dividing up that $30 
million, he needs to be multiplying it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
in my last answer, Mr. Speaker, this $30 million represents this 
government’s commitment to public education in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s an annualized payment. So when they talk 
about fractions, Mr. Speaker, certainly the seven and half 
million dollars is in-year funding to help support classrooms, to 
help support supports in the classroom, Mr. Speaker, and as the 
Premier has mentioned, Mr. Speaker, to give school divisions 
the opportunity make sure that they’re ready for the fall. 
 
But it’s a start, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to have 
ongoing dialogue with our partners in education — not just 
school board trustees, but teachers and parents and other 
professionals that support classrooms, Mr. Speaker — to make 
sure that we’re continuing to advance the interests of children in 
the classroom, Mr. Speaker. That’s the commitment that we 
made, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the commitment we’re going to 
follow through on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Far from reinvesting, 
the Sask Party has been cutting even more from across the 
budget. The third quarter shows that there was about $81 
million more than predicted in the education budget. But 
instead of putting it back in the classroom, they grabbed it to 
cover up their own mismanagement. And they did it with $37 
million from municipalities, 225 million from agriculture, and 
22 million from transportation. They even collected $40 million 
more in fees than they had budgeted for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when their heartless cuts are hurting so 
many people, how can they justify not using these surpluses to 
help Saskatchewan people instead of the Sask Party’s bottom 
line? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Finance minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, only the NDP would be 
very unhappy when, at the third quarter, we’re on track to 
balance and actually meeting the targets that we had set. The 
difference of the line for education, quite frankly, is a pension 
adjustment. So I’m hoping the member opposite isn’t asking for 
us to spend what is an accounting pension adjustment. And the 
increase in agriculture was a decline in crop insurance claims, 
Mr. Speaker, which is very positive for the farmers within our 
province. I would think that would make her happy as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Management of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, instead of making things even 
tighter for Saskatchewan people’s wallets, they should be 
tightening their own belts, especially at the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub]. On top of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] investigation and possible charges, the GTH is 
losing so much money it can’t even cover the interest payments 
on its debt anymore. In fact, they’ve grown its debt to $11 
million more than they had predicted at the beginning of the 
year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome the Attorney General to 
his new role — it’s a recycled role — who gets to be Minister 
Responsible for the GTH. Now it’s the Attorney General. Can 
he tell us, how much money does the GTH have to lose before 
the Sask Party finally admit that they’ve failed with it in every 
way except scandal? How much of the Saskatchewan people’s 
money do they have to lose before it’s too much? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect, I think it was 
the Environment minister that was recycled and maybe a few 
others who were recycled. But, Mr. Speaker, some of the ideas 
that are recycled are the ones that are coming from the other 
side of the House. They haven’t had a fresh or a new idea in the 
last decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is intended to attract business, attract 



3364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2018 

international commerce to our province. There are highways, 
railways going in there. There are a growing number of people 
moving into the program, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will stand by that and make sure that it continues to grow and 
flourish. At this point, Mr. Speaker, it is under construction. 
More work is being done; more work needs to be done. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s on track. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Support for the North 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I wish they’d defended the 
North the way they defend the GTH. The Premier had a chance 
to show us he was different but in his first speech to municipal 
leaders from across the province, he didn’t say a single word 
about the North. Mr. Speaker, a strong Saskatchewan needs a 
strong northern Saskatchewan, and our children are losing hope 
to live. So why are they still leaving the North and northern 
people behind? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for his question, but we have not forgotten the North. 
The 2017-18 budget commits $210 million for First Nations and 
Métis organizations and individuals. The 2017-18 budget 
commits $76.7 million in gaming agreement transfers to First 
Nations and Métis organizations. In 2017-18, 19.2 million to be 
allocated to the North from municipal revenue sharing. In the 
last 10 years of government, the NDP provided the North with 
roughly 58 million in revenue sharing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Mental Health Services in the North 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not helped by that 
government’s inaction. Children are giving up all hope. And as 
the Children’s Advocate says, they are literally dying in the 
North. That government squandered a historic opportunity to 
make changes that would save lives. Every child in 
Saskatchewan, whether they live on a remote First Nation, a 
small town, or right here in Regina deserves access in a timely 
way to high-quality mental health supports when they need 
them. We owe it to them. We owe it to ourselves. We owe it to 
our future. When is the Sask Party going to stop making 
excuses and start to support vulnerable kids who need and 
deserve help and hope? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this government fully 
recognizes the challenges of some of our youth across the 
province, specifically in the North. We know that youth mental 
health and suicide rates in the North are far too high. We’ve 
been paying attention. We’ve been working with our northern 
partners, getting input from them, also working through the 
regions and through other supports to add those supports into 
the northern areas specifically where they are needed, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve been fully engaged with, whether it’s New 

North or other organizations in the North, to hear their ideas 
and also continue to implement mental health supports and 
supports throughout the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the former regions that we had in the North, now covered by 
the new Saskatchewan Health Authority, there is specifically a 
focus on increasing those supports including psychiatry 
appointments and psychiatry availability through the North, 
mental health first aid, Mr. Speaker, as well as when we look at 
northern opportunities with engaging youth right in the schools, 
whether it’s ASIST [Applied Suicide Intervention Skills 
Training] training or other facilities and other programs that we 
can help with our northern partners in mitigating these terrible 
tragedies. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, we’ve heard those lines 
before. What families need is someone that’s going to listen to 
them, someone that’s going to sit down with them and 
understand that children are being stolen from loved ones, from 
families all through our province, and certainly in the North. 
 
In February the Children’s Advocate took to Twitter to share 
his own personal story about his experience with our broken 
mental health system. After hours of waiting, he was told that 
he would need to leave Saskatchewan to get the care that his 
family needed. Mr. Speaker, that happened in our province’s 
largest city, in Saskatoon. If the Sask Party can’t ensure 
services in Saskatoon, a city of over a quarter million people, 
what does that say about the kind of hope and support that 
they’re offering in rural, remote, and northern Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have 
mentioned in my previous answer, there is a host of different 
areas that we’ve been investing in and talking to our northern 
partners when it comes to these issues, Mr. Speaker. But in 
respect to the question from the member opposite, I spoke to the 
advocate a number of times, along with his family members, to 
kind of hear what the challenges that they had been facing, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that the response that they got from the ER 
[emergency room] was not an acceptable response, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When we look at services across our province, when compared 
to Alberta for example, we know that — and when talking to 
our federal counterparts across, and our provincial counterparts 
across the country — almost every province suffers some of 
these challenges, Mr. Speaker. We know that our services in 
Saskatchewan are very comparable to Alberta. When referred to 
maybe a private system, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have as much 
private accessibility in this province, but we are working very 
diligently and making sure those sources are available in our 
public system, Mr. Speaker, as well as for the issue mentioned 
by the member opposite, the Dubé Centre, the mental health 
emergency system that will be set up in the Saskatoon hospital 
by summer and then transitioning to the new Pattison Hospital 
through the emergency department following that. 
 



March 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3365 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Mental Health and Addictions 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend we 
learned of tragic deaths in Saskatoon related to drug overdoses, 
apparently caused by cocaine laced with fentanyl. Over a year 
ago the federal government committed $158.5 million to mental 
health and addictions over a decade. More than 3 million was 
supposed to be dedicated to the last budget, but we don’t have a 
clear answer about where that money went. 
 
Has it been added as new money to help address the growing 
mental health and addictions challenges in Saskatchewan, or is 
it just backfilling for Sask Party cuts? Will the minister put an 
end to the doubt, do as the Deputy Premier urged during the 
most recent leadership campaign, and commit to using these 
funds to raise mental health and addictions funding to 7 per cent 
of the health care budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
recognize the importance of mental health. It’s front of mind, 
not just in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but for all health 
ministers across the country. It was a significant part of the 
discussions at the recent federal-provincial-territorial health 
ministers’ conference in Edmonton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to get to the specifics of the question that the critic 
asked, specifically this year the federal government provided 
$3.1 million for mental health projects. $1.6 million of that, Mr. 
Speaker, was spent in various areas for mental health 
treatments, suicide prevention efforts. And to the point about 
addictions, there is addiction medicine services in Prince 
Albert. 
 
[17:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rest of that funding will be carried forward. It 
will be added incrementally to the money that will be available 
in this upcoming budget. Mr. Speaker, again we recognize the 
importance of mental health. We’re going to make use of every 
single penny of those federal transfers to improve mental health 
programming in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
could improve our abysmal mental health funding from taking 
us from 5 per cent to the 7 per cent that the Deputy Premier had 
called for in his leadership campaign. So again to the minister: 
will you commit to using these funds to raise the mental health 
and addictions funding to 7 per cent of our overall health care 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, again we recognize how 
important mental health is. I would point out how much, since 
we were given the privilege of forming government, the overall 

health budget has increased. So, Mr. Speaker, that again 
substantially increases the target to get to 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier and the Premier both, in the 
leadership race, said it was their intention to get to 7 per cent of 
the budget. That is our goal. We are going to get there as soon 
as finances allow, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to make every 
possible use of all the federal money that’s available, as well as 
other allocations from our own finances. Mr. Speaker, we 
recognize the importance and we will get to 7 per cent. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think those leadership 
candidates talked about when the finances were in place, Mr. 
Speaker. They committed to 7 per cent. So I ask the Health 
minister again: when will we get away from our abysmal 
spending in mental health and get to at least the 7 per cent of 
the national average of mental health spending as a percentage 
of the overall health budget? When will we get there, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, that was a 
platform position of both the Premier and the Deputy Premier. 
That indeed is our goal. We’re going to reach that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just point out very simply this: we have 
been increasing funding for mental health. We’ve increased it 
by, mental health and addictions by 44 per cent since we were 
given the privilege of forming government, Mr. Speaker — 
substantially more than the last year of the NDP in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental health’s a priority. It’ll continue to be a 
priority. And, Mr. Speaker, I would just point out the kinder, 
gentler approach that the Leader of the Opposition spoke of 
apparently ended fairly quickly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House does 
now adjourn for the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has moved adjournment of 
the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:34.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3349 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3350 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3350 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3351 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Vacancy in Swift Current Constituency 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3352 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 
 Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 
 Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3353 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 
 Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 
 Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3353 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act .............................................................................................. 3353 
 Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act ........................................................................................................ 3354 
 Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act ................................................................................................... 3354 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Swift Current Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3354 
 Bill No. 119 — The Melfort Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3355 
 Bill No. 120 — The Kindersley Constituency By-election Act 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3355 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3355 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3356 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3356 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3356 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3357 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3357 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3357 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3357 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3358 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3358 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3358 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3358 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3358 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3358 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3358 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3359 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3359 
 Agriculture Safety Week 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3359 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3359 
 Maple Creek Trans-Canada Visitor Reception Centre 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3360 
 Recognition of Canadian Silver Medallist 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3360 



 

 Induction Into the Prince Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3360 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Milestone at Boundary Dam 3 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3361 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Shared Priorities of Government and Opposition 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3361 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3361 
 Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3361 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3362 
 Funding for Education 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3362 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3362 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3363 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3363 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3363 
 Management of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3363 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3363 
 Support for the North 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3364  
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3364 
 Mental Health Services in the North 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3364 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3364 
 Funding for Mental Health and Addictions 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3365 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3365 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


