


















































April 12, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, APRIL 12, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3767 
 April 12, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave to 
move a motion of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved a motion of 
condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCE MOTION 
 

Humboldt Broncos Bus Tragedy 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
co-operation of all members of this House and the Leader of the 
Opposition for granting this leave here this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few days ago Edmonton Oilers coach Todd 
McLellan was speaking to the media about visiting Humboldt 
after last Friday’s unimaginably tragic accident. Coach 
McLellan reminded the reporters that it wasn’t just young men 
on that bus last Friday. There was a young woman as well. Her 
name was Dayna Brons. 
 
Dayna was the trainer of the Humboldt Broncos, and yesterday 
she passed away as a result of the injuries that she suffered in 
this accident. Mr. Speaker, Dayna was 24. Dayna’s passing is 
another reminder that the tragedy confronting us is an ongoing 
tragedy and that the families going through this painful ordeal 
will need our love and support for the duration, for as long as 
this takes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dayna was a graduate of the University of 
Regina’s kinesiology program. She volunteered with a number 
of teams. Dayna’s family said that she will be remembered for 
her joyful smile, and her passion and love of sport. And they 
added that Dayna was extremely proud to be part of the 
Broncos family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a good column in the StarPhoenix the 
other day by Cam Fuller, and I quote: 
 

There are reports of surviving players fighting for their 
lives in hospital. It’s all a fight. A fight to believe it 
actually happened, a fight to understand, a fight to keep 
going, a fight to make a meaningful contribution. 

 
What is the right thing to do? Everything . . . 
 
We are imperfect. But in times like this we are something 
more important, which is wonderfully human. Keep it 
going. Like The Wave in an arena. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say one more time: this is our team — the 
Humboldt Broncos. Their school is our school. Their 

community is our community. And their families continue to be 
our families. Today I am asking again, everyone in this 
province and across Canada, to continue to support our team, 
the Humboldt Broncos, in honour of their hour of need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Assembly I would like to move 
the following motion: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
deepest sympathies and condolences to the friends and 
families of Dayna Brons, 24, from Lake Lenore, 
Saskatchewan; and further 
 
That her name be added to the list of names acknowledged 
by this Assembly on April the 9th, 2018, as follows: 
 
Adam Herold, 16, from Montmartre, Saskatchewan 
Conner Lukan, 21, from Slave Lake, Alberta 
Evan Thomas, 18, from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 
Jacob Leicht, 19, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Jaxon Joseph, 20, from Edmonton, Alberta 
Logan Boulet, 21, from Lethbridge, Alberta 
Logan Hunter, 18, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Logan Schatz, 20, from Allan, Saskatchewan 
Stephen Wack, 21, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Parker Tobin, 18, from Stony Plain, Alberta 
Brody Hinz, 18, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Darcy Haugan, 42, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Glen Doerksen, 59, from Carrot River, Saskatchewan 
Mark Cross, 27, from Strasbourg, Saskatchewan; and 
Tyler Bieber, 29, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, by leave: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
deepest sympathies and condolences to the friends and 
families of Dayna Brons, 24, from Lake Lenore, 
Saskatchewan; and further 
 
That her name be added to the list of names acknowledged 
by this Assembly on April 9, 2018 as follows: 
 
Adam Herold, 16, from Montmartre, Saskatchewan 
Conner Lukan, 21, from Slave Lake, Alberta 
Evan Thomas, 18, from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 
Jacob Leicht, 19, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Jaxon Joseph, 20, from Edmonton, Alberta 
Logan Boulet, 21, from Lethbridge, Alberta 
Logan Hunter, 18, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Logan Schatz, 20, from Allan, Saskatchewan 
Stephen Wack, 21, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Parker Tobin, 18, from Stony Plain, Alberta 
Brody Hinz, 18, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Darcy Haugan, 42, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Glen Doerksen, 59, from Carrot River, Saskatchewan 
Mark Cross, 27, from Strasbourg, Saskatchewan 
Tyler Bieber, 29, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



3768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
regret, my sadness, and my agreement to the motion of 
condolence for the family of Dayna Brons. It’s very troubling to 
hear of her passing and it reminds us that while an accident 
happens in a moment — it’s a matter of seconds and lives are 
changed and sometimes lives are lost — that the extent of the 
damage takes much longer to really understand. And the 
healing for those who have survived the accident, those who are 
members of the family, the friends, the communities, it takes a 
lifetime. 
 
And I want to once again reiterate my thanks for those who 
were there that day to respond and help everyone in that 
moment — the first responders, the health care providers — but 
also those who continue to work to support the survivors, to 
support the community: clergy members, counsellors, health 
care providers, family, friends, community leaders. 
 
It is so important . . . And Dayna’s passing reminds us that 
there’s a tendency, when a tragedy happens, to come together to 
grieve and then to want to look away. But we can’t look away. 
We need to continue to be there, to be present, to be reaching 
out to each other for support and reaching out to those who are 
struggling the most, to give them everything we can. 
 
So once again my thanks to all those around Canada, around the 
world, who have given their attention, their generosity, their 
time to help the survivors, to help Saskatchewan. And ask for 
that support to continue, and offer the condolences of the 
members of this caucus, the members of this team, and of all 
the people of Saskatchewan and wholeheartedly second this 
motion of condolence for the family of Dayna Brons. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — With leave, to move a motion of 
transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader is asking 
leave for order of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion as well as the verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the family of Dayna Brons, the 
Humboldt Broncos junior hockey club, and the city of 
Humboldt. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader by leave: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion, as well as verbatim 
transcripts of the debate, to the family of Dayna Brons, the 
Humboldt Broncos junior hockey club, and the city of 
Humboldt. 

 
Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery it’s my pleasure to welcome Ethan 
Niebergall and his parents, Kelli and Ken, to their Legislative 
Assembly. Ethan is a grade 3 student attending Emerald Ridge 
Elementary School, and is a skilled writer, Mr. Speaker. He’s a 
remarkable young man. 
 
Ethan has authored three books in his Mega Ninja series, and is 
donating all the profits to charity. The series includes Mega 
Ninja, with proceeds going to the Canada Children’s Wish 
Foundation; Mega Ninja Mini Adventure: Attack of Rat Man — 
which I had the pleasure of reading this morning, Mr. Speaker 
— with the proceeds going to the Canadian Red Cross; and 
Mega Ninja: Attack of Spiky Giants from the Sun with proceeds 
going to the Royal Canadian Legion for the Power in Me 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I finally got my hands on Ethan’s newest book this morning, 
The Hero Squad, with all the proceeds going to the children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And with your permission, 
once I’ve read it, Mr. Speaker, I’ll place it in the Legislative 
Library. 
 
Ethan, your hard work and creativity will make a lasting impact 
in the lives of so many that are in need in this province. Our 
province is fortunate to have such gifted and philanthropic 
students such as yourself in our province. So, Mr. Speaker, 
Ethan’s going to have . . . I had an opportunity to meet with 
Ethan and his parents in my office this morning. He’s going to 
have a chance to tour the legislature this morning with a special 
stop at the Premier’s office after question period, Mr. Speaker. 
So I would ask all members in the legislature to welcome Ethan 
and his parents to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Deputy Premier in welcoming Ethan and his family to their 
Legislative Assembly, and congratulate him on his early 
success as an author, and to congratulate both him and his 
parents on raising such a dedicated and warm-hearted young 
man. I look forward to the exceptional things that you will 
continue to do in your life, Ethan, and I just want you to know 
that all members of this Assembly are very proud and 
impressed by your authorship skills, by your kind heart, and we 
all welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3769 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you in the east gallery that obscure figure way at 
the top there all by herself, my favourite 10-year-old in the 
whole wide world which would be Ophelia Chartier McDaid. 
My favourite 20-year-old unfortunately isn’t here; she’s at 
school in Montreal. 
 
But Ophelia is not a stranger to this place. When I was first 
elected, Mr. Speaker, she spent the first two years of my elected 
life commuting every week with me back and forth, and used to 
run down the halls when my office was in the basement, quite 
loudly I’m sure. Those of you who were here undoubtedly 
heard her as she rolled down the hallways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ophelia is a pretty amazing kid. She does drive me nuts at 
times, as both my children do, but I’m very proud to have such 
a kind, funny . . . One of her traits, she really likes people in her 
life to smile and laugh, and does her best to do that on a daily 
basis, Mr. Speaker. She has a great social conscience, which I 
really love. She’s concerned about other people in the world, in 
her community around her. She’s a pretty fantastic kid. She’s 
the reason and Hennessey are the reasons I’m here, for them but 
for all the kids who come after them too, kids like Ethan and 
their family. 
 
But Ophelia and Hennessey have made great sacrifices. Ophelia 
has spent 9 of her 10 years as having a mom as an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. And there’s lots of 
times where she’s not a fan of session, Mr. Speaker. So she’s 
made a great sacrifice for the people of Saskatchewan too and 
for people of Saskatoon Riversdale so her mom could serve. For 
that I’m grateful, and I love that girl an awful lot, Mr. Speaker. 
But with that, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Ophelia to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
[10:15] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Porcupine Plain. I do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition concerning funding to our children’s 
classrooms in this province. Those who have signed this 
petition wish to draw our attention to many things, Mr. Speaker. 
One of them is the fact that even though the Sask Party is 
making us all pay more, our kids are actually getting less. They 
point out to the fact that last year, the people of Saskatchewan 
paid an additional $67 million in education property tax, but the 
Sask Party cut $54 million. 
 
And those who have signed this petition know that costs have 
only continued to increase since last year, that we have more 
children, about 5,000 more students in our classroom than last 
year. And that $30 million offering in this year’s budget doesn’t 
come close to undoing the damage inflicted on our classrooms. 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to reverse the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
here today to present a petition to increase the funding to Prince 
Albert mobile crisis. Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed 
this petition want me to draw the following points to your 
attention. Prince Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its 
door during daytime hours resulting in a loss of resource to 
people in distress. 
 
The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put stress on 
the Prince Albert Police Services, Victoria Hospital, and other 
agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to provide 
counselling and intervention services to clients. I’ll read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to the 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition come from the 
community of Prince Albert. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Yom Hashoah Observed Across Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is Yom Hashoah, otherwise known as Holocaust 
Memorial Day. From 1933 to 1945, six million Jews were 
murdered by the Nazi regime, a culmination of thousands of 



3770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

years of anti-Semitism, of pogroms, expulsions, and terror. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we must not forget the legacy of the 
Holocaust. Synagogues across the province have had memorial 
events and will continue to have them over the next month. At 
many of these events, Mr. Speaker, Holocaust survivors share 
their stories and experiences with thousands throughout the 
province. I had the opportunity to attend such an event a few 
weeks ago where Robbie Waisman, a Holocaust survivor, 
shared his story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our society is more peaceful and inclusive than 
ever before. But there will always be those like Neville 
Chamberlain, on the eve of the Holocaust, who look to avoid 
any direct confrontation in the hopes that our enemies will 
forget their evil ways and learn to love us. Those voices do not 
speak for the rest of us. You and I know and we do not believe 
that peace can achieved by avoiding the face of evil. And our 
honoured dead who gave their lives to stop the advance of the 
Nazis didn’t die in vain. They knew that evil where it exists 
must be confronted, for the price of civilization is eternal 
vigilance. 
 
Lessons of the Holocaust are universal. They are a lesson 
written in blood, remembered in tears that represent the 
horrifying price demanded should we falter in our ongoing fight 
against evil. We will remain eternally vigilant so that we must 
never relearn the lessons of that dark chapter of human history. 
Never again, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

St. Louis Lions Club Celebrates 50 Years 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday April 
7th, I had the pleasure of going back to my hometown to 
celebrate the 50th anniversary of the St. Louis Lions Club. Mr. 
Speaker, St. Louis was a wonderful place in which to grow up, 
in no small part because of the many contributions to our 
community from the St. Louis Lions Club, including the skating 
rink, the curling rink, the ball diamonds, and the bowling alley, 
to name a few of their many projects. 
 
After a delicious supper, a program followed which included 
Don Brooks from Rosthern as the guest speaker. The member 
from Batoche was also in attendance and I was pleased that, 
during his greetings, he said that he has been working with the 
federal government to obtain funding to convert the old St. 
Louis bridge into a pedestrian bridge. Knowing how the people 
of St. Louis love their historic bridge, this is a perfect use for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate President Emile Boutin and 
his executive, the charter members, and the current members of 
the St. Louis Lions Club on 50 years of service to the village of 
St. Louis. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the St. Louis Lions Club on their excellent 
service and dedication, and acknowledging their many 
contributions to their community over the past 50 years and to 
wish them well in their future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 

Assiniboia Athlete Successful in Basketball and 
Track and Field 

 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to stand in the Assembly today and acknowledge a bright young 
constituent of mine, Logan Fettes. Logan is a grade 12 student 
at the Assiniboia Composite High School and a member of both 
the basketball and the track and field teams. 
 
As a basketball player, Logan was the highest scorer in the 
Moose Jaw high school league in both 2016 and 2017. Mr. 
Speaker, despite his success in basketball, Logan has said his 
favourite sport is track and field, and he has also experienced 
great success as a track athlete. In 2015 he won the provincial 
medal in triple jump, and in 2016 he took home silver and two 
golds in triple jump, long jump, and the 4 x 100-metre relay. 
 
He then went to achieve similar success at the Saskatchewan 
Summer Games, winning multiple medals. And, Mr. Speaker, 
his high school track career culminated in a sixth-place finish in 
the triple jump at the Legion national track and field meet as a 
member of Team Saskatchewan. Logan plans to take his talents 
to the U of R [University of Regina] this fall, and I know he’ll 
represent the people of Assiniboia well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Logan for all his success and wish him all the best 
as his career continues here in Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Outdoor Hockey League Thrives in Regina 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the great Canadian 
tradition of outdoor hockey was very much alive and well here 
in Regina this past season, including at the Regina Rosemont 
rink. The Outdoor Hockey League, also known as the OHL, is a 
very successful program that was started more than 20 years 
ago by Ranch Ehrlo and run by Sport Venture for those years. 
This program ensures that kids from all walks of life have the 
opportunity to take part in Canada’s game. I’ve volunteered for 
many years as a coach with the OHL, and I have so many great 
memories of young people growing and building relationships 
through hockey. 
 
More than 300 young people from all across our city take part 
in this program. This wouldn’t be possible without the 
dedicated work of Taylor Ward, the interim program manager 
of Sport Venture. She stepped in for the amazing Amanda 
McConnell who’s on education leave. I also want to thank the 
staff that help run the program: Ojay Stein, Cody Woit, Kailey 
Budd, and Tracie Leost. 
 
I also wanted to recognize a local volunteer that’s up for an 
award. The WHL [Western Hockey League] has named Regina 
Pats forward Matt Bradley as the eastern conference 
Humanitarian of the Year, in part for his volunteering with the 
OHL. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know what hockey means to this province. It 
binds our communities together with pride and develops young 
people. This is on full display within the OHL. I ask all 
members to join with me in recognizing the OHL, all of its 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3771 

staff, all of these community leaders, the amazing players, and 
the dedicated coaches for making it happen. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Healing Lodge Volunteer Receives Taylor Award 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
recognize an exceptional constituent of mine, Captain Ed Dean. 
Mr. Speaker, Captain Ed Dean received the Taylor Award. This 
award is presented by the Correctional Service of Canada and 
the National Volunteer Association for outstanding volunteer 
work dedicated to service. 
 
Along with the recognition, Captain Ed Dean was also draped 
in a star blanket during the award ceremony, from Chief Alvin 
Francis of the Nekaneet First Nation. The star blanket was very 
meaningful to him as it recognizes his community’s 
appreciation for his service and is considering him as a very 
good and honourable man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was truly an honour for Captain Ed Dean to 
receive this award. After learning of his nomination, Ed stated, 
“I didn’t think I’d done anything out of the ordinary,” as he 
reflected on over 10 years of service and volunteerism at the 
healing lodge. His humble spirit and dedication to this service is 
inspiring. 
 
The award is named after Charles Taylor and is in memory of 
his lifelong dedication to faith-based counselling with offenders 
in correctional facilities and other communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to please join me in 
congratulating Captain Ed Dean on his award and thanking him 
for his dedication to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Primary Health Centre Opens in Cut Knife 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was my 
pleasure to bring greetings and join the celebration of the newly 
relocated and expanded Primary Health Centre in Cut Knife a 
few weeks ago. I was also joined by Chief Wayne Semaganis of 
Little Pine First Nation. 
 
The opening of this health care facility is a great achievement 
for this community. The new space is three times larger than the 
former clinic, and patient access to care has nearly doubled 
thanks to the new availability of the nurse practitioner in town, 
Casey Gaw. The facility also includes additional space for 
visiting mental health counsellors, chronic disease management 
professionals, nutrition specialists, public health nurses, and 
home care nurses. These additional spaces and expanded hours 
will benefit both the town of Cut Knife and the surrounding 
area greatly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to investing in 
primary health care, and our government has made significant 
investment over the past several years. But it takes the efforts of 
the community to undertake an important project such as this. 

We are grateful to the town of Cut Knife, the surrounding 
community, and especially Mayor Gwenn Kaye, who was 
instrumental in the development of this project. And as a side 
note, Gwenn has worked at this facility for 30-plus years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating the community of Cut Knife on the opening of 
their new Primary Health Centre. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

First Annual Wheelchair Curling Funspiel 
Held in Kamsack 

 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
acknowledge the hard work from the people of my home 
constituency, particularly those from the town of Kamsack. Mr. 
Speaker, on March 9th and 10th Kamsack hosted a first annual 
wheelchair funspiel at the Broda Sportsplex. 
 
Kim Hudye assisted in organizing the benefit function for her 
son Teddy who has been in a wheelchair for the past three years 
following a dirt bike accident. Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure 
of coaching Teddy when he played for the Canora Cobras 
midget hockey team, and his accident was a day after our 
hockey windup. He was selling his dirt bike, and it was his last 
day. He was driving it across the field when the accident 
occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Teddy and his curling team, along with 11 others, 
participated in the fun bonspiel. Participants had to be a little 
creative, Mr. Speaker, each individual person standing behind 
him to ensure the wheelchairs were kept steady while using a 
stick to throw the rocks. The teams did not include sweepers. 
Due to the modifications, the scoring was similar to that of 
shuffleboard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event is estimated to have raised over $5,000 
from sponsors and team entries. The winning three-person team 
comprised of Josh Gogol of Canora, Carter Birch of Regina, 
and Teddy Hudye of Kamsack. Both Josh Gogol from Canora 
and Ted Hudye are part of the First Steps in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating Kamsack and the organizers for hosting a fun 
and successful bonspiel. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wait Times for Surgery 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve 
timely access to good quality health care, but increasingly 
Saskatchewan people are waiting longer and longer to access 
those services. A national report from yesterday saw 
Saskatchewan fall desperately short on surgery wait times 
compared with other provinces. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Just two years ago, Saskatchewan was at 100 per cent of the 



3772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

benchmark for hip replacements, but now that’s slid to 76 per 
cent. And for knee replacements, the province was at 99 per 
cent of the benchmark and again in only two short years that’s 
plummeted to 61 per cent. And Saskatchewan, as a result, has 
fallen below the national average on several of these wait-time 
benchmarks. 
 
In just two short years, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party’s 
watch, surgery wait times are once again a very serious concern. 
They threw money at the problem, but they didn’t make the 
changes to the system to make sure that access would remain 
sustainable. And now as a result, thousands and thousands more 
people aren’t getting the health care they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what went wrong? Why is Saskatchewan falling 
behind so dramatically? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we most certainly have 
invested in . . . We’ve invested mightily in our health care 
system over the last decade, Mr. Speaker, up 56 per cent in 
some 10 years, including a two and a half per cent lift, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget — which is a very challenging budget, 
Mr. Speaker — on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. But in light of that budget we are still able to 
continue to increase our health care budget by some two and a 
half per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we most certainly have done things differently here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have totally changed our entire 
. . . Mr. Speaker, we have changed how we bring physicians in 
from around the world, Mr. Speaker. We have invested heavily 
in the College of Medicine to certify and ensure that we can 
expand the seats at the College of Medicine to provide the 
services across the province, Mr. Speaker, including in our 
surgical centres. 
 
And most notably, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced private 
surgery clinics here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So we have one line of individuals requiring surgery, 
Mr. Speaker. When they get to the front of that line, they either 
go to the public system or the private system, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s been ample investment, Mr. Speaker, ample innovation, 
Mr. Speaker, and always a willingness to look at how we can do 
things better on behalf of the people across this great province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
have invested a great deal in health care, and Saskatchewan 
health care providers do incredible work. However, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party’s management is resulting in more 
people waiting, resulting in people paying more and getting 
less. You know, it wasn’t that long ago that we heard day after 
day from the members opposite right in this House, we heard 
about surgery wait times all the time, boasting about their 
success. And we’ve been waiting to hear more, waiting to hear 
what’s happening now. 
 
But lately it’s been pretty silent, Mr. Speaker, because under the 
Sask Party, in less than three years the number of people 
waiting over three months for their surgery has grown by over 

7,000 people. That’s over five times as many people who were 
waiting in 2015. There’s 4,500 more people waiting more than 
six months for their surgery — people in pain, not able to work, 
having a diminished quality of life. Mr. Speaker, that’s 10 times 
as many people than those who were waiting in 2015. No 
wonder the Sask Party stopped talking about this. How does the 
Sask Party justify these unacceptable wait times? What concrete 
actions are they taking to address them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I said, with 
the investment that we have provided, over 50 per cent increase 
in investment over the last decade, Mr. Speaker, an investment 
in private surgical centres to complement the work that is 
happening in our public centres, Mr. Speaker. We have now 
performed over 69,000 surgeries, Mr. Speaker, in those private 
centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what this has resulted in, here are the results, Mr. Speaker. 
Compared to 2007, compared to when the members opposite 
were in charge of this file, Mr. Speaker, those waiting more 
than 18 months is down 87 per cent. Eighty-seven per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s 2,666 patients down to 343, Mr. Speaker. Of 
those waiting more than a year, down 79 per cent. Those 
waiting more than six months, Mr. Speaker, down 57 per cent, 
and those waiting more than three months, Mr. Speaker, that 
waiting list is down some 41 per cent. So that’s almost 6,200 
patients, Mr. Speaker, that are not waiting for surgeries that 
were under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we see a government that likes to 
look to the past. But we’re talking about today and today we 
want answers. In the last three years, more than 10 times as 
many people are waiting than in 2015. What happened? What 
happened? Why have the wait times got so much longer so 
quickly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as of August 31st of 2017, 
80 per cent of patients received surgery or were offered a 
surgery date within three months of their booking, Mr. Speaker. 
This is highly ironic, Mr. Speaker, in this House that we stand 
in here day after day, Mr. Speaker, and we listen to the 
members opposite asking for more investment in health care, 
Mr. Speaker. Done. Two and a half per cent more investment 
this year, Mr. Speaker, and results in our surgery centres, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They asked for more investment in social services, in 
corrections, in police, and in justice, Mr. Speaker, and then they 
come with a response, Mr. Speaker, that is utterly ridiculous, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s ridiculous. They call for this investment and 
when the investment is made in education, right in our 
classrooms, in health care, Mr. Speaker, into our hospitals, into 
the people providing service, Mr. Speaker, to people across this 
province and into social services and justice, into our 
communities’ most vulnerable, in some way, shape, or form, 
they say that investment doesn’t count, Mr. Speaker. Only the 
NDP would come up with such a ridiculous accusation as that. 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3773 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve got lots 
of bluster from the Premier but absolutely no answers for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And after wasting billions during the 
best years, they’re not just hiking fees and raising taxes. 
They’re expecting Saskatchewan people to get by with less, too. 
From the tens of millions they’re still short in education 
funding, to cutting job-training programs, university grants, and 
even trying to take credit for federal funding for things like 
mental health, they still haven’t fixed their bad management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the Minister of Central Services admitted 
that the Sask Party’s waste at the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] is sucking up money that could go to our classrooms or 
other important services. Now, Mr. Speaker, with the GTH 
price tag of $150 million and counting, doesn’t the Minister of 
Finance agree that the money could be better spent educating 
our kids, training our workers, and helping the most vulnerable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it was sort of a free-range 
question. Sort of went all over . . . The preamble was out there. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to zero in on a few of the facts 
that should be very important to the members opposite. We took 
a tour of the GTH last week. The members opposite were not 
able to go. Mr. Speaker, today I would like to renew that offer 
and see if I can’t arrange for a tour so they can go out and they 
can meet some of the 8 or 900 people that are working at the 
Loblaw facility. And I’d like them to look those people in the 
eye and say, oh, this is wasted money having you have a job 
here. Well, Mr. Speaker, those are new Canadians and, Mr. 
Speaker, those people are taking up citizenship. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those people will be voting in the next election, and I 
know who they won’t be voting for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are over 860 full-time jobs there; 4,800 
trucks move in and out of there every week. There is more work 
to do, more land to be sold, more development to be done when 
the bypass is completed. And, Mr. Speaker, those people should 
look over the jobs over there and they should say thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Yes, it’s too bad the minister chose a time 
when these members here were already scheduled for meetings. 
But we do definitely want to have a tour. Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Two thirds. Two-thirds, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now like so much of what they do, that answer is more about 
smoke and mirrors than about facts and transparency. Just look 
at their budgets, Mr. Speaker. Years ago, 2013, they were told 
to respect accounting principles and to include the pension 
accrual adjustment when they switched to summary financing. 
But at that time, when they switched to summary, the 
adjustment was a negative and would have meant an $800 
million hit to their forecast a year before an election. So, 

surprise, they ignored the auditor and they kept ignoring the 
auditor until now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you might be asking yourself, why now? 
Well through you to the Finance minister, will she admit that 
this sudden change of policy was less about following the rules 
and more about the nearly $400 million that magically added to 
her bottom line this year? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
been transitioning to summary financial statements and I know 
that’s been a struggle for the members opposite to understand. 
The pension liability was a separate line but it was still in the 
document and the calculation could easily be done. It also has 
always been included. It has always been included in the Public 
Accounts. Mr. Speaker, it’s included in all other provinces and 
by our federal government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, any time that the member opposite asks 
questions, quite frankly she used the Public Accounts document 
that she did the calculation. So she always asks questions with it 
calculated in, and she asked for it to be put back in, Mr. 
Speaker. At Q3 of this budget we brought the pension back in 
line. We did a side-by-side demonstration of how it calculated if 
it was in or if it was out. Either calculation, we were still on 
track at Q3. There was an explanation given. And you know 
what the member opposite did? She was silent. She was silent 
because it didn’t serve her purpose to say anything, Mr. 
Speaker. But now even though she’s wanted it calculated in all 
along and asked for it to be in, now she wants to calculate it out 
and asked for it to be out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I really admire the eagerness of my colleague 
to get into the questions, Mr. Speaker, but I do have one more. 
Now I don’t think anyone over here or anyone in Saskatchewan 
believes that the Minister of Finance didn’t do a little happy 
dance when they figured out that trick at third quarter. It’s 
probably the same . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — We’re thinking this is probably the same 
happy dance that the folks are doing over at Cenovus, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Cenovus is the only customer of the $1.5 
billion carbon capture and storage experiment at Boundary 
dam 3. 
 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] only works about 60 per cent 
of the time and falls short of its targets for carbon capture every 
year. And, Mr. Speaker, every time the Sask Party’s project 
fails to meet the targets, Cenovus gets to collect a fine. This 
year it was $5.5 million dollars, Mr. Speaker, $5.5 million of 
ratepayers’ money. 
 



3774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

So a simple question to the minister responsible: will he admit 
that there is a clear link between these fines and the three 
SaskPower rate hikes, and then the over 10 per cent increase in 
the last two years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite would know that 
SaskPower has announced just recently that Boundary dam 3 
has captured 2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide. This is the 
equivalent of 500,000 vehicles being taken off the road. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Boundary dam 3, the carbon capture unit, has 
been running at 100 per cent capacity since December 19th of 
2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite leaves out is the fact 
that, while yes there was a shortfall, the revenue for last year for 
CO2 sales exceeded the shortfall by over $7 million. In fact, 
since the unit has been up and running and selling CO2, it has 
gained a net gain of more than $20 million in the sale of CO2, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is good news for SaskPower. 
And this is good news for enhanced oil recovery in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And most of all, it’s great news for the 
environment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Mental Health 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
Saskatchewan people’s money and the health and welfare of an 
entire province, and they’re playing three-card monte. Well 
sleight of hand is not going to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is below the national average for mental health 
spending. We have a devastating suicide crisis in the North, a 
growing number of people struggling across the province, and 
community-based organizations crying out for more funding so 
they can help. Mr. Speaker, instead of making excuses and 
taking credit for federal money, when will the Health minister 
admit there’s a problem here and take real steps to help the 
Saskatchewan people who are suffering? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
do take this very seriously. We’re very concerned about mental 
health. It’s a priority. We’re not taking credit for dollars that 
flow from the federal government. We’ve been very transparent 
about where that money comes from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget, on new money there’s about 
$9 million coming from the federal government. Mr. Speaker, 
we appreciate every dollar. That’s going to be added in addition 
to 2 million in new provincial money and $275 million overall 
from the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of new initiatives in mental 
health, a number of new programs, some exciting programs. 
The Children’s Advocate had advocated for a program that’s 
seen some success in schools in Alberta, as did the medical 

students just a few days ago in this House, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to be moving forward on that program. We’re going to be 
hiring a significant number of new FTEs [full-time equivalent] 
to do with mental health services around the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the member asks another question because 
I’d certainly like to follow up on that. There’s a number of new 
programs. We’re very optimistic what that’ll do, Mr. Speaker. 
We take this very seriously. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, over 80 per cent of the mental 
health funding they announced on Tuesday is coming from 
Ottawa. And the minister is wrong to pretend other ministries 
are awash in mental health dollars, which they’ve done in some 
of their media and news releases. Education is still tens of 
millions behind where it was before the last election. The Sask 
Party re-announces the same policing resources every few 
months in a different direction. And a rural helpline is no 
excuse to walk away from farmers and producers who are 
struggling with nowhere to turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of rewrapping Justin Trudeau’s funding 
and calling it their own, why won’t the Sask Party back up their 
words with real action and, at the very least, at the very least, 
match the federal funding so we can start helping those in 
desperate need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the NDP are 
the only people that aren’t happy with the increased funding 
and the overall funding for mental health in the province. Mr. 
Speaker, the Children’s Advocate tweeted this to the budget 
announcement: 
 

Pleased to see some dedicated dollars to mental health . . . 
supporting our most vulnerable youth, looking forward to 
the pilot project of the Mental Health Capacity Building in 
Schools Initiative & reducing wait times to see our mental 
health specialists. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the program I was speaking about earlier 
from Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this, Mr. Speaker. We very clearly in 
this budget outlined how important this is as a priority. This is a 
national issue, the issue for mental health spending. It’s had a 
great deal of discussion when the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health and I met with health ministers from across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this: the member opposite should 
consider what she’s asking for. She just said, why won’t the 
minister commit to meeting the amount of funding from the 
federal government . . . to matching it, I believe she said. Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget, $9 million from the federal 
government, which we appreciate, 275 million from the 
province. It’s far in exceed that it’s been matched, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3775 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, my question was about new 
dollars for mental health. My question to the minister: will he 
commit to actually putting his money where his mouth is and 
match the targeted money from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I very clearly indicated we 
far exceed the amount of funding from the federal government. 
Mr. Speaker, 275 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . So somehow 
previous money doesn’t count, according to the NDP. They’ve 
always had a bit of an issue with accounting, Mr. Speaker. The 
member in the previous question clearly indicated, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re very able to twist and spin and try to score some 
political points. Mr. Speaker, I’ve clearly indicated mental 
health’s a priority. 
 
As far as previous questions, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talked about surgical wait times. How about this, 
Mr. Speaker? There’s a recent story in Global that says that 
while, unfortunately — and we’re going to keep an eye on this 
and we’re going to take action — our wait times have increased 
somewhat, Mr. Speaker, this story very clearly indicates, it 
says, “Patients in Saskatchewan have some of the shortest wait 
times in the country to receive elective surgery . . .” Mr. 
Speaker, overall they’re talking about Saskatchewan being at 
the top. Not where we were under the NDP. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Public Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Yesterday the Minister of Education claimed that 
boards and stakeholders are happy with his budget. He 
committed to ongoing dialogue and listening to his partners in 
education going forward. And as well he should, Mr. Speaker. 
He should read past the Sask Party spin and listen to what 
people are really saying about what the Sask Party’s budget is 
doing to public education. 
 
The Saskatchewan School Boards Association said, “The 
funding announced today only goes so far in terms of meeting 
the pressures being faced in classrooms across Saskatchewan.” 
The STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] said, “With 
more students and fewer teachers, today’s budget won’t make it 
any easier to meet the needs of students.” 
 
Will the Education minister actually listen to what leaders in 
education are saying, acknowledge the shortfall, and fully fund 
our children’s classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we are listening to 
educators. We are listening to teachers, we are listening to 
trustees, and we are listening to parents, Mr. Speaker. We 
committed $30 million in this budget, Mr. Speaker, which will 
go to help resourcing classrooms, Mr. Speaker. It shows a 

commitment on the part of this government to support children 
in the classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve committed to an 
ongoing conversation with all our partners in education, and I 
made that very clear that I consider them to be our partners in 
education, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to have this dialogue. 
 
We know there’s going to be enrolment pressures in the fall, 
Mr. Speaker. I have committed to school board trustees that we 
will have that conversation, now that we now have the numbers 
in terms of the projected enrolment numbers for the fall, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to have a conversation about that and I’ve 
committed to that, Mr. Speaker. This government takes public 
education very seriously. We understand the importance of 
investing in public education, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue 
to look at it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we have a new Premier. We have a 
new Sask Party Premier. We have a new Sask Party Education 
minister. But this Sask Party budget offers more of the same 
Sask Party underfunding to our kids’ classrooms. 
 
They know that their offering of $30 million doesn’t even come 
close to fixing the damage that they’ve inflicted all across our 
province, but they’re plowing ahead anyways with their 
short-sighted approach. They’re failing to invest in our children. 
They’re failing to invest in the future. And they’re playing shell 
games with their insufficient offering of $30 million. Can the 
minister tell this Assembly how much of his $30 million 
offering will be in this budget year and how much will have to 
wait for next year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I made it very clear that the 
$30 million, Mr. Speaker, is based on the school year, Mr. 
Speaker. Those funds will flow to the school divisions as they 
normally have, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well if they’d like the answer, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to give 
it. Mr. Speaker, the $30 million will flow out to school 
divisions in the school year just like it normally flows out, 
pursuant to the formula, Mr. Speaker. That should come as no 
surprise to the member opposite. She is a former school board 
trustee. She will know how this works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We continue to have those conversations, Mr. Speaker, that the 
$30 million will flow out to the school divisions pursuant to the 
school year under the formula, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, post-secondary institutions 
have been left hurting as well after a budget that doesn’t repair 
the damage of the cuts from last year, nor display an 
understanding of how difficult it is for students to make ends 
meet. 
 
After last year’s 6 per cent funding cut that led to program 
deferrals, tuition hikes, and dozens of full-time job losses, the 
U of R is saying that they have no choice but to look to the 



3776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

chopping block again. And U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] president Peter Stoicheff told reporters the 
recent 4.8 per cent tuition hike was a direct result of last year’s 
budget cuts, the recent tuition hike on top of a workforce 
reduction of more than 100 staff at the U of S. These relentless 
cuts to our post-secondary institutions are pushing costs onto 
students and eliminating good paying jobs at a time when we 
need them most. 
 
The Premier pretends to value education, but instead it’s more 
of the same. Can’t the Premier see the impact, the damaging 
impact, of these choices and what they’re doing to universities 
and students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to thank the member opposite for the 
question. We were able to hold the line on operating costs for 
the universities this year. And I would point out additionally to 
that that we were able to provide much-needed support to the 
College of Medicine, Mr. Speaker, in order to help them with 
their accreditation issues and, Mr. Speaker, at a time when we 
have an opening of the children’s hospital which is so important 
to our province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I can quote from the tweet that was 
given out to us by Dr. Larry Rosia, the head of the 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, whose students, by the way, have 
about a 90 per cent employment record in this province upon 
graduation, precisely because of their important relationships 
with industry partners, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll quote from his 
tweet. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan government’s commitment to continue 
investment in Sask Polytech, other post-secondary 
institutions, is most welcome. Supporting efforts to 
provide students the best . . . [focused job] education, 
while ensuring employer and labour market needs are met, 
benefits Saskatchewan well into the future. 

 
And I have numerous examples of how we’re doing just that, 
Mr. Speaker. I look forward to further questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the budget, 
university students have said that they’re going into greater 
debt, that they’re being shut out, and that they see little hope for 
them with choices like these. And in response to those concerns 
about students working multiple jobs to make ends meet and to 
pay for school, the minister said she too had to work multiple 
jobs when she was in school, saying, “It was a tough road, but 
it’s not a unique one.”  
 
Well my experience was the same as the minister’s, but the 
times have changed since we were in university. The costs of 
tuition and housing have skyrocketed and more than outstripped 
the ability for students to earn that same amount of money. 
 
Students across Saskatchewan don’t need to have their 
experiences minimized. They need a budget that works for 

them. Now they’re staring down another round of tuition hikes. 
The budget has cut student support by $12.6 million. This is the 
next generation of leaders, and we must act to give them hope. 
Why didn’t the Sask Party budget invest the dollars that are so 
desperately needed by students and post-secondary institutions 
across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well once again I want to thank 
the member opposite for the question, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, it’s very important that he talked about moving forward 
and having young people. 
 
And you know, last day the Leader of the Opposition talked 
about planting a tree. Well let’s talk about that for a minute, Mr. 
Speaker, and something important about our young people in 
this province. We have invested in a graduate retention 
program, Mr. Speaker, which 70,000 young people have taken 
advantage of in this province. And I would add to that, Mr. 
Speaker, that that member opposite, the Leader of the 
Opposition, proposed to scrap it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections]  
 
The Speaker: — Allow the minister to answer the question. I 
recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
mean that member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, 
proposed to scrap a program that 70,000 students in this 
province had taken advantage of upon graduation so they can 
establish roots in this very province. That’s not planting a tree, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a forest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Funding for Northern Highways and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At her 
Finance briefing, the minister was asked why there were budget 
incentives targeted for the south and why there’s nothing to 
spur growth in the North. And she claimed infrastructure dollars 
had helped make everyone better off. Are you kidding me, Mr. 
Speaker? It isn’t northerners building the $2 billion semicircle 
around the city. 
 
And a critical piece of infrastructure that would help the lives of 
northerners has been left out of this budget. After a tragic plane 
crash that rocked the community of Fond-du-Lac last year, 
leaders tried to raise the alarm about the runway, calling for 
desperately needed improvements. But there wasn’t a single 
dollar in this budget for this airport. 
 
Fond du Lac Chief Louie Mercredi said that theirs is one of the 
shortest runways in northern Saskatchewan, despite the fact the 
size of planes using the airstrip continue to grow. They don’t 
need a jurisdictional runaround; they need safe access in and 
out of their community. 
 
When will this government get to the table with community 
leaders and create a concrete plan to widen and to lengthen the 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3777 

runway at the Fond-du-Lac airport? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this year’s 
budget, Ministry of Highways has committed to $61 million for 
northern roads and airports in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We are dedicated to that. In the last 10 years, we’ve 
invested over $400 million in northern roads and airports in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are looking at airport expansion. We’re looking at, in many 
communities . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, I will be travelling and 
visiting every one of those airports in northern Saskatchewan 
here in June, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at construction costs. 
We’re looking at all aspects of safety. We’ve looked at these 
concerns and we’re addressing these concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, nothing for the North. No 
meaningful investment for northern highways and 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. But do you know what the Sask 
Party government have money for? Two billion dollars for their 
40-kilometre semicircle around Regina, but nothing for the 
North. 
 
This year once again the Saskatchewan Party is reaching into 
the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan for $330 million for 
the Regina bypass. This adds up to more than one-third of total 
highway spending this year alone. Mr. Speaker, there are so 
many projects that need investment, but when a third of the 
budget’s going to one highway around Regina, there isn’t much 
left over for the rest of us. 
 
To the minister: why are there endless dollars for the P3 
[public-private partnership] Regina bypass and the GTH, but 
nothing for northern highways? 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question from 
the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. We have invested over $400 
million in the past 10 years in northern Saskatchewan on roads 
and airports, Mr. Speaker. The Regina bypass is a $1.2 billion 
project, Mr. Speaker. It’s on track. It’s on budget, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact we’re ahead of schedule, Mr. Speaker. It’s a major artery 
around the city of Regina. It’s going to attract commercial 
investment, and we’re going to expand it. 
 
And the biggest reason we did that, Mr. Speaker, is safety. 
Since we’ve opened the bypasses east of Regina there has been 
no incidents in that area, Mr. Speaker. And saving one life is a 
major issue that we are dealing with in the Ministry of 
Highways, and safety is our number one priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to table a 
report from the Chief Electoral Officer regarding the Swift 
Current by-election. 

Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a 
motion regarding a leave of absence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to move a motion regarding a leave of absence. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move: 
 

That a leave of absence be granted to the member from 
Regina Rochdale from Monday, April 16th, 2018 to 
Thursday, April 19th, 2018 to attend the Commonwealth 
Women’s Forum in London, United Kingdom on behalf of 
this Assembly. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That a leave of absence be granted to the member of 
Regina Rochdale from Monday, April 16th, 2018 to 
Thursday, April 19th, 2018 to attend the Commonwealth 
Women’s Forum in London, United Kingdom on behalf of 
this Assembly. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 212 through 220. 
 
The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . 212 to 220. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 



3778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will be 
speaking in favour of the budget, but I will not be speaking in 
favour of the opposition’s amendment. 
 
Before I begin delving into talking about the budget, there is 
some people that I would like to acknowledge. I’d like to thank 
my family and my friends who have been so supportive and 
encouraging me to seek public office and to continue to 
represent the constituency of Regina Rochdale. It’s a 
commitment that one has to make, and I did it with 
wholehearted agreement from my family and my friends, and I 
appreciate that kind of work. 
 
It’s not always an easy choice to seek public office. But as my 
role of Chair of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians 
of Canada, one of the things we’re asked to do is to encourage 
more women to seek public office, because ensuring that we 
have more capable, competent women sitting at the 
decision-making table, good decisions are being made. 
 
This past week we had a very capable, competent, female 
Finance minister present her budget. And I have to commend 
our Minister of Finance for the ongoing work she has done with 
serving her community, but also within her role as Minister of 
Finance. It has been a very, very difficult week for the minister 
in regards to the tragic accident that happened in Humboldt, and 
yet she persevered. She dug deep, and she brought forward a 
very concise and well-planned budget, and we have to thank her 
for it. 
 
A good friend of mine, Willard Larson who coached many 
teams in the city of Regina once said to me, Laura, sometimes 
you’ve got to play hurt. Well that’s exactly what our Finance 
minister had to do because she was hurting very deep inside 
because these were close friends and constituents that were lost, 
and the whole community has been shook and the whole 
province has been shook. 
 
Our family had our own . . . On March the 15th, 1989, a very 
similar tragic accident happened for us in that our son, with two 
of his friends, were on the way to a sporting event and were 
killed in a horrible accident. So this week has been just like 
having that band-aid ripped off all over again. And so I can 
understand, and I can really sympathize with the family 
members whose . . . The young boys and now a young woman 
have lost their life. Because they will never grow old to us, they 
will always be our kids. And that’s something we can never 
forget. 
 
So I am so proud and so pleased that we have such a capable 
Finance minister who was able to dig deep, stand up in the 
House, and present the budget. 

One of the interesting things is that the opposition tweeted out, 
on April the 10th, 2018, “Spending more on social services, 
corrections, policing, justice and health care does not represent 
an investment.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wow. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Exactly. One of my colleagues just said, wow. 
I’ve got to say, Mr. Speaker, they are really out of touch 
because what better way to spend taxpayers’ money than on 
services for people of Saskatchewan. Yes, you know, putting 
forward a budget with a plan, and it’s called On Track, really 
sends a clear message. 
 
I have a quote here from the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, the CEO [Chief Executive Officer], Steve 
McLellan, who sent out a quote that said, “Without a plan, 
getting a balanced budget would not be achievable. We are 
pleased that this 2018-2019 budget has a clear plan that is 
working towards that balanced budget.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, tough decisions had to be made. On this side of 
the House, we’re fiscal conservatives, but we have a big heart, 
and committing to ensuring that people of Saskatchewan are 
being well served is our main objective. As a fiscal 
conservative, we do not go into budgeting like the Liberal 
Trudeau government with their sunny ways. They absolutely 
have no concept of ensuring that a balanced budget is in sight. 
In fact, when they ran in that last federal election, they 
promised to not balance the budget. That absolutely has long, 
devastating consequences for the country. 
 
In Saskatchewan here, we have a plan. We sat down, we rolled 
up our sleeves and made decisions. Tough decisions, but 
decisions based on ensuring that we get to balanced budget 
because, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility to not just the 
residents of today but to future residents to ensure that we have 
the books in order. So I must say, Mr. Speaker, we ensure that 
there’s a plan and that we stick to it. 
 
A good friend of mine, Corey Lueck, in 2007 when we formed 
government, he wrote a really interesting song called We’re on 
the Right Track. And it’s about Saskatchewan, and I must say 
that the budget that’s called On Track is exactly what the theme 
of his song is. The theme of our budget is that we are on the 
right track for people of Saskatchewan. People of Saskatchewan 
elected us to ensure that we plan for the future, and that’s 
exactly what we are doing. 
 
We have some of the members of the opposition say things like, 
well you know, we don’t care about northern Saskatchewan. 
Couldn’t be farther from the truth. You know, the children’s 
hospital is a good example. It is located in Saskatoon. It is 
accessible to everyone in Saskatchewan, but really it has the 
ability to service our northern communities. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, before that we did not have a dedicated children’s 
hospital and, because of that, we had to send our children out of 
province. 
 
So committing more funding to ensuring that our children’s 
hospital will be completed on time is a commitment to everyone 
in Saskatchewan, to every family member because we all have 
children coming up within our family. So I commend our 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3779 

government for making sure that that kind of commitment is in 
place. 
 
Sometimes, you know, we don’t think that our budget resonates 
with everyone or that they, you know, they come, they listen to 
it, and then they go away. But we had the opportunity to see 
people who were deeply moved. The hearing loss screening 
program for babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals, the 
executive director from the hearing loss program had tears in 
his eyes. He had tears in his eyes because of this kind of 
commitment. This is what we mean by having long-term plans 
because every baby should have the ability to have their hearing 
tested to ensure, if there is any issues, that they will receive care 
promptly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we present a budget, sometimes people 
just think about the numbers. We don’t just think about the 
numbers. We think about the people. We think about the lives 
that we have the opportunity to make a major impact. So I 
commend everyone who sat around that budget 
decision-making table and said, this, this is what we have to 
invest in. This is investing in our children. This is investing in 
our future of our province. And I must thank our Finance 
minister for ensuring that programs such as this brought 
forward, that our Health ministers, they put that on the table and 
said this is something that we need. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us has the opportunity 
to talk to our constituents and find out what resonated for them. 
And so having money invested in our province, in our city here 
of Regina, the mayor of Regina was pleased with the budget 
this year and said that we are putting forward a plan that they 
can work with. That’s the important thing. 
 
Sometimes people say, well there wasn’t a lot of noise around 
this budget. No, because in fact people understood that when 
we put forward a plan, a budget that was called On Track, we 
are on track, Mr. Speaker. People in Saskatchewan expect us to 
have a budget that resonates, that meets their needs. Everybody 
doesn’t get everything they want, and we understand that. But, 
Mr. Speaker, when we have to make the choices, we make the 
tough choices, but we make the right choices because they will 
have lasting impact on everyone. 
 
And you know, the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
also stated, and I quote, “Finally, for a budget based on private 
sector growth, the government has done an excellent job of 
staying out of the private sector’s way on the road to growth.” 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we want. We want to continue 
to ensure that Saskatchewan grows because it is through growth 
that we have the . . . for everyone to be able to ensure that we 
have a good quality of life. So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, our 
government is in touch with people. We humbly asked for their 
support. They gave it to us, and we are humbly providing them 
with good governance. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’m so disappointed in the 
opposition’s response to a budget that is based on fiscal 
prudence but also spending on people — spending on social 
services, corrections, policing, justice, health care. This is 
investments for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

wholeheartedly support the government that is on track for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
tough act to follow my colleague from Regina Rochdale, so I’ll 
do my best to match her eloquent words that she has said about 
the budget that we presented this week. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot different speech that we’re 
giving today than we gave on Monday, and our hearts are with 
Dayna Brons and her family as there’s another day of 
remembrance that we’re going to have our flags at half-mast for 
one more day. And I hope that’s the last condolence motion that 
we have to move in this House for a very long time because 
we’ve moved too many in the short amount of time I’ve been in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as is common with these speeches, either be it 
talking to the budget or to the Throne Speech, I’d like to thank a 
few people before we get under way going through the budget. I 
am honoured to represent the people of Regina Walsh Acres. 
It’s been eight years now, and actually as a staffer this is my 
10th budget being in this Legislative Assembly and then the 
House. And I started as a staffer in 2009 so it’s kind of a decade 
of budgets, so it’s an interesting little time to be here. 
 
And we’ve gone through a lot of different budgets but I want to 
say that I’m proud of the work our new Premier and our new 
Finance minister have done so far. And treasury board, they 
worked very hard. I know both sides went through leadership 
races and we have a new Opposition Leader, a new Premier, a 
new Speaker. Mr. Speaker, congratulations on your new role. 
It’s a pleasure to see you in that chair. And the treasury board 
did a lot of work. We had some changes within this process of 
treasury board and it’s come out as a budget that really does 
represent I think where the people of Saskatchewan want their 
government to go. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be speaking from the point of the citizens 
of Regina Walsh Acres. And I always want to be, first and 
foremost, keep their concerns in the back of my mind because it 
is an honour to be able to stand in this Assembly and represent 
the people of Walsh Acres. And that’s something that we’ll 
never take for granted. And we always humbly stand here to 
give their point of view towards what . . . We’re going to get 
feedback and it’s not always positive. I’m not going to sit here 
and say we haven’t had negative feedback on budgets before, 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s what you do in government. You make 
decisions that you think is best going to serve the whole 
province going forward. 
 
Secondly, I’d like to thank our constituency assistant at Walsh 
Acres. Heather Howell-Shiplack has been with us for the whole 
time as MLA so she is a trooper, one might say. We get along 
very well in our office, and I just want to thank her for the 
amazing job she does responding to our constituents. She has 
been great. She has just a great personal touch about her. She 
knows how to speak with people, bring them down sometimes. 
Not all calls are positive in Regina Walsh Acres. We get the 
odd person calling in that has some issues with what the 



3780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

government has done, and Heather does an amazing job with 
the people, with constituents that call in. And I just want to . . . 
can’t thank her enough. 
 
And she’s been a great supporter of ours, and she’s actually 
kind of part of the family when she’s . . . been together for so 
long. Our kids love her and Auntie Heather they call her, and 
she loves going into our constituency office. And the kids go, 
Mom and Dad, can we go and see Heather’s office? So she has 
her convinced that it’s Heather’s office; it’s not dad’s office. 
And I think that’s a good way to look at it because I sometimes 
really think it’s Heather’s office as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been amazing experience being in this 
Chamber for eight years. And our family’s gone through a lot of 
changes. We now have three kids. And as a father, you look at 
budgets very differently, Mr. Speaker, and you look at what 
you’re going to do into the future. I know that the members 
opposite . . . And I commend them; they’re champions for 
education. But on this side of the House, we prioritize education 
as well. Larissa and I talk about often what we’re going to do 
and where our kids are going to go to school. And we want to 
make sure there’s the best possible public school system 
available for them and for all kids across the province. 
 
And I think when you look at education, you look at the 
equality of opportunity. And I think that’s the picture we want 
to put on the lens, is giving each kid opportunity to have access 
to good education. And that’s what I think this budget does. It 
puts in the commitment of our new Premier into the $30 million 
added to education, and that shows our commitment. 
 
As the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] 
president said, Mr. Davidson, “[Shawn] Davidson said boards 
see the efforts made this year to reprioritize funding for 
education as critical to supporting continued progress in the 
area of student achievement.” And I think when you get a 
president of the SSBA to say that . . . And I’ve known Shawn 
for a while, and we talked after the budget and we had a candid 
conversation. And he said, you know, it’s nice to see the 
reprioritization of education. And I think that’s something we 
can take back to our constituents and realize we are looking at 
doing as much as we can for education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, on education, I’d like to talk about infrastructure in 
Regina over the last couple years since we’ve been in 
government. We’ve really built in Regina. The Regina schools 
have been built. There’s three joint-use schools, Harbour 
Landing, Greens on Gardiner, and Rosewood Park, for $82 
million. Arcola School replacement, $17.8 million. Campbell 
Collegiate structural repair/restoration, $26 million. École 
Connaught replacement school, $21 million. Douglas Park 
School replacement, $19.9 million. Scott Collegiate 
replacement school, $31 million. The Seven Stones replacement 
school, $20 million. Three new joint-use schools at $55 million. 
And the Sacred Heart replacement school at $27 million — 
that’s an estimate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Elphinstone say, 
“Hear, hear.” And he should be relatively happy with the 
schools because when you drive down Elphinstone, there’s four 
— four? — three new schools going down Elphinstone Street 
— the mâmawêyatitân centre, Sacred Heart. And I think that 

that’s something that shows a commitment to our education in 
Regina, is the infrastructure that we’ve put forward for 
education in Regina over the last decade since we’ve had the 
privilege of being in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government takes a few things into consideration. It 
controls spending, which I think we’re one of the only 
governments in the Dominion of Canada who’s really focused 
on controlling our spending as a government entity, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that is incumbent, when I put a lens on it 
as a parent, is I don’t want to kick the can down the road and 
put debt on to our kids. I know other governments are looking 
at doing that across the country and the federal government is 
really okay with layering debt on to our future generation, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s something where I don’t want to be writing 
cheques that my kids are going to have to cash. 
 
So I think when it comes to this budget, one of the things that I 
appreciate the most is the time and effort all of our ministers 
took into looking at how we can control spending in each of 
their ministries. And I appreciate all the ministers taking the 
time and saying what are their priorities. And this budget lays 
out what our priorities are. It’s delivering high-quality services 
for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it does that by record investment in health care 
which includes universal coverage of HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] drugs. The new psychiatric facility, 
the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, will open this 
fall. That was a hundred-year-old facility, Mr. Speaker, and the 
member from Cut Knife-Turtleford and Lloydminster and The 
Battlefords were tremendous champions in making sure that 
that facility got built and got opened in a timely manner. And 
you know, you may not believe it but I think it was the bright 
and sunny disposition of our member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford that really pushed that. He’s just a little ray of 
sunshine all the time, and I think that’s what helped get this 
done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the important things that as a parent 
and having . . . We have three children under four. We’ve got a 
four-year-old, a two-year-old, and a one-year-old. And the new 
hearing loss screening program for babies born in 
Saskatchewan hospitals is something that the member from 
Regina Rochdale said so eloquently that there’s tears in the eyes 
of the people that had championed this cause. 
 
And I think when you go through the budget and look at some 
of the initiatives that we’ve put money towards, it’s towards 
some of our most vulnerable people, and babies and some of 
our most vulnerable. I think that’s something that we can take 
to our constituencies and constituents and say, this is some of 
the people that we prioritized. And I think they’re going to be 
okay with that, Mr. Speaker. I think they’re going to be okay 
with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a funding increase for foster families, caregivers, 
and community-based organizations. Community-based 
organizations across our province do amazing work with the 
resources they have, Mr. Speaker. And to be able to add money 
to those budgets is so important because they look after some of 
our most vulnerables in care homes. And, Mr. Speaker, to have 
a better quality of life for our most vulnerable is something that 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3781 

government should be looking at putting investments. And 
when there is limited investments that we can do now, doing 
investments with the most vulnerable in our society is 
something that we should do as a government each and every 
time and whenever we can. 
 
We always wish we could put more money into initiatives like 
this, Mr. Speaker, but to do it and to invest the money that we 
have into these initiatives is something that once again we can 
take to our constituents. And they’re going to understand what 
we’re looking at and where we’re going because we have a plan 
and it’s on track, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s something the 
people of the province are really appreciative of, is having a 
plan to get to balance and that plan being on track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A couple of new funding, a new funding in a new group home 
that the member from Cumberland should appreciate, funding 
for a new group home in La Ronge. And I just think that’s 
something that is very needed up in the North. I have a little 
special place in my heart in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. I lived 
there for a little bit so I am happy to see that this new funding 
for a group home in La Ronge as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, infrastructure supports safety and growth. The 
twinning and passing lanes projects on highways 6, 39, 4, and 7 
ensures that people can travel safely around our beautiful 
province in summer. Spring may be coming someday, 
eventually I think hopefully, and I know people are going to hit 
the road more. Investing in the infrastructure of our highways to 
ensure people can travel safely from destination to destination is 
something important for our government as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 4.9 million new funding to help keep rural 
residents safe through rural crime strategy. Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that has come up across many of the conversations 
we’ve had. And the member from Cut Knife and I know the 
member from Lloydminster had a big town hall gathering of 5 
to 600 people talking about rural crime across our province. 
And this is an issue that we have to take very serious and on 
this side we do take that issue very serious. And I think that is 
something, where we showed investments in a budget where 
we’re trying to control spending but investing $4.9 million into 
rural crime reduction is something that’s very important to us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again keeping our economy strong is the 
focus. But we always have to finish the statement of “keeping 
our economy strong” so we can invest in better lives of people 
across our province — keeping our economy strong so we can 
invest in the most vulnerable across the province or in health 
care, in education, in social service, Mr. Speaker. So we’re 
increasing funding for Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership to support increased export activity. 
 
There’s new tax incentives, Mr. Speaker. And these are 
something that are going to be very interesting for our budget 
and ensure we keep our economy strong and grow jobs across 
the province, is the new tax incentives Saskatchewan 
value-added agriculture and Saskatchewan technology start-up 
to support investment and job creation and productivity. Mr. 
Speaker, the incentive program to encourage mineral 
exploration, grow and diversify our mineral sector, Mr. 
Speaker, this investment is projected to help create more jobs in 

the North. We know that there is 800 job losses in the North, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is one of the examples of what we’re 
trying to do to help grow the economy in northern 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, some things very important to myself as 
a father of three young children is to return to balance in 
2019-2020. There is a three-year balanced budget plan that 
remains on track for the Government of Saskatchewan. And I 
think that’s something that we need to continue to look at and to 
control our spending and look at how we can increase revenues, 
Mr. Speaker. And to keep this budget balanced is something 
that we find is important on this side, which is a stark contrast 
to I think what the members on the opposite side, after their 
leadership race, are looking at — the fact that their new leader 
has committed $2.5 billion of commitments in the leadership 
campaign with no plan to pay for them. $2.5 billion each year is 
impressive to commit to funding that with no idea how they’re 
going to pay for it, except maybe what 75 per cent of the 
residents of Saskatchewan don’t want, which is a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that those nine members are on the wrong 
side of the issue of the carbon tax boggles my mind. Each and 
every day they sit there. I think at some point in time they are 
going to have to have a serious conversation and realize that 
there’s not one person in this province that wants a carbon tax 
other than the nine members over there. 
 
You know, when we’ve committed to not . . . I’m not sure if I 
saw this or not, but I think when we committed to not 
implementing a carbon tax, maybe one or two of them actually 
clapped their desks over there. I think they did slap their desk in 
agreement, one or two. I think it was an involuntary reaction, 
but I think subconsciously a couple of them may have that 
conversation in their caucus where, you know, we may be on 
the wrong side of this carbon tax. I think maybe the member for 
Rosemont might be one of them. He’s a pretty smart guy and I 
think maybe he may not have been so quick to jump on the 
carbon tax bus, Mr. Speaker, but he may get thrown under that 
carbon tax bus here right away. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be able to stand in my place and 
have the conversation and speak on behalf of the people of 
Regina Walsh Acres, and I’ll continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
And I just want to say that as long as I’m able to stand in this 
Assembly, I’ll always vote against the carbon tax when it comes 
because it makes everything more expensive. Everything that 
people need, it makes more expensive. That’s why, as 
progressives, as they like to call themselves — which I don’t 
know why they call lefts progressives, which is another 
conversation — but as progressives they’re trying to put on a 
carbon tax that hurts the most vulnerable, makes everyday 
staples more expensive. So why would they want to champion 
something that hurts the most vulnerable people in our society? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do think maybe it’ll be this summer. Each 
side has caucus retreats so maybe this summer. I think they 
might get together and say to their new leader, perhaps we’re on 
the wrong side of this. And I’m hoping in the fall maybe we can 
have a motion together and go and put forward a united voice to 
the federal government, the federal Trudeau Liberals, and say 



3782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

Saskatchewan will never have a carbon tax for the people of 
this province. And I do believe that hopefully that 
come-to-Jesus moment happens this summer for our hon. 
members across the side, and I hope they get on board and do 
respect what 75 per cent of the people of the province want, and 
that is not a carbon tax. They don’t want a job-killing carbon 
tax. They don’t want a carbon tax that makes everything more 
expensive, everyday items for everyone in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I’d like to finish with saying I appreciate what our Finance 
minister had to go through on the day that she delivered the 
budget. It was a very tough day for her. I know she has a lot of 
emotions and a lot of ties back home to Humboldt. And for all 
of us in this Assembly, I want to say we’ll continue to be 
Humboldt strong and thank the Finance minister for her great 
work in treasury board. And I will be supporting our budget this 
year and am proud to do so, to control this spending and make 
sure that we have . . . we’re on track to control spending and 
have a surplus budget in next year. And I’m proud of our team. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s with 
pleasure that I rise and add my voice to the budget debate under 
the new leadership of a Premier of Saskatchewan, under a new 
Opposition Leader, and a new Lieutenant Governor. And 
personally, Mr. Speaker, I give my sincere congratulations to 
you for being elected as Speaker of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly, and you’ll bring your hard work ethic 
and your integrity and your charm to your duties. And we have 
faith that you will bring logical decisions on behalf of all of us. 
 
And I would also like to congratulate my colleague, the hon. 
member from Humboldt, the Finance minister, on her role in 
our budget as well as being the first woman in the government 
to give a budget and making history. So I’m proud and humbled 
to be in her government. I’d also like to thank the officials for 
their long hours of thought and work put into the budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to add my voice with 
countless others and offer my condolences to the families and 
friends of the young men and now the young woman who lost 
their lives in the tragic events of April 6th. I’m not sure what 
could prepare parents for such a heartache as this and how to 
find some sense or solace out of this loss. But the Humboldt 
Broncos lost a large part of their family, and the whole province 
and nation is grieving and sending condolences. 
 
So as we deal with this, we work on our Saskatchewan strength 
and spirit and will continue on as the rest of our province wants 
us to. So I’m inspired by all the stories and the coming together 
in the last few days, the stories of generosity and hope. And so 
I’m inspired to continue on with my constituents, and as we all 
have to in this House, work on our budget and think about other 
people. So we are Saskatchewan strong, and I’m confident we’ll 
continue. So thank you for that moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as the people look to us for resources and co-operation and 
good governance of their finances, I can’t help but think of my 
own home area and the people I represent and work with, all the 
RM [rural municipality] councils and reeves and mayors who 

were also elected by their communities and peers. 
 
The local government structure of Saskatchewan Rivers 
consists of two towns, nine villages, two resort villages, 
Waskesiu and Prince Albert National Park; eight RMs; four 
First Nations; eight local and regional parks including Candle 
Lake Provincial, Emma, and Anglin recreation sites; Great Blue 
Heron Provincial Park; Sturgeon Lake, Big River, and Morin 
Lake regional parks. All these communities are supported by 
our budgets. 
 
No tax rate increases on education property tax and no increase 
on provincial sales tax rates. So our government supports all 
these people. Fourteen million for the urban connector program 
and over 12 million for Clean Water and Wastewater Fund for 
municipal support. For our rural municipalities, over 68 million 
will be received to help support all those families in 
Saskatchewan Rivers and across the province. 
 
Our local education governance is the school division Sask 
Rivers No. 119 and North East No. 211. Sask Rivers schools 
dot the landscape from Big River through to White Fox, and our 
dreams for our future generations will unite us and a new day 
dawn giving us more light. This budget helps the people of 
Saskatchewan, the students, and the teachers. Life is brighter. 
 
Our budget supports Saskatchewan students and the education 
staff, leaders, essentially in every community across the 
province. This budget allows the excellence of our education 
system to continue, and I’m constantly amazed at the 
remarkable things that teachers do in education in our schools. 
Saskatchewan has some of the best teachers in our country. 
They taught me, they taught our four children, and now five of 
our eight grandchildren have entered the school system. And 
that’s something worth enhancing and protecting. This budget 
supports our children and their quality of education. 
 
Several times a year, I go out to my rural schools and I speak to 
the schools’ classrooms and the students. And last year I went 
to Spruce Home, Choiceland, and Big River schools, and I met 
incredible and dedicated teachers, such as Mrs. Kurbis and Mrs. 
Paterson, who are preparing students for career choices, shaping 
their lives, and illuminating our future stars in our great 
province. These leaders . . . These teachers can be found in 
every school, every rural community across the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and I say thank you to them for a job well 
done. 
 
I feel this budget gives support systems to our educators and the 
tools needed for preparing the next generation. This is a budget 
plan that puts people first — students and teachers — a plan 
that invests in Saskatchewan and what matters to people. 
Balancing the future with sound fiscal management, we are 
helping students get ahead with a good start, and we’re on track. 
We’re supporting libraries, continuing operating funding with 
11 million, over 15 million in continued funding for KidsFirst, 
and increasing operating funding of over 30 million over last 
year’s school year. So, Mr. Speaker, we are on track. 
 
Agriculture is very important in the economy and livelihood of 
many in this province. This budget and government recognizes 
investing in research and innovation helps ensure that 
Saskatchewan remains a competitive and world-class 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3783 

agriculture research hub. Saskatchewan and farmers benefit 
from the knowledge and tools developed by research. 
 
Earlier this year, federal and provincial Agriculture ministers 
announced over 6 million in funding for 24 livestock and 
forage-related research projects through Saskatchewan’s 
Agriculture Development Fund. Through ADF, projects include 
researching new vaccine strategies to help prevent pink eye, 
which will help mitigate economic cost to Saskatchewan cattle 
producers. In the days of only the white-faced Herefords, I 
remember the many summer days of riding pasture checking 
and treating numerous pink eye cattle victims, which was 
time-consuming as well as costly. And my fellow cattle 
ranchers here in the legislature, as well as across Saskatchewan, 
will empathize with me and congratulate the government on this 
much-needed and appreciated initiative. 
 
Also new knowledge of DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] paternity 
and geonomic program information will enable beef producers 
to make better breeding decisions in their herds. For those of us 
who choose to export, develop, market, and sell their herd 
genetics, these are more tools for improving the quality of beef 
and better choices for the global market. 
 
The agriculture development funding is part of the over 26 
million the government has committed to in agriculture 
research. Funding is provided under the 
federal-provincial-territorial initiative, Growing Forward 2. In 
early 2018, governments and partnership announced over 7 
million for 30 crop-related products. Good news for agriculture 
producers and the upcoming younger generations of farmers 
growing their farm operations in viable and successful 
businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Northern Fringe Marketing Club located in my 
community is a group of farmers who work together educating 
themselves about innovative ideas and support each other in 
their farming practices. And they’ll be very happy to hear their 
government’s initiatives towards new agri-food innovation, 
creating new opportunities for farmers, and creating jobs in the 
value-added food processing sector. 
 
Saskatchewan’s value-added food processing sector has grown 
tremendously in the last decade and now includes 300 
companies that export 4 billion worth of goods annually and 
employ 5,000 people. Earlier this year, Saskatchewan 
celebrated the grand opening of the new Agri-Food Innovation 
Centre that will diversify the Saskatchewan Food Industry 
Development Centre’s capacity to develop and process food 
products. 
 
Our budget demonstrates the importance of agriculture by 
investing over 378 million to the agriculture sector, ensuring 
Saskatchewan producers will continue to work and feed the 
world. 
 
Our budget continues to track the environment and keep our 
beautiful Saskatchewan Rivers constituency a great place to 
live, work, and raise a family, as we also aim to attract tourists 
— tourists of families, hunters, and people from around the 
world — who enjoy our pure water and our beautiful forests. 
Our government will continue to manage the health of 
Saskatchewan environment in a respectful, responsible, and 

enforceable manner that balances growth and sustainable 
development as we harvest the forest and protect the forest with 
fire management and forest service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government continues to raise 
awareness about the risk posed by aquatic invasive species, or 
AIS. And in 2017 we significantly reduced our AIS preventive 
efforts on a number of fronts. Education and awareness 
continues to be a focus for the ministry. News releases, articles, 
magazine columns, public service announcements, and 
additional signage have all been part of the efforts to raise 
awareness. And in 2017 the ministry engaged stakeholders such 
as the SWF [Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation] to participate 
on a task force to coordinate preventive efforts across the 
province. 
 
Last year the ministry also boosted its watercraft inspection 
efforts. And ministry staff completed more than 1,200 
watercraft inspections and, through our partnership with the 
Canada Border Services Agency, provided invasive species 
information to approximately 900 watercraft owners who 
entered Saskatchewan from the United States. In total, more 
than 2,000 watercraft entering Saskatchewan across federal and 
provincial borders underwent AIS screening in 2017. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we continued to monitor for zebra and 
quagga mussels in 2017 with the help of other government 
agencies. And our monitoring program plays a critical role in 
our overall strategy providing the opportunity for early 
detection and allowing us to quickly respond to any potential 
introduction of contamination. We all need to do our part to 
stop the spread of these invasive mussels and the ministry is 
asking residents, cottage owners, and municipalities to 
participate in the 2018 adult invasive mussel monitoring 
program. And I encourage all of you to take part and help the 
province further expand its early detection network as you 
enjoy our beautiful provincial and regional parks in 
Saskatchewan Rivers and our province. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another initiative the ministry announced in 
2017 was the launch of a new mobile application called 
Saskatchewan Co-operative Wildlife Management Survey. Now 
this app allows anyone to record wildlife observations for 
species such as moose, elk, deer, and select game birds, and it’s 
compatible with Apple and android smart phones. So as I drive 
the highway — and I know I’m always on the alert for deer and 
that one moose that is waiting for my car — I think this new 
tool makes recording and reporting wildlife observations much 
easier than manual tracking. So this tool will help, the new 
Co-operative Wildlife Management Survey app; you can get it 
on Google Play or the Apple Store. So wildlife sightings 
provide important information on population growth and 
survival for big game and upland game birds, and I encourage 
everyone to get involved. 
 
Now for those of you that are ardent hunters, I refer you to the 
2018 winter edition of Big Buck Magazine where my 
son-in-law, Chris de Villiers, graces the cover with his 
white-tail buck. Now he told me as he sat down in the forest — 
it was in the general area of Prince Albert; we can’t say where 
exactly — he paid his respects to this beautiful creature he 



3784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

realized was very massive. So Chris has become one of the top 
10 in Canada for this white-tail deer that he shot, and he’s 
getting a full body mount of this deer with a score of 222, if that 
means anything to you hunters. So he’s going to have this full 
mount in his hunting room. Yes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the strong partnership 
and good work of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation which 
has helped our government make progress in so many areas for 
the people of Saskatchewan who enjoy being in the wildlife and 
the forest. 
 
Now in regards to the Health budget, which is a robust 5.36 
billion investment in people, I was speaking with some families 
whose children have experienced hearing loss and they were 
previously asking for a newborn screening program. I’m so 
pleased to announce in our Health budget we have established a 
universal newborn hearing screening program to screen babies 
born in Saskatchewan hospitals And it’s the right thing to do 
and our government is on track to helping Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Another Health budget investment for the people of 
Saskatchewan is a 2.8 million for individualized funding for 
children with autism spectrum disorder. This provides parents 
with more flexibility for access to various services to suit their 
individual children’s needs, and these families in Sask Rivers 
constituency will be given a better quality of life due to this 
funding. So again we are on track. 
 
Also in the Health budget, there’s a 250,000 increase to provide 
vision loss rehabilitation service and equipment to the Canadian 
National Institute for the Blind. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
quote from Nairn Gillies, executive director, Saskatchewan 
Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services. She says: 
 

They save lives by providing early screening. They save 
lives here because we have deaf kids who are lifelong for 
the rest of their life going to be in mental institutions or 
mental health facilities because they didn’t have access to 
language from their early age. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my daughter, who is a speech pathologist in 
Saskatchewan, also added her voice to the positive reactions 
and comments coming in. She said, “Good job, Mom, on your 
government’s budget. This will save tons of money in rehab. 
Better hearing outcomes when deafness is caught early.” We are 
on track.  
 
As we have seen in the past year, mental health in our province, 
even nationally and abroad, is in need of services and support. 
In our budget, our government is committed to improving the 
response and services needed by individuals by increasing 
support to services across all government ministries. And in 
total our government will spend 367 million on mental health 
supports. The 10-year mental health and addiction system plan 
guides the priority areas for addictions, investing in mental 
health in our province. 
 
Our government has come to my region and talked about 
addictions, so I was quite happy to see there will be more 
services in Prince Albert area and the North, and we’ll provide 
specialist consultation services to medical health professionals. 

So by listening to communities in need of better health, our 
government also increased mental health first aid courses to 
better equip front-line staff to recognize and respond to crises, 
and individual communities will receive management tools to 
help plan their supports. 
 
Some of our communities have been experiencing crime in 
smaller centres and farms right across rural Saskatchewan, so 
our government has responded to those in need and created a 
protection and response team after consulting with groups in 10 
communities and 58 stakeholders. My neighbours in 
communities in Saskatchewan Rivers, which is comprised of 
mainly small villages and rural areas, has spoken with me 
regarding concerns about crime and safety. And our budget will 
provide full funding to the protection and response team, 
launching a dedicated safer communities and neighbourhoods 
unit in Prince Albert. 
 
So this budget includes a 4.9 million to help fund additional 30 
police positions, reassign 10 RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] positions, and complete Saskatchewan’s first rural crime 
innovation challenge to alert landowners about irregular activity 
related to this property. So this budget is about security for 
tomorrow and planning for prosperity today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We continue to live in the best province with enduring values 
— community, co-operation, and compassion — working 
together for the greater good. After reaching out to 
Saskatchewan people, our government responded to their needs. 
The quality of life we experience today means preserving 
quality of life for tomorrow needs as well, and this budget 
prepares us for a better tomorrow with accessible programs but 
security for the vulnerable. 
 
Our Saskatchewan citizens have told us they want more 
resources and less duplication. So with careful management, all 
will be considered in preparation for our new fiscal realities. 
Our partners face difficult choices also while protecting core 
service and programs that make our great province a good place 
to work, live, and raise your family. 
 
Through co-operative efforts of Saskatchewan people and 
sound financial management, our government and province is 
providing our quality of life. Our government will continue to 
meet our challenges. This will not divide Saskatchewan people 
but unite us and keep us on track for future generations. In 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget but not 
the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and join in the debate on the budget. Mr. Speaker, I would 
just point out right at the start that I think our Finance minister 
did an outstanding job through the entire budget process and 
especially this week under very difficult circumstances for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, often at this stage in the budget debate members, 
colleagues will take the opportunity to speak about family, to 
speak about office staff, and I’m going to be no different, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll do that at different points throughout my remarks 
this morning. 
 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3785 

But before I begin, I just want to add, as several of my 
colleagues have done, some comments about the Humboldt 
Broncos tragedy, Mr. Speaker. There’s been an outpouring of 
support from across the entire province to the entire 
community, to all the families who’ve lost loved ones and all 
the pain that they’re suffering, Mr. Speaker, and my community 
of Rosetown is no different. I’d just like to mention a situation 
that had happened there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This week, Rosetown is hosting the Allan Cup. The Allan Cup, 
for those who aren’t familiar, is supremacy of senior hockey in 
Canada. It’s, I believe, 109 years old, is an outstanding 
tradition. Rosetown is very honoured to be hosting that this 
week, Mr. Speaker. So earlier in the week during the opening 
ceremonies, there was a ceremonial puck drop, and there was a 
moment of silence for the Humboldt Broncos. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the Rosetown Red Wings is a former Humboldt 
Bronco and he wore his Humboldt jersey during the opening 
ceremonies. It was, I understand — I was here; I wasn’t able to 
be at home — but I understand it was a very moving tribute to 
the Humboldt Broncos, Mr. Speaker, and our heart goes out to 
that wonderful community. The entire province is grieving for 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d mentioned about office staff, Mr. Speaker. To start with, I 
listened to the very eloquent remarks of my colleague and good 
friend, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, yesterday, and 
he mentioned that our two offices work together very closely. 
It’s like one big staff is what it’s like, Mr. Speaker. And he 
mentioned them, but I feel like I need to mention them as well. 
Selena Beahm, Cheryl Verhelst, Elias Nelson, Brett Boha, and 
Christopher Thresher in my office do an outstanding job, both 
for myself and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health. And in 
his office, Jessica Tessier, Whitney Kelsch, McKenzie Kibler, 
and Brayden Fox. Again, the minister mentioned all of them 
yesterday, but I certainly want to thank them as well, and I’d be 
remiss if I didn’t also mention my constituency assistant, Kathie 
Parry, in Rosetown. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to keep an eye on the clock. There’s 
a number of items that I would like to discuss today, pretty far 
ranging. There are some areas of the budget that are near and 
dear to my heart, but where I want to start is with health care 
because that’s the file that I have the privilege of representing 
as Minister of Health. So I’m going to start my comments there, 
and see how far down the road I get before I decide what other 
topics I’ll discuss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think where I’d like to start, when we’re speaking about 
health care, is on some health challenges that were recently 
experienced by a member of this Assembly. I mentioned the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health earlier. He’s not only a 
colleague. He’s become a close personal friend. And he 
mentioned some of the challenges he’s faced recently in his 
comments, so I don’t think he’d mind me speaking about it. 
Over the past year or so, he’s been battling colorectal cancer. 
He went through a difficult number of months and it’s so good 
to see him here and healthy in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing I want to mention about him — he has a 
number of great attributes, some not so great, but most great 
attributes, Mr. Speaker — he has a tremendous work ethic. He 
has a great sense of humour, and, Mr. Speaker, on the sense of 

humour, I’ll tell you how incredible this man is, even in the 
most trying times. He’d continue to go to work even when he 
shouldn’t have been, when he was taking chemo, and I just have 
to share an anecdote from something that happened last year. 
 
The minister and I met . . . The SMA, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, the doctors in the province if you will, 
were having . . . They have a conference twice a year and it’s 
fairly traditional that the night before the conference the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health and the Minister of Health 
meet with their executive. So we had a supper meeting and a 
meeting that night. It was a very good meeting. And then the 
next morning I was scheduled to give a speech to the assembly 
and then do a question-and-answer session. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, 
because he was taking treatments at the time and he had some 
tests the next day, he wasn’t able to stay for the conference. But 
he still made the effort to be at the meeting the night before, and 
then he left. The next morning I was getting ready to speak to 
the assembly. And I would put it this way: the doctors in the 
province, tremendous group of people and don’t mince words. 
If they’re not happy about something, you know it. And the 
expectation was there was a few things they were going to be 
unhappy about, and they were going to let me hear about it. 
 
So that morning I’m getting ready to go to the conference and 
give the speech and do the question-and-answer, and I get a text 
from my friend and colleague, the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. And it says this: “Once again I’m sorry I can’t 
be there today. I have to get some tests done. I’m getting a 
colonoscopy. I’m not sure which one of us is going to get it 
worse today.” Mr. Speaker, I shared that text. I read it to the 
doctors and luckily, Mr. Speaker, the doctors in this province do 
have a sense of humour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on to the budget and specifically the health 
care. Again, like I said, I’ll keep an eye on the clock and see 
there’s some other areas that I wouldn’t mind speaking about. I 
come from the municipal sector. I had the privilege previously 
of being the Minister of Government Relations. There’s some 
topics there I’d like to discuss. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on health care: a record $5.7 billion this year 
in various areas of health care, I think, right at the start shows 
us how important this government considers health care. 
 
So to touch on some of the specific health care budget 
highlights, I think the one I’ll start with, Mr. Speaker, is one 
that came up in question period today. It was on mental health. 
It continues to be a priority for us, Mr. Speaker. It’s very front 
of mind, not just in Saskatchewan, but right across the entire 
country. At the recent federal-provincial-territorial Health 
ministers’ conference that the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health and I attended in Edmonton, it had significant 
discussion. 
 
It’s generally understood by all the ministers, and I think most 
people, that you can’t really have physical health if you don’t 
have mental health as well. They go hand in hand, Mr. Speaker. 
So it’s extremely important. So that’s why the Ministry of 



3786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

Health is investing $284 million in mental health this year, 
which is a 58 per cent increase since we were given the 
privilege of forming government in 2007. 
 
So this topic, as I said, is very important. So I’d like to give 
some breakdown on this, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to take a 
couple minutes and go to some of the budget information that 
was passed out to the media on budget day earlier this week. So 
where we’re at financially is simply this: the province, last year 
budget expenditures were about $275 million in mental health. 
That’s been increased by $11 million this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are sort of three tranches specifically that programs are 
going to be expanded or new programs are going to be offered 
for mental health support services, Mr. Speaker. The first one is 
improve mental health and addiction services for children and 
youth. There’s about 4.6, $4.7 million new money that’s going 
to be spent there. And where that’s going to go . . . Going to 
read through a few of these points, Mr. Speaker, just because I 
think they’re very, very important. That’s going to be funding 
for new child and adolescent specialist positions to reduce wait 
times, increase capacity for diagnosis and treatment, and 
improve services and supports for children, youth, and families. 
 
There’s going to be a pilot project which is modelled after the 
mental health capacity-building initiative that’s currently 
operating in Alberta. That came up in question period today as 
well, Mr. Speaker. It’s to better engage high-risk youth in 
prevention and intervention programming and, Mr. Speaker, 
that was mentioned as well that that’s been advocated for by the 
Advocate for Children and Youth, and it was also raised when 
the medical students from the University of Saskatchewan 
attended the Assembly a couple weeks or so ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also going to be implementation of a target physician 
training program to improve the capacity to assess and treat 
child and youth mental health conditions in Saskatchewan. This 
will assist in reducing wait times for child and youth psychiatry 
services — very important, Mr. Speaker. There’s been some 
unacceptable wait times in Saskatoon in particular and we’re 
working very hard to improve that. 
 
We’re also going to continue expansion of suicide prevention 
efforts through implementation of the Mental Health 
Commission of Canada’s suicide prevention demonstration 
project. 
 
I mentioned there’s sort of three main tranches. That’s the first 
one. The second one is to enhance access to community health 
and addiction supports which is about $5.2 million, Mr. 
Speaker. Key to this one is we’ll be hiring in the neighbourhood 
of 40 new FTEs for the development of multidisciplinary 
community recovery teams. Those community recovery teams 
will be in eight communities around the province and they’ll 
provide client-centred support to individuals that have complex 
and persistent mental illness. Mr. Speaker, we’re hugely 
optimistic about where that’s going to go. We’re very optimistic 
about the benefits that we’re going to see from that. 
 
Also under that tranche we’re going to improve the response to 
individuals with crisis mental health needs through the 
expansion of police and crisis teams. They’re referred to as 
PACT [police and crisis team] teams, Mr. Speaker. In the areas 

that we have been using them, all the professionals are very 
impressed with the results that we’ve been seeing. They’ll be 
expanded into communities of North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 
and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to expand addiction medicine 
services to address service pressures in Prince Albert and 
northern Saskatchewan, and to provide specialist consultation 
services to physicians and other allied service professionals. 
And we’re going to increase access to mental health first aid 
courses in communities across Saskatchewan, and better equip 
human service sector staff to recognize and respond to mental 
health crisis. 
 
The third tranche — that was the second one, Mr. Speaker — 
and the third and final tranche that I would say kind of 
encompasses where we’re targeting this money is improve 
mental health service delivery, about a million and a half dollars 
there. And what we’re going to do, there’ll be three main 
components to that. We’re going to expand online mental health 
services across the province through dedicated clinical positions 
and development of new online supports. We’re going to 
improve outcomes through the implementation of a provincial 
mental health and addictions client record and clinical planning 
tool, and provincial implementation of outcome management 
tools to improve client outcomes and support clinical 
supervision and community needs planning. So what all those 
do, Mr. Speaker, that’s where the new $11 million is going to 
go. 
 
So to give you kind of an overall picture of where all the 
funding is right now, Mr. Speaker . . . And I also want to speak 
to the issue about the Canadian Mental Health Commission and 
their general target that provinces should spend about 7 per cent 
of their health budgets on mental health. I’m going to give you 
an overview of where the province is on that. 
 
So as I mentioned earlier, we’re spending in total, including the 
$11 million, a little over $284 million this year specific to 
mental health. There’s other areas as well. There’s, I think, 
about $46 million specific to addictions, which sometimes, Mr. 
Speaker, is a little hard to differentiate because, not always of 
course, but frequently mental health and addictions, the 
programming kind of crosses over and you’re helping the same 
people in some instances. So, Mr. Speaker, where we’re at in 
that case is the $284 million as a percentage of the health 
budget puts us at about 5.3 per cent. So clearly we’re going to 
keep moving towards the 7 per cent. 
 
But something else I’d like to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that 
mental health spending isn’t only in the Ministry of Health. 
There’s also a number of areas in other ministries that we 
spend. In Social Services, there’s about $31 million. In school 
divisions, K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] mental health 
resources is over $30 million, is spent there. Central Services, 
about 12 million; integrated justice services is 4.4 million; 
Corrections and Policing, 2.4. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just one example that tends to not be front of mind for people 
because they always expect mental health services to be funded 
out of the Ministry of Health. In Agriculture, the Farm Stress 
Line, Mr. Speaker, very clearly for mental health services — 
not funded through the Ministry of Health but funded through 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3787 

the Ministry of Agriculture because we feel that that’s probably 
where it’s most appropriate to be, at least at this time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I think that shows the commitment that 
this government has to increasing mental health services and of 
course all health services in the province. There’s probably 
nothing more core to this government than health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on to some other items that are sort of new or 
expanded in this budget that I think are very near and dear to 
many people in this room. Autism services, Mr. Speaker, the 
introduction of individualized funding for children with autism 
represents fulfillment of an election platform commitment from 
the last election. So what we’ll be doing, Mr. Speaker, starting 
in this budget year, children under the age of six will be eligible 
for $4,000 in funding toward whatever services best suit their 
needs. Mr. Speaker, this amount and the coverage will increase 
in the out years toward an eventual goal of 15 to $18,000 for 
children under six and $4,800 for school-age children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is very important because the $2.8 
million targeted for that, that’s going to benefit an anticipated 
700 children with autism in this province, Mr. Speaker, a very 
well-received program that I’m very pleased that it will very 
soon be kicked off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another item, HIV. HIV is a terrible disease. It 
affects people, their friends, their families, and our 
communities. Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years we’ve 
taken steps to try to correct the exorbitantly high rate of HIV in 
this province. That includes working on prevention. We’ve 
increased testing substantially, Mr. Speaker, and of course 
treatment. The drug plan had already, previous to this budget, 
had already covered over 90 per cent of prescription drugs for 
HIV. But, Mr. Speaker, despite these efforts, our HIV rate in 
Saskatchewan is far too high. It’s the highest in Canada and 
something absolutely needs to be done. So to act on this in this 
budget we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, universal coverage of 
HIV medication for everyone in this province. We’re also going 
to provide increased funding to AIDS Saskatoon and the 
Westside Clinic in recognition of their good work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize there’s other CBOs 
[community-based organization] doing good work. In out years 
we’ll certainly look at that. Mr. Speaker, as I said, the HIV rates 
in this province are just far too high and we’re optimistic that 
these two new steps that we’ve taken, along with existing steps, 
will certainly help to rectify that situation. 
 
Another item that I think is very important: $523,000 is being 
invested in a universal newborn hearing screening program. 
That’s for babies who are born in hospitals in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. This will support early detection of hearing loss. 
My colleague the Provincial Secretary, who spoke just before 
me, had read a couple of quotes from Nairn Gillies who’s the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services, Mr. Speaker. So I won’t go through the entire 
quotes, but I’m going to pick a few points out of this because I 
think this just goes to show absolutely how important this new 
program is going to be for some families and for some babies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s parts of the quotes that Nairn Gillies . . . And I had an 

opportunity, by the way, to speak to him on budget day after the 
budget. And I don’t think he’ll mind me saying this, Mr. 
Speaker: he was somewhat emotional. He couldn’t impress 
enough on how absolutely important this new program was 
going to be. These are parts of some of the quotes, some of the 
comments he made: 
 

This was the best budgetary thing that could ever happen 
in the province, in my opinion. From the time they’re 25 to 
the remainder of their life, for a few dollars in the front end 
to screen them, give them access to language, and get 
things going, kids end up with a bachelor’s degree instead 
of being a ward of the state. This is gigantic for us. This is 
huge. 

 
And he went on, Mr. Speaker, in another quote, and he said: 
 

They’ve saved lives by providing early screening. They’ve 
saved lives here because we have deaf kids who are 
lifelong for the rest of their life going to be in institutions 
or facilities because they didn’t have access to language 
from the early age. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I knew this was the right thing to do. I was very 
excited about it, but after I talked to Nairn on budget day I’m 
even more excited about it. I think this is going to be, as in his 
words, huge. It’s going to be life saving and, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud of our government for implementing this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned I’m mindful of the time so I 
probably won’t delve into some of the other areas, but there’s 
just a few things left that I think is important that I do want to 
say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it fascinating that virtually every day in this 
House the members of the NDP will criticize government and 
they’ll demand more spending. They’ll demand more spending 
on social services. They’ll demand more spending on justice, 
Mr. Speaker. And they’ll demand more spending on health care. 
 
And so what did the NDP do on budget day, Mr. Speaker? On 
budget day they tweeted a couple of tweets. Some I think have 
been read before by other colleagues. But, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it bears repeating because, Mr. Speaker, to me it’s nonsensical. 
These are two tweets that came from the NDP on budget day. 
The first one says, “Increased spending on social services (+$63 
mil), corrections & policing (+$30 mil), justice (+$9 mil) and 
healthcare (+$137.9 mil) . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all the areas of government that the NDP 
had been demanding funding increases to for months, and Mr. 
Speaker, there’s funding increases in all those key ministries. 
And what did they say this means? They said it means “. . . 
more people are slipping through the cracks, when we should be 
investing in keeping people from slipping through the cracks in 
the first place.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second tweet said this: “Spending more on 
social services, corrections, policing, justice and health care 
does not represent an investment.” Go explain that, Mr. 
Speaker. I can’t. That makes no sense to me. So after weeks of 
calling for more spending in those very areas, Mr. Speaker, now 
they’re criticizing the fact that we have actually done that. 



3788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

We’ve increased spending in those very areas that they were 
calling for. They actually said that increased spending for health 
care is evidence that people are slipping through the cracks. 
 
[12:15] 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it’s not. What that means is, it actually means 
we’re committed to the best possible health care for the people 
of this great province. And it means this province is growing 
under this government, something it never did under the NDP. 
It means this province is growing and there’s more people that 
have needs from our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know it’s the NDP’s job to criticize the budget, 
but to criticize increased health funding is absolutely ridiculous. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only their job to criticize; it’s also their job 
to be reasonable and to offer alternatives. Mr. Speaker, so far 
this week they’ve done neither. 
 
So yesterday the Leader of the Opposition — I think it was the 
very first question in question period — he commended the 
government for, and I quote, “some good decisions in . . . [the] 
budget.” He commended us for full coverage for HIV 
medications, which I just spoke about, Mr. Speaker. He 
commended us for funding for autism, which I’ve also just 
spoke about. And he commended us, and I quote, “. . . to see 
this government take a step towards greater treatment, greater 
support for mental health.” And he said again, “These are all 
positive things.” 
 
Now we appreciate those comments, Mr. Speaker. It was very 
good of him. The problem is, they came just hours after the 
NDP criticized the government for increasing health care 
spending. Those programs that we just listed, those programs 
cost money. And the inconsistencies I believe from the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker, will not be lost on the good people of this 
province. They’re far too smart for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the recent NDP leadership race, the Leader 
of the Opposition released his platform, a platform with many, 
many expensive promises. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s in the range 
of two and a half billion dollars per year, that platform and 
promises. And so now I guess he’s going to pay for that, Mr. 
Speaker, with increased deficits and a carbon tax I guess, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s his plan for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked a great deal about health care today. 
Mr. Speaker, every day in the province of Saskatchewan 
thousands of prescriptions are written for the benefit of citizens 
of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, the leader of the NDP’s 
plan for Saskatchewan is a prescription for disaster. Mr. 
Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment but I will very 
proudly support the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand 
today to add my remarks to the budget of 2018-19. Surprisingly 
enough, Mr. Speaker, it’s been just over two years since the last 
general election and I am incredibly honoured to represent the 
constituents of Prince Albert Northcote. Like other members in 
this Assembly, we have the opportunity to meet so many 

incredible community members and attend events that are so 
very special. 
 
Prince Albert is a beautiful city with all the amenities needed, 
and its proximity to the beautiful lakes that are nestled in the 
forest fringe is just amazing. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it 
is the residents of Prince Albert that make it the most wonderful 
place to live. People in Prince Albert are friendly and dedicated 
to their community. Whether it’s the arts or the sporting 
community, everyone pulls up their sleeves and helps to make 
many events in Prince Albert a success. I love the fact that there 
is always so many different things to do in our small city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would not be possible to fulfill these duties 
without the support from family. I’m very fortunate to have my 
partner, Darren. He goes above and beyond to take care of the 
family, and he’s a wonderful dad, stepdad, and grandpa. Papa is 
what the grandchildren like to call him. Mr. Speaker, my 
daughter Melissa is extremely engaged with the regular 
proceedings in this Assembly. In fact she indicated to me that 
she records the proceedings so she doesn’t miss an opportunity 
to watch me in question period or participate in bill debate. 
Therefore I must give her a shout-out occasionally because I 
know that she is watching. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am so very proud of Melissa. She works so 
hard in university with her goal of becoming a social worker, 
and also works at Ranch Ehrlo as a youth worker, and she 
enjoys her time with the youth there. She does all of this while 
raising a dynamic young man, full of personality, and finds time 
to stay engaged and involved with her family and friends. I’m 
very fortunate to have our children and grandchildren all close 
to home, and Darren and I are very dedicated to Prince Albert 
and want to make sure that Prince Albert is the best place to live 
and raise a family. This is what motivates me with my work in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed to see that there was very little 
provided in this budget that will address the genuine issues in 
Prince Albert. Even though residents of Prince Albert have been 
advocating for a second bridge, there was no mention of that 
being an investment. Mr. Speaker, the residents of Prince Albert 
want two river crossings because if anything happens to our 
only bridge, we would be in a state of crisis. We are very 
fortunate that no crisis has happened to date, but there has been 
times when the bridge access was compromised due to 
accidents or damage to the bridge, which resulted in very long 
wait times. If an emergency vehicle needed to get through, it 
would be a real issue. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish we could stop 
making this a political issue and make it a real issue, and get 
this major infrastructure accomplished. 
 
Another issue is that Prince Albert does not have a safe route, 
good routes. Most major centres are working to have routes 
away from residential areas and city centres in case a major 
accident happens. To access the bridge in Prince Albert or to 
get north of the river, you have to travel through the city by 
residential homes and our city centre. If there was an accident 
that involved the dangerous goods, this could potentially be a 
tragic situation. But this government continues to completely 
ignore this important infrastructure issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is the hub for much of the northern 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3789 

part of the province. When residents need to have their medical 
needs addressed, they often come to Prince Albert. Our hospital 
has long wait times and overcrowding is an issue. The Premier 
knows full well the issues at the Victoria Hospital and promised 
a new hospital for Prince Albert when he was campaigning. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I see nothing in this budget for a new 
hospital. I want to see this Premier be good to his promise and 
start immediately with the construction of a new hospital in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, due to multiple cuts to funding, Prince Albert’s 
mobile crisis unit had to cut their weekday daytime hours. 
Instead, crisis issues are now being downloaded to other 
agencies such as the emergency room at the Victoria Hospital 
and city police. Crisis workers with the mobile crisis are 
specifically trained to deal with these crisis situations, and I was 
hoping to see more funding provided to mobile crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I learned that the PACT [police and crisis team] 
program was expanded to North Battleford, Moose Jaw, and 
Yorkton. And while this is wonderful news for the communities 
to have this program, I think this program would be excellent in 
Prince Albert as well. We know that this program has shown 
excellent results in Regina and Saskatoon, and I was surprised 
that it will not be implemented in the third largest city in the 
province. 
 
We have seen such success when police and the health region 
work together to provide services, and that situations are 
resolved in a more sensitive manner when trained, registered 
social workers attend to help clients that have mental health 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, it’s not uncommon to see police 
officers sitting at the mental health outpatient or in the 
emergency room at the Victoria Hospital to help ensure that a 
client receives services. They are often waiting hours, Mr. 
Speaker. This puts more strain on protective services in the 
community and costs the municipality a lot. I would really like 
to see this government reconsider and place some funding for a 
PACT team in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental health is a real issue in our province but 
especially in Prince Albert, in the North where suicide rates are 
higher than the provincial and the national norm. The federal 
government is doing their part with providing funding but this 
province is not being transparent on how that money is being 
invested. 
 
Also this provincial government needs to start investing in real 
action and programs. Wait times are unacceptable and need to 
be addressed. Children should not have to wait months to see a 
counsellor. Services need to be available when they are needed, 
and I hope this government starts investing in that now. As the 
Children’s Advocate said: 
 

Our kids are crying out for our help. And as they cry out 
for help, they’re literally dying as we stand by and wait for 
tragedy to happen. Let’s not wait for the next kid to die. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert has a high unemployment rate, and 
we need to have some opportunities available to stimulate our 
economy. The mayor of Prince Albert indicated that his main 

points of contention with this budget was that there was a lack 
of details on funding announcements and the lack of solid 
programs aimed to getting people back to work. He said, “We 
understand when the economy is down we all suffer, but at the 
same time we’ve got to get our people back to work.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing in this budget to help with 
employment, but instead 2.9 million was cut from programs that 
help people get back to work. We need to be making smart 
investments now to grow the economy, create jobs, and protect 
the most vulnerable over the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PST [provincial sales tax] is always a contentious 
issue, but this government should have considered removing the 
PST on construction projects. New home starts are one of the 
fastest ways to get a number of people back to work in good 
paying jobs. And the addition of PST on construction materials 
has discouraged people from investing in new homes or 
renovation projects. Construction companies have been feeling 
the decline in services which has created higher unemployment 
rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the previous premier of this province and 
former leader of the Sask Party had some strong words to say 
about the PST, and I quote, “In my view, government should 
avoid doing dumb things, and charging the PST on the same 
vehicle over and over again seems pretty dumb.” Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a very valid point. I wonder how he feels about this dumb 
move by this government to remove the PST exemption on used 
vehicles. This was a campaign promise made in 2007 election 
and now one broken under this new Premier. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, cutting the PST on energy-efficient 
appliances makes no sense. It seems like a backwards move. 
We should be encouraging people to choose energy-efficient 
appliances, expand government support for individuals that are 
looking at being more conscientious on climate control. There 
should be more incentives for energy efficiency, not less. 
 
In the previous budget, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a lot of PST 
exemption removals like the PST exemption taken away from 
children’s clothes impacting families that are already having a 
hard time making ends meet; and the reversal on PST 
exemption on home and vehicle insurance. This has been 
difficult on many homeowners and landlords who indicated that 
this is going to impact rental costs. Another hard hit for people 
struggling to make ends meet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an increase to the Social Services’ 
budget, but that is due to the utilization rates going up. More 
people in our province are struggling, but there is nothing in 
this budget that will address that. Instead this government 
decides to take more money from people that have very little by 
eliminating the rental supplement. Rent is not going down. In 
fact, many rental rates are increasing because property taxes and 
utility rates are increasing. Taking from the poor to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement is the lowest of the low. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the senior population is growing in this province, 
but this government is not investing in services that they need. 
There is very little in this budget for seniors. Nothing to address 
the excessive cost of prescriptions, the increased costs of living, 
long wait times for long-term care, and mental health supports 



3790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

specific to seniors’ mental health, and no investment in a 
seniors’ advocate. We need to do a better job looking after our 
seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour to be on the Human Services 
Committee when we were tasked to present recommendations 
about improving organ donation in the province. Saskatchewan 
has some of the lowest rates of organ donation, and 
recommendations that were put forward would improve these 
rates. Mr. Speaker, I did not see any money for improving 
organ donation in this budget. This government needs to start 
making this a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been enjoying my role as the critic for 
municipal relations. In this role I have had the honour of 
meeting many of the first responders that work hard in this 
province. Every day emergency response personnel attend 
emergency situations, but this past year a few major situations 
happened that come to mind, and we are so grateful for 
everything they do. But, Mr. Speaker, we have an obligation to 
take care of these emergency personnel and ensure that they 
have the supports that they need when they need them. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to see this government look at 
providing more services to support volunteer workers. I think 
we must do a better job with ensuring that mental health 
services are available immediately when someone reaches out. 
The situations that these brave men and women experience is 
difficult to manage, and we have an obligation to ensure that 
they are taken care of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is off-loading expenses onto 
municipalities that residents will ultimately pay for through 
higher property taxes and utility rates. The Sask Party budget 
does not fix the grants-in-lieu mess that this government created 
last year. But instead they have downloaded the problem to 
municipalities across the province who now have no choice to 
take that to the ratepayers. Also, Mr. Speaker, freezing the 
municipal revenue sharing for two years at the lowest level in 
years is unfair. Municipalities deserve to have their fair share of 
the expanded PST revenues. How is it fair to have the 
municipalities pay more but get less? 
 
The Finance minister indicated, “Due to the recent expansion of 
the PST base, the one-point municipal revenue-sharing formula 
will be revisited.” This government should honour their 
agreement with municipalities and continue to provide the one 
point of the PST to them. The expansion and increase of the 
PST has impacted municipalities and community members and 
they should benefit from this increased revenue as well. 
 
The population in the province, Mr. Speaker, has increased and 
urban municipalities have faced the responsibility to provide 
services and increase their infrastructure in their communities to 
accommodate for this. Municipalities stepped up to the plate 
and now the province needs to help support them and step up as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is titled On Track, but should be 
named, much of the same. More people are struggling which 
has resulted in an increase of social assistance applicants. There 

is little to no support for municipalities and people are paying 
more in taxes and getting less for services. This budget is more 
of the same from the Sask Party. It’s short-sighted and offers no 
leadership or long-term plans to invest in prosperity. My 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana described this budget 
perfectly. It has no hope, no plan, no inspiration, and shows no 
leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage members across to use critical 
thinking when they study the budget. Talk to your municipal 
leaders in your community. Talk to educators in your 
community. Talk to the front-line workers in the health centres. 
Talk to your community-based organizations. Use your critical 
thinking abilities and vote for a budget based on what is the best 
decision for residents in your constituency and know that that 
answer, that this budget will not improve the lives of the people 
you represent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget, but I’ll be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, while it’s a pleasure to stand in this House today, I’m 
thinking about the Humboldt Broncos and the families involved 
there, and wish to offer my condolences to all those who lost 
their life and to their families. I know what kind of tragedy this 
is and I’m especially empathetic with those that are injured 
from this accident that . . . And I know that their lives will be 
changed from last Friday onwards, both for the individuals 
involved and for their families. 
 
Past Tuesday was the 20th anniversary of my son’s accident, so 
I know the impact it can have on your family, but as well that 
there are lots of successes to be had after that point. So those 
that were injured need to think about what they’re going to do 
into the future. My son got a degree in computer science and 
has a very good job today because he applied himself regardless 
of his injuries. The fact that he’s a quadriplegic did not hold 
him back. 
 
So those that were injured in this accident now need to focus, 
not on what their hopes and dreams may have been in a hockey 
career, but what they are going to do now and into the future. 
The Premier has indicated that the supports will be there for 
those individuals that survived and for all of the families 
involved, whether or not your person on the bus survived or not, 
because they’re all going to need support. 
 
You know, we talk about in Saskatchewan that . . . or I should 
say, people talk about the six degrees of separation, and in 
Saskatchewan it’s not that far. Logan Boulet, when I heard the 
name on the radio first, I thought, I wonder if there’s any 
connection to the Boulets that lived in Alida. It turns out that 
Rollie is his grandfather. Rollie was the UGG [United Grain 
Growers Ltd.] agent in Alida, later went to work for Mobil Oil, 
as did I, and we worked together out in Alberta. Sunday 
morning I get a text from my sister-in-law who lives in 
Lethbridge, and Logan’s mother taught my niece rugby at the 
university. So all of us have a connection with somebody. 
 
And I think we need, and I know I’ve talked with the Minister 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3791 

of Health . . . So my sister-in-law is trying to lead the parade 
online for organ donations. And I’ve talked to the Minister of 
Health about this, what we can do further to assist in that area. 
Enough about Humboldt. I wish them well. 
 
So last week I’m home for the Easter break from the House and 
I go to the RM supper that was in Alida, and the Minister of 
Highways is there. And part of this budget deals with 
construction of highways across this province. The Minister of 
Highways was there to not necessarily inaugurate but to 
confirm that the Ministry of Highways has entered into a 
partnership with the RM of 32 to rejuvenate Highway 361 from 
Alida to No. 8 Highway at Storthoaks, and further that they 
would rejuvenate the Highway 318 from Alida four miles south. 
The Highways ministry is paying 70 per cent of the cost and the 
RM is paying 30 per cent, and then the four miles going south 
from Alida will revert to the municipality and become a super 
grid. 
 
Now I wish the Ministry of Highways would carry on with what 
the RM is going to do because the RM is going to pave that four 
miles as well as another six on the 601 grid. So we’ll have a 
paved road paid for by the municipality — the 601 grid — from 
the north side of the municipality right through to the south 
side, which is great for us. 
 
But all those years when I stood in this House as a member of 
the opposition, I would raise those highways with the member 
for Athabasca when he was the minister of Highways, and they 
completely ignored all of the highways in my constituency. 
These two highways plus No. 47 north from Stoughton are the 
worst highways in my constituency and we are actually working 
on them. Although I can tell a humorous story, if you would 
like, about the current Minister of Health when he was the 
minister of Highways. 
 
So I showed him a picture of a highway and I asked him when 
he was going to fix this highway. And he looks at me — and 
it’s a dirt road, which is what 361 and 318 are — and he says, 
where is that? And I said it’s Africa, but the point is you didn’t 
know that. He thought it was a Saskatchewan highway, because 
that’s what the highways were like under the NDP. So I would 
like to thank the Minister of Highways and the Minister of 
Finance for providing some assistance to support those two 
particular highways in my constituency. 
 
Also when I was home last week, I got a phone call from the 
Redvers Activity Centre, and the Redvers Activity Centre 
provides a centre for clients that are challenged, and they also 
run five group homes, a new group home of which was built by 
this government. And they wanted to talk about a situation of 
their employees and how they relate to their clients and the 
difficulties they were having in retaining employees. They had 
a 41 per cent turnover last year, going from the group homes to 
the Ministry of Health. 
 
Well in this budget, Mr. Speaker, there is an increase of 
$10-plus million to third-party groups like the Redvers Activity 
Centre to better support their employees and to provide training 
for their employees so that they can continue to provide 
continuous care to the clients of group homes across 
Saskatchewan. And this is very important. This is the second or 
third time we have increased the funding for salaries for the 

employees within those group homes, and it was decades prior, 
under the NDP, that that didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we are showing that compassion to people in the province, 
those that need our help, that are not able to necessarily support 
themselves. But the best thing I like about the Redvers Activity 
Centre is that their clients, where they are capable, are placed in 
jobs around the community. So they are not just someone who 
is stuck in a group home but they’re out working in the 
community. They are part of the community. And everybody in 
the community accepts them the same as everyone else in the 
community. They are fully functioning participants in the 
community. And the Redvers Activity Centre doesn’t just draw 
from Redvers. It draws from all of southeast Saskatchewan for 
their clients. So I would just like to send out a bouquet to the 
Redvers Activity Centre in particular, but also to the other 
group homes around the province that provide services to those 
less fortunate in our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the budget is about the economy. It’s about 
how well Saskatchewan is doing within the economy — what 
we pay for, what we tax, what we promote, Mr. Speaker. But 
we’re facing headwinds. Not just the headwinds of the 
reduction from $150 a barrel of oil down to 20-some dollars, 
and now it’s back up a little bit, but even that back up a little bit 
is discounted because we cannot get our products to market. 
 
[12:45] 
 
You know, we see currently British Columbia trying to block 
our access to tidewater. This, Mr. Speaker, is clearly a crisis for 
Western Canada’s industry. We see not just our oil being denied 
access to markets but we see our grain products not being able 
to move. We see our potash products being hindered, Mr. 
Speaker. So when we try to ship west, whether it is in pipelines 
or rail, we are hindered by those . . . the province of British 
Columbia when it comes to shipping. 
 
NDP governments, Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia and in 
fact, with this difficulty between actually two NDP provinces, 
Alberta and British Columbia, we see the injection into that of 
the NDP federal leader who says, oh we need to be talking to 
each other; we need to send this to the Supreme Court. How 
many years does it take something to get through the Supreme 
Court? It can take decades, Mr. Speaker. Clearly he has no 
desire to have this resolved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we look to the east, we see that Quebec did exactly the same 
thing that British Columbia is doing now. They blocked the 
access to the east, to tidewater, of products coming out of 
Western Canada, including Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, clearly these provinces who block the economies of 
other provinces are being un-Canadian, and that needs to be 
recognized. 
 
So when Quebec blocks our resources from reaching tidewater 
and still demand that we continue to pay them equalization, 
they need to understand that the lack of our sales is going to 
diminish what they receive in equalization. I’m not sure that 
their publics understand that, but they need to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, BC [British Columbia] and Quebec both were 
saying, well we want to block these products because they’re 



3792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2018 

not environmentally sound; they are pollutants, that they are 
polluting the environment. Well, Mr. Speaker, when British 
Columbia produces items and ships it east, either on trucks or 
trains, they are creating CO2 as they pass through Saskatchewan. 
So why should we allow them to pollute our environment? 
Maybe we need to stop and think a little bit about preventing 
them from polluting our environment. 
 
When somebody unloads a ship in Vancouver and won’t allow 
us to load a ship in Vancouver, maybe we need to say to the 
shippers, no, you cannot bring your CO2-spewing vehicles and 
trains into Saskatchewan. We need to say the same things to 
Quebec. All those cars they produce in Quebec, not only do 
they spew CO2 when they come through Saskatchewan, but the 
actual vehicle is putting out CO2 as well. Maybe we need to 
block all the shipments out of Quebec as they approach our 
border. But if we do that, how are we going to ship our 
products? Clearly already CP [Canadian Pacific] and CN 
[Canadian National] are having a great deal of difficulty 
shipping our grain. 
 
But we have access to the South, Mr. Speaker. We have a line 
crossing in the member for Estevan’s constituency at North 
Portal, right on the border of my constituency as well. We have 
another line that crosses the US [United States] at Northgate. 
Needs a little work perhaps to get a train there, but it can be 
done fairly easily. But CN and CP are doing everything they 
can to block our shortline rails from shipping products out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is not interested 
in enforcing their own laws. So why do we in Saskatchewan 
continue to be Boy Scouts and follow the federal law on the 
railroad Act? Let’s start using our shortlines, run them over CP 
and CN lines, and get our products to market. Let’s start 
shipping our products through Seattle and Portland, or New 
Orleans. Ship them down. Ship it down the Mississippi River 
by barge, which is the cheapest actual way to get it to tidewater. 
Mr. Speaker, we need to start thinking about these kind of 
solutions if people like the NDP in British Columbia are going 
to block our economy’s access to the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought at one time that — I still think it, 
actually — that the US as a jurisdiction is in serious trouble. I 
can see within 50 years that the US could break up into five 
separate jurisdictions. I was just reading online that there is now 
a petition circulating in California that has 640,000 signatures. 
To put it on the ballot they only need 345,000. They have 
640,000 to put on the ballot the question of whether or not to 
split California into three separate entities and secede from the 
United States. 
 
That is the start of it. I think it’s North Carolina that just had a 
motion presented to their House of Representatives to secede, to 
allow the state to secede from the United States. And the 
interesting part about that, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1860 North 
Carolina was the first state to vote to secede from the United 
States and obviously created the American Civil War. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we think that these things are 
far-fetched, they’re not that far because there is no longer a 
commonality of interest in the US. New York and Texas and 
California no longer have the same interests. And I thought 

Canada, we would be immune to all of this. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
after observing what is going on in Quebec, what was going on 
in Quebec, I don’t think we’re that far behind where the US is 
at. We are approaching a constitutional crisis. 
 
You know, I was reading on my Surface Pro here earlier today a 
column by Mark Bonokoski of the Toronto Sun. Now Toronto 
Sun is not normally thought of as an unfriendly newspaper to 
the Liberal government. You know, if you were to ask where 
the Toronto Sun is in the political spectrum, they would likely 
be under the Liberal column . . . Well I know the member 
opposite from Regina Elphinstone doesn’t agree with me 
because he thinks they’re actually a part of the NDP process, 
but I would put them more in the Liberal camp. 
 
So Mark Bonokoski’s headline yesterday was, “When the going 
gets tough, Trudeau gets going.” Mr. Speaker, as we find out 
today, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is off to Peru for a 
conference rather than dealing with the issues in this country 
that are destroying the economies of Western Canada. To 
further quote Mr. Bonokoski, he says: 
 

When things get rough on the home front, he [meaning 
Mr. Trudeau] flies off to another far-away place . . . he 
flies back to Ottawa, reloads his Louis Vuitton . . . 
[luggage], and flies off again. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see how the federal Liberal government 
takes this crisis in Western Canada. They don’t take it as an 
issue at all. I watched the news conference after the emergency 
cabinet minister meeting in Ottawa, and Minister Carr, the 
Natural Resources minister, comes out, says a few words that 
yes, we’re taking it seriously; we’re looking at it. Oh and by the 
way, I’ve got to catch an airplane. Goodbye. And runs out. You 
know, even hear the reporters say, what? Really? 
 
You know, so that’s how serious the federal government is 
taking this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. My colleague 
mentions a former NDP minister who ran for the elevator when 
a tough question was asked him in a scrum . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. Well and another colleague says it really 
wasn’t that tough, but he ran anyways. So you know . . . 
 
But the Minister of Natural Resources and the Minister for the 
Environment were both there, and all of a sudden they both had 
to catch an airplane right away. You know, couldn’t answer any 
questions. 
 
You know, so the federal government is obviously not taking 
this issue seriously. This has the potential to be a constitutional 
crisis in this country and needs to be taken seriously. The 
federal government can no longer just talk. They have to act. 
And they have to act in the interests of the economy of Canada, 
not to protect the NDP government in BC or to protect their . . . 
Trudeau’s mantra that this is 2015 after all. 
 
This is a crisis that is seriously impacting the economies of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta and Manitoba, and it needs to be 
resolved. We can no longer wait. And we have been waiting 
and waiting and waiting. We can no longer wait for the federal 
government to literally get off the pot. They need to do 
something. 
 



April 12, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3793 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we cannot ship our products east or west, 
then we need to seriously think about shipping them south or 
north. We could go around Alberta and British Columbia and 
go through the Northwest Territories and the Yukon and put our 
oil and potash and grain into the Gulf of Alaska and ship it 
around the world. Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to have British 
Columbia. We want to have British Columbia. We want to have 
access through there, but we don’t need to have access through 
there. So unless the people in British Columbia want to start 
eating all that fruit from the Okanagan Valley, if they want to 
stop digging coal in northeast British Columbia and not ship it 
around the world, if they want to shut down their oil industry in 
northeast British Columbia, shut down the Peace River grain 
growth, Mr. Speaker, they can do that to themselves. But they 
cannot, should not, be able to do it to the rest of Western 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if the federal government is not prepared to step up and be 
held accountable, then we need to take control of the railroad 
systems in Saskatchewan, develop the crossings into North 
Dakota. I just saw a statistic from the US today that 84 per cent 
of North Dakota’s exports are to Canada. So it’s going to have a 
major impact on parts of the US as well. So we need to be able 
to ship our products south to Seattle, to Portland, to New 
Orleans, Mr. Speaker, and get our products out of 
Saskatchewan as we rightfully should be able to. We should be 
able to do that as Canadians. But if we can’t do it as Canadians, 
we still need to do it. 
 
And I still have 10 seconds to go, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve got 
enough words to actually do that. So, Mr. Speaker, if the people 
of BC don’t want fuel and stop getting it from across the border, 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve got a pipeline running from Blaine, 
Washington to Vancouver and they need to shut it down. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I certainly hope the folks at home were 
tuned into that riveting debate speech from the member from 
Cannington. It now being 1 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CONDOLENCE MOTION 
 Humboldt Broncos Bus Tragedy 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3767 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3768 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3768 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3768 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3768 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3769 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom Hashoah Observed Across Saskatchewan 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 
 St. Louis Lions Club Celebrates 50 Years 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3770 
 Assiniboia Athlete Successful in Basketball and Track and Field  
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3770 
 Outdoor Hockey League Thrives in Regina 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3770 
 Healing Lodge Volunteer Receives Taylor Award 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3771 
 Primary Health Centre Opens in Cut Knife 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 
 First Annual Wheelchair Curling Funspiel Held in Kamsack 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Wait Times for Surgery 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3772 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3773 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3773 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3773 
 Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3773 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3774 
 Funding for Mental Health 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3774 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3774 
 Funding for Public Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 
 Funding for Northern Highways and Infrastructure 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3777 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3777 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3777 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3777 
 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3778 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3779 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3782 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3784 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3788 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3790 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


