


















































March 14, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3417 
 March 14, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I have a few guests down here . . . I say down 
here, from the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, from 
various communities across the constituency. 
 
I have Bevra Fee, who is the managing director of the Northern 
Lakes Economic Development Corporation from the 
community of Spiritwood, lives out at Fur Lake near Shell 
Lake, Mr. Speaker. With her I have Terry Wingerter, the owner 
and manager of TNK Trucking Ltd., also of Spiritwood. And 
we have Darin Stene, the general manager of Triple S Transport 
from the community of Shellbrook. He’s the general manager. I 
think the owner is his wife, Tina, who works alongside him, or 
Darin works for her, in that company in the community where I 
reside. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I ask all members of 
this Assembly to welcome these three individuals to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a couple of 
guests in your gallery I’d like to introduce. We have the reeve 
of the RM [rural municipality] of Enterprise, Wayne Freitag, 
and a councillor, William Gergely from the RM of Enterprise. 
I’d like to welcome you to the legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly here today, I’d 
like to take this opportunity to welcome some guests seated in 
the west gallery. We’ve got a group there from my hometown 
of Swift Current. It’s the Maverick School class there. We’ve 
got eight grade 10 to 12 students, part of the social studies 30 
class. They are joined today by their teacher, Mr. Scott Hunter, 
and their educational assistant, Krista Erickson. 
 
I had a chance earlier today, Mr. Speaker, to meet with the 
group, and Mr. Hunter informed me that they had some 
questions prepared, and there were no softball questions there 
either. And they stayed true to that. They had questions, great 
questions, for me and I was hoping that I was able to answer 
them to the best of my abilities. So I just hope the group has had 
a great visit here today, and I’d ask all members to welcome the 
class from Maverick School to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce nine 

grade 11 and 12 students from the Arcola School. They are the 
law 30 class, and accompanying them today is their teacher Ron 
Wardrope and chaperone Jackie Hughes. And I look forward to 
meeting them later for photographs and a discussion. So I ask 
everyone to welcome them here today . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And there will be no ice cream as it’s not 
necessarily good for all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
welcome three guests to your gallery, long-time friends and 
important people in this city. I will be delivering a member’s 
statement soon, but I wanted to single out for introduction the 
publisher of the Prairie Dog, Terry Morash; the editor, Stephen 
Whitworth; and long-time supporter, probably plays a lot of 
roles, Ms. Tammi Morash. I welcome each of you, and I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these special guests to your 
gallery. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the cuts 
to post-secondary education. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 
 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from Moose 
Jaw and Humboldt. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are 
opposed to the federal government’s decisions to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Fillmore and 
citizens of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition calling on 
the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ classrooms. Those 
who signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: to the fact that the Sask Party has cut at least $674 in 



3418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

government funding for each student across the province; that 
the Sask Party hiked education property taxes by 67 million, 
while at the same time cutting $54 million from our classrooms. 
And, Mr. Speaker, of course this has had dramatic and 
detrimental effects to classrooms all across this province, has 
meant such things as loss of classroom supports, funding for 
buses for kindergarten children, and programs to help children 
with special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
education system pay the price for the Saskatchewan 
Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Moose Jaw and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to raise a 
petition today to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. 
We know that in Saskatchewan we have an outdated election 
Act that allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even 
those from outside the province, to make unlimited donations to 
our province’s political parties. And we know that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations and of that, 2.87 million come from companies 
outside this province. And we know that Saskatchewan politics 
should belong to Saskatchewan people, and that the federal 
government, the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, and 
Nova Scotia, and even BC [British Columbia] now have moved 
to limit this influence and level the playing field by banning 
corporate and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d read the prayer now: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign 
finance laws to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban 
on donations from corporations and unions, and to put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Regina. 
I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a seniors’ advocate to be 
established in the province of Saskatchewan. The petitioners 
point out a number of things, but certainly they talk about the 
beneficial effect that the senior advocate has had in several 
other provinces throughout the Dominion of Canada. And they 
point out that the advocate successfully works with seniors to 

ensure that the supports that are needed and deserved by seniors 
are there and able to be drawn upon. 
 
So in the prayer that follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Sask Party 
government to immediately appoint a seniors’ advocate to 
ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that all seniors 
across the province have the supports they need and 
deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens in the 
good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Prairie Dog Celebrates Its 25th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month Prairie Dog 
turned 25. Since its arrival on Groundhog Day in 1993, the 
Queen City’s feisty, free paper has informed and amused and 
occasionally even enraged Reginans with its unique take on 
news, politics, arts, and entertainment stories of the day. 
 
To last 25 years as an independent newspaper, especially in this 
era of layoffs, bankruptcies, and shutdowns, really is a rare 
achievement. Prairie Dog’s longevity is a credit to the 
dedication and spirit of the paper’s staff, contributors, 
volunteers past and present. Thanks to them and this little 
newspaper that could, it’s still around today making city life a 
little more interesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Dog is also a worker co-operative. 
Thanks to its democratic ownership model, the Dog has been 
able to avoid the pitfalls faced by media monopolies. While 
Canada’s corporate news giants struggle, the Prairie Dog 
survives. In 1999 the paper more than doubled its frequency, 
going from monthly to biweekly, and in 2003 Prairie Dog 
expanded into Saskatoon with a sister newspaper, Planet S, 
which thrives to this day. 
 
For a quarter century through good times, bad times, booms, 
and busts, Prairie Dog has been here to tell Saskatchewan 
stories with its one-of-a-kind voice. In a time when truth and 
facts have somehow become alternative, I invite all members to 
celebrate this original, made-in-Saskatchewan newspaper. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you to Stephen and Terry and Tammi for joining us 
today. I want to have a shout out to Mitch Diamantopoulos and 
April Bourgeois who were there in the beginning. And to the 
Dog, here’s to the next 25 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Canada 150 Medal and Senate 150th Anniversary  
Medal Recipients 

 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3419 

the opportunity to stand today and talk about some of my 
constituents that received the Senate 150th Anniversary Medal. 
This medal celebrates the 150th anniversary of the Senate’s first 
sitting. They were awarded to Canadians or permanent residents 
who have been actively involved in their communities through 
their generosity, dedication, volunteerism, and hard work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that two of my constituents and 
a local business were awarded the 150th Anniversary Medal. 
The recipients were former MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Kelvington-Wadena, June Draude, for her work 
with children, high-risk individuals, and people with 
disabilities; Major General Wayne Eyre, who served his country 
with the Canadian Armed Forces and continues to mentor 
recruits and serve veterans in need; and the Wadena News, 
which has kept people informed and connected for more than a 
century. Publisher Alison Squires and former co-owner Marge 
Headington accepted this award. 
 
I would also like to mention that Harvey Weber from my 
constituency was awarded with the Canada 150 Medal for his 
contribution to teaching, coaching, and volunteering with youth. 
This medal was presented by Randy Hoback, MP [Member of 
Parliament] for Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the award 
recipients and thank them for all the work they have done to 
make our communities the best places to live. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Nutrition Month and Dietitians Day 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
recognition of Nutrition Month. The Nutrition Month 2018 
public campaign is dedicated to Unlock the Potential of Food. 
Dietitians help Canadians realize the potential of food to fuel, 
discover, prevent, heal, and bring us together. They believe in 
the power of food to enhance lives and improve health. 
 
[13:45] 
 
March 14th is also recognized as Dietitians Day in Canada. It 
spotlights the profession and reminds us that dietitians are the 
trusted choice for reliable life-changing food and nutrition 
advice. Today we celebrate dietitians as regulated health care 
professionals committed to using their specialized knowledge 
and skills to translate the science of nutrition into terms 
everyone can understand to support healthy living for all 
Canadians. 
 
For many people, it’s a lot more complicated than just eating 
more fruits and veggies. Registered dietitians have the 
specialized knowledge and training to help ensure people with 
complex conditions like diabetes, celiac disease, and kidney 
disorders get all the vitamins and nutrients they need. 
Registered dietitians also have important knowledge to share 
with people who have specialized diets for health, religious, or 
moral reasons. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing national Nutrition Month and thanking all of our 

province’s registered dietitians for the work they do to help 
build a healthier Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Moose Jaw Women Honoured at Awards Event 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today I rise to 
congratulate the influential women that were honoured at the 
PRISM [perseverance, role model, influential, successful, 
mentor] Awards in Moose Jaw earlier this month. The 
recipients were recognized for their efforts in business, 
highlighting their accomplishments and their contributions to 
the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven women were honoured in a variety of 
categories. Laura Hamilton was the recipient of the 
Perseverance Award, and Maryse Carmichael was given the 
Role Model Award. Carla O’Reilly was recognized in the 
Influential category, and Johanne Spencer was given the award 
for Mentorship. Rebeca Johnstone won the Successful Award, 
and the Lifetime Achievement went to Geri Hall. Mr. Speaker, 
all were very humbled at this recognition and were thankful for 
the collaboration and support from their fellow colleagues 
throughout their careers. 
 
On a special note, Mr. Speaker, Olivia Arndt, the winner of the 
Youth Achievement Award, had suffered a stroke when she was 
only seven years old. Ever since, she has done everything she 
can to overcome setbacks and persevere through hardships so 
that she can live her best potential. 
 
This event gave a great sense of collaboration and community, 
bringing women in business together to celebrate and to pave 
the way for younger generations. Thank you to the organizers of 
this event for the very memorable evening. Mr. Speaker, I now 
ask all members to please join me in congratulating the 2018 
PRISM Award winners in Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 

Young Athlete Achieves Remarkable Success 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
acknowledge here today a young constituent of mine who has 
achieved some remarkable success in her young athletic career: 
Jordan Kos. At just 17 years old, Jordan is the youngest national 
team member from Saskatchewan for lawn bowling. Jordan has 
been playing the sport since she was seven and has been 
working hard over the past 10 years to continually improve and 
compete on bigger stages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to her success across the provincial 
and national tournaments, lawn bowling has taken Jordan all 
across the world. She has represented Saskatchewan and 
Canada in tournaments in Australia, England, China, and in 
United States, and she has plans to compete in more major 
competitions in Australia and New Zealand. Mr. Speaker, 
Jordan’s success has even transcended her own sport; she has 
also been nominated for the Saskatchewan Sport Awards 2017 
Youth Female Athlete of the Year. 
 



3420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

This year, the 2018 national championship will be held at 
Jordan’s home club, the Regina Lawn Bowling Club. I hope 
members of this Assembly can attend to support some of our 
provincial top athletes. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire 
Assembly, I want to congratulate Jordan on all her success and 
wish her the best moving forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Rural Municipality and Towns Combine Fire Services 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Awards were announced late last year, 
and I am proud to say that the RM of Wilton, town of Lashburn, 
and town of Marshall in my constituency were awarded the 
Regional Cooperation Award. This award was given for the 
towns’ and RM’s joint work with Legacy Protective Services, 
which provides new equipment to fight fires, train firefighters, 
and provide other emergency support and assistance in the 
event it is ever needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this service is a combination of multiple fire 
service agreements in the area that in essence combines the fire 
services programs from these RMs and towns into one service. 
This allows the combined service to do a number of things, 
including building more efficient response time models, having 
a more consistent idea of available equipment and backup, and 
reducing red tape. 
 
Ultimately the costs are spread over multiple areas, allowing 
high tech equipment purchases and training no one community 
could ever afford. Mr. Speaker, this service is an example of 
how governments at any level can save taxpayer money by 
reducing red tape and innovating. 
 
On behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to congratulate 
the RM of Wilton, the town of Lashburn, the town of Marshall, 
and everyone involved with Legacy Regional Protective 
Services on all of their innovative work. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 

Quinn Stevenson Memorial Rink 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with spring fast approaching, people all over the 
province are trying to squeeze in as much time enjoying 
community rinks as they can. Residents of Erindale/Arbor 
Creek are no different, but their local rink has special meaning 
to the people of the community. Their local rink is the Quinn 
Stevenson Memorial Rink, named after Quinn Stevenson who 
tragically lost his life after his car was struck by a drunk driver 
in 2013. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the roots for naming this rink began in 2014 when 
the Quinn Stevenson Memorial Spirit and Athletic Trust 
donated money to purchase and equip a mobile warm-up trailer 
for the rink. They wanted to be involved in this purchase as 
Quinn had spent many hours at the rink. 
 
Then in 2015, Troy Carbno, a volunteer at the rink and friend of 
the Stevenson family, came up with the idea to name the rink in 

Quinn’s honour. Mr. Speaker, the renaming of the rink is a 
beautiful tribute to Quinn. I knew Quinn personally as a young 
man, so involved in sports and community activities. It is the 
perfect way to honour his memory. 
 
On behalf of all members in this Assembly I would like to 
thank his parents, Bonny and Craig Stevenson, for all the work 
they do with the Quinn Stevenson Memorial Spirit and Athletic 
Trust, and all the volunteers who operate our community rink. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — All right, let’s have a good and spirited debate 
today. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Delays in Rail Transportation of Grain 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is once again faced 
with a severe backlog of our province’s grain, and we’re 
growing more and more at risk of losing money that’s essential 
to our local economy and causing ongoing stress and 
uncertainty for Saskatchewan farmers. It may not be billions 
and billions, Mr. Speaker, but these massive delays are keeping 
tens of thousands of bushels of grain stuck in our province, 
weeks behind on filled orders. Mr. Speaker, the last time there 
was a backlog of this magnitude it cost the Western Canadian 
economy almost $8 billion and left millions of tonnes of grain 
undelivered for months. 
 
I know the Premier shares my concern on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker. So my question to him is, can the Premier tell us what 
specific measures he’s taking to pressure the federal 
government to clear the backlog and avoid future bottlenecks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for this question that is of dire 
importance to the economy of this province, and the question 
with respect to ensuring that we are able to get our products to 
port. And most particularly in this province, one of those most 
important products are our agricultural products — our grain, 
our canola oil, all of the products that come from the 
agricultural sector. 
 
I raised this with the Prime Minister when he was in town last 
Friday. We talked about the potential, and I encouraged him 
that if CN [Canadian National] isn’t able to come back with 
some volume-based deliveries that are acceptable to the 
industry, that he entertain the thought of passing an order in 
council mandating volume-based deliveries to the port, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also encouraged him to look at an order in council with 
respect to interswitching, so that if one transportation company 
is not going to move that product, that another one can actually 
come in on those tracks and retrieve the product and get it to 
market, Mr. Speaker. I also encouraged him to move as swiftly 
as possible with the passage through the Senate of Bill C-49, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve also engaged with the interim CEO [chief executive 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3421 

officer] of CN, Mr. Speaker, on a phone call last week. And 
they have assured me that they will have their plan by March 
the 15th full with in excess of, I believe it was, 5,000 cars a 
week. And I mentioned to them under no uncertain terms that I 
would be encouraging the Prime Minister that, if they’re not 
able to meet those delivery targets that are acceptable to the 
industry, that I will be encouraging the Prime Minister to pass 
these order in councils to ensure that we can get our product to 
port, Mr. Speaker. So I thank again the member opposite for the 
question of utmost importance to this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Special Dietary Needs 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has made the 
laudable commitment to make Saskatchewan the very best 
place in Canada to live for those with disabilities. We share this 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately the government 
continues to fall short. 
 
One significant step backwards occurred last summer, when the 
government announced changes to the special diet benefit. 
Every day as a doctor in my family practice, I filled out the 
forms for special diet funding. This small amount of extra 
money helped patients with chronic medical conditions like 
HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], diabetes, and heart 
disease to afford a little bit more nutritious food. It was 
nowhere near adequate and in fact needed to be raised, as 72 per 
cent of people living on social assistance in Saskatchewan are 
food-insecure. Instead it was cut, Mr. Speaker, forcing people 
with disabilities to choose between paying the rent, paying for 
medications, and paying for food. 
 
So my question is, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier’s 
commitment to making Saskatchewan the very best place in 
Canada to live for those with disabilities include a recognition 
that living well in Saskatchewan means being able to afford 
enough nutritious food to stay healthy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for the question. The only change that we made to 
our programs, Mr. Speaker, was to make sure that it was a 
diagnose-based recommendation from the doctor, Mr. Speaker. 
We haven’t changed any of our programs. We want to make 
sure that the right programs are going to the right people at the 
right time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in regards to what we’ve done for people with disabilities 
in our province, I’m very proud of our record, Mr. Speaker. We 
have taken 112,000 people off the tax rolls. We increased child 
care spaces, Mr. Speaker. We have increased our programs for 
income assistance up $287 million, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud of the record that we’ve done for the people with 
disabilities and those on income assistance, Mr. Speaker. Is 
there more work to be done? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. We look 
forward to working with our stakeholders to be able to get that 
work done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m reluctant to say so but that, I 
don’t believe, is an adequate description of the changes that 
were made. We always required a diagnosis. What now has 
been done is an elimination of the top tier, the calorie-based 
funding, and a requirement for anybody who is suggested by a 
doctor to need that funding to go through the process of seeing 
a dietitian. And that’s resulting in making this an inadequate 
system and a very complicated system for patients. 
 
We have today in the gallery Charmaine Hart from Regina. 
She’s a former federal government employee now on disability 
after two significant vehicle accidents. She’s on SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] and was 
diagnosed with a gluten sensitivity, and her doctor said she was 
eligible for a special diet. But those changes meant that she had 
to go see a dietitian, which took her two months. And then 
when she saw that dietitian, the dietitian said her needs are over 
$200 but she was told she could only have $150 a month. 
 
This is one of thousands of stories across the province of 
patients who are being forced to navigate a more complicated 
and increasingly inadequate system. Mr. Speaker, will the 
Premier commit to raising special diet allowance and fixing this 
program so it’s not difficult for patients to navigate and it’s 
sufficient to cover their nutrition needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member for the question. We want to make sure that 
first of all that the member opposite has a consent form to be 
able to bring up this specific case. I can’t comment about any 
specific cases, Mr. Speaker, but what I can do, Mr. Speaker, is 
tell you about some of the programs that we have done within 
Social Services to be able to make sure that we meet our 
clients’ needs. 
 
If there is somebody particular that would like to meet after 
session, Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than happy to meet with that 
individual after question period to be able to discuss this, Mr. 
Speaker. But again, without the presence of a consent form, I 
can’t talk about a specific case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Charmaine was good enough to join us today and 
she is here in the west gallery, and I’m sure she’d be happy to 
speak to you. What you failed to clarify however . . . Pardon 
me. Mr. Speaker, what the minister failed to clarify was that 
that process that he described isn’t really how things work. It’s 
not sufficient to have a diagnosis. We’ve always been required 
to provide a diagnosis for special diet funding. It’s been 
inadequate for years, and now it’s been made even less 
adequate and more complicated, more difficult for patients to 
assess. 
 
[14:00] 
 
And what I’m asking the Premier to commit to is to fixing this 
system, making sure that the patients who need that extra 
funding have enough to be able to afford food, and that it’s not 
so complicated that it’s causing them the great levels of stress 
that Charmaine has described. 



3422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker, and what 
came out of what the Leader of the Opposition is specifically 
talking about came out about the SAID program, Mr. Speaker. 
That was a program that we created to be able to work with 
people with dietary needs, Mr. Speaker. We’ve looked at all of 
these. 
 
What we’re trying to do again, Mr. Speaker, is what I’ve said is, 
we’re trying to direct our funds in the most efficient way in 
Social Services. We’re trying to direct them to the individuals 
that need it in the time that they need it, Mr. Speaker. And 
again, if there’s an individual that’s in the Chamber today, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be more than happy to talk with that person after, 
to be able to find out exactly what their case is. But right now, 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t comment on that because I don’t have all 
of the facts with me right now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Tariffs on Steel Exports to the United States 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Yesterday, along with the Leader of the 
Opposition and caucus colleagues, I met with members of 
United Steelworkers Local 5890 from Evraz Steel here in 
Regina. As we’re all aware, there are 1,400 good-paying jobs 
there, and Evraz is key to our province’s economy. The threat 
of an end to tariff exemptions from the Trump administration is 
putting our economy and these jobs at risk. 
 
We stand ready to continue to work with the workers, the 
company, the members opposite, and both levels of 
government. Can the minister responsible please update this 
House on what efforts are being made to protect Canada and the 
Evraz jobs here in Regina from American steel tariffs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Export and Trade 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and thank you for the question from the opposition. 
We have been very engaged on this file. This is something that 
is obviously very, very important for those that are employed at 
Evraz. It’s important for our economy in a general context. We 
were pleased that there was an exemption granted for Canada 
and Mexico with regard to the tariffs in the immediate term. 
 
We need to continue to be engaged and will be engaged with 
our national government to ensure that in the course of the 
NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] negotiations 
— which we understand that there’s a connection with from the 
point of view of the administration on the tariff issue — that we 
continue to be engaged. We’ve had officials at all eight rounds 
of negotiations thus far. The ninth round of course will be 
happening soon in Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. 
We’ll be represented as a province at that round as well. 
 
But we will continue to be engaged. We know this is vitally 
important. We’ve raised this issue repeatedly with our 
counterparts at the national level and we are pleased to see that 
at least in the short to medium term that we won’t be subject to 

these tariffs which we believe are unjustified and unfair. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Investment in Prince Albert and Hospitals 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, for far too long the Sask Party 
forgot about the things that matter to Prince Albert. And I am 
proud to be here on behalf of the people of Prince Albert 
Northcote, but also all of Prince Albert, to remind them the 
people in my hometown want to keep our Crowns public. They 
want a new bridge over the North Saskatchewan River. And 
they want the provincial government to step up to the plate and 
fully fund a new hospital. Instead, all they’ve gotten from the 
Sask Party are broken promises, cuts to funding, and tax hikes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier should be no stranger to the issues 
affecting the Prince Albert area. What’s the Premier’s plan to 
reverse his government’s record of abandoning Prince Albert 
and instead make life better for the people of Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for that question. As she knows, Mr. 
Speaker, Prince Albert is very near and dear to my heart 
because it is my home community. 
 
This government is doing amazing things for Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker. The bridge, the current bridge, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
invested over $5 million in repairs to that bridge, Mr. Speaker, 
which I might remind the members opposite that they never 
spent a dime on repairs of the bridge. The city had to cover all 
of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and currently, Mr. Speaker, we had . . . 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the university, we’ve had 
experts in to analyze the current bridge, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’ve actually analyzed it. They’ve installed monitoring 
equipment, state-of-the-art monitoring equipment, Mr. Speaker, 
that will tell them if there is an issue with it. But they forecast 
that it’s good for another 70 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
we’ve been doing with the current bridge, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Lots of talk, Mr. Speaker, but no answers of 
what the Premier would do, and who represents the Prince 
Albert area, is going to do for the people of Prince Albert. 
 
The Premier may have forgotten about the promises he made 
during the Sask Party leadership race, but he made them all the 
same. Allow me to remind him of one clear promise. He told 
the Prince Albert Daily Herald that when it came to a new 
hospital for Prince Albert, “. . . the provincial government 
would fund 100 per cent of that facility here in Prince Albert.” 
Mr. Speaker, when can the people of Prince Albert expect the 
Premier to deliver on that promise? 
 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3423 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I thank the member from Prince Albert Northcote, the 
current member from Prince Albert Northcote, for her question 
with respect to the major centre near the community where I 
live, Mr. Speaker, and the opportunity to speak about some of 
the investment over the last number of years that has come into 
that area and some of the engagement that has come into that 
area, Mr. Speaker, in ensuring that there’s First Nations 
engagement in the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker. And I point 
to agreements with Agency Chiefs Tribal Council, with a 
number of First Nations in the area, Mr. Speaker, and some 
successful engagement in that great economic opportunity that 
continues to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point to the investment in twinning 
the highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker, opening up the community to the southern portion of 
the province, Mr. Speaker, and ensuring that that community is 
accessible and accessible in a safe manner, Mr. Speaker, as 
tourism is one of the major opportunities as we move forward to 
some of the lakes in the northern area. 
 
We have great engagement with the businesses in that particular 
area, Mr. Speaker, and the surrounding area, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as the council, as the member from Prince Albert Carlton 
and myself and Sask Rivers and Batoche have met with the 
council a number of times, as long with the mayor, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And she is correct that when our finances return to balance and 
we work our way through some of our capital infrastructure, 
Mr. Speaker, we will fund a hospital in Prince Albert. The 
understanding that it’s a use to the North, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people that come from the North come there in a much more 
comfortable fashion so that they can get back to their home 
community, Mr. Speaker, and receive the services that they so 
rightfully deserve. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, that question was pretty clear 
and precise, but there’s lots of promises and big talk by the 
Premier. But the reality is, is this hospital is desperately needed 
and we need immediate action. Prince Albert residents deserve 
a timeline and they need a guarantee that the Premier will 
commit to this hospital. So when can the people of Prince 
Albert expect the Premier to deliver on this promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been very clear on this issue. Prince Albert, the new 
hospital to come, will be fully funded as financial conditions 
allow, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the member’s insinuation 
that somehow Prince Albert has been left out in Saskatchewan 
is just completely wrong, Mr. Speaker. Prince Albert, by the 
way, Mr. Speaker, does have outstanding representation on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is a priority in this province. It’s 

benefited not only the rest of the province, but Prince Albert as 
well. We have 750 more doctors. We have 3,400 more nurses. 
We have hundreds more long-term care workers, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re very proud of our record in health care, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a priority now. It will continue to be a priority. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a very long reply to the 
member’s question from the Premier, but we didn’t hear an 
answer. We didn’t hear anything about when that promise, that 
promise that he made in that very recent leadership race . . . 
That leadership race was to be the Premier. These were not for 
future considerations. This is a job that he was starting the day 
after that leadership race ended. When will we see an answer? 
When will the people of Prince Albert know when that hospital 
will be built? And will it continue to be built, as promised in 
that leadership race, with 100 per cent provincial funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Yes, it will, Mr. Speaker, 
and it will be as finances allow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have built, Mr. Speaker, under a Saskatchewan 
Party government, we have built 13 long-term care facilities 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. A number of them also have 
acute care facilities attached, one in the Prince Albert area . . . 
two in the Prince Albert area actually, one right in Prince Albert 
and one in the community of Shellbrook, just outside Prince 
Albert, the same health region, Mr. Speaker, as well as a 
number across the province. 
 
I see a hospital built and open in Moose Jaw, which I also saw 
during the leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker. I see a children’s 
hospital being built and coming on stream in the community of 
Saskatoon, and I see a Saskatchewan Hospital, Mr. Speaker. I 
see a Humboldt hospital that was promised, I think seven 
announcements actually, by the members opposite, was built by 
a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have additional work to do in a hospital in the 
community of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. And when we get to a 
financial position to get ourselves through these capital 
infrastructure that we’re committed to, Mr. Speaker, we will 
build the hospital in Prince Albert, and we will fund it 100 per 
cent because of its importance to northern communities, Mr. 
Speaker. It is an important piece of Saskatchewan 
infrastructure, and we will be there, Mr. Speaker, as soon as 
we’re able. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Consultations Regarding Cannabis Distribution  
and Regulation 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it was nearly three years ago that 
the federal Liberals formed government. Front and centre in 
their platform was a commitment to legalize and regulate 
cannabis. This wasn’t a secret, so it shouldn’t have come as a 
shock to the Sask Party. Still, it took way too long for the Sask 
Party to move on any kind of a plan. One point they have made 



3424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

clear was, even though they will use SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority] for licensing, they are refusing 
to follow what every other province is doing and use our 
Crown’s extensive wholesale network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did they take such a strong stance against this 
approach that would have not only strengthened one of our 
Crowns and made money, but would have improved public 
confidence as well? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t necessarily 
agree with the member opposite. The private sector can provide 
services in our province. I think they . . . in several other retail 
opportunities, they do a great job. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think 
this is a good plan that we have, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite definitely have an adversarial relationship I know with 
the private sector but, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an insult to say 
that the private sector can’t handle that entity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll also point to our friends in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
using the public sector. They’re spending . . . The LCBO 
[Liquor Control Board of Ontario] is the regulator, but also 
they’re retailing and they’re wholesaling . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, I understand that. They spent $650,000 on 
marketing for a government monopoly, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
the kind of expenditures we see out there from government 
monopolies, Mr. Speaker. We’ll let the private sector, we’ll let 
the market work here in Saskatchewan. That’s the best use of 
SLGA’s expertise. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I am having a difficult time hearing the 
answers, so if we could tone it down a little bit, both sides 
please. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly a day when the 
ministers don’t seem to know their files. And I think the 
minister has forgotten that he’s privatizing both the retail and 
the wholesale part of the cannabis business, and that’s what the 
question was about — using the Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. It was supported by Saskatchewan people in the Sask 
Party’s very own survey, but the Sask Party and this minister 
are ignoring it altogether. 
 
They also refuse to properly consult with municipalities and 
First Nations. Municipal and band leaders, Mr. Speaker, have a 
lot to consider as legalization approaches including drafting and 
passing very important bylaws. They will also be forced to take 
on many of the costs associated with it. 
 
But far from being transparent about how they’ll spend any 
money received from the sale of cannabis, the Sask Party aren’t 
even including any revenues or expenses in the budget. Mr. 
Speaker, how can the minister justify showing so little respect 
to the leaders and communities across the province with so little 
consultation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we won’t have another 
cabinet shuffle. But I do enjoy the wandering preambles from 
the members across the street. It makes it a lot of work over 
here to figure out who’s going to answer the questions. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we always are ready to answer their questions that 
they ask on behalf of the good citizens of this province . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I always 
appreciate the rhetoric from the member for Saskatoon Centre, 
good soul that he is. I’m glad that he’s putting things forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want people in this province to know that we 
spent a lot of time, did a lot of consultation, over 30,000 replies 
to the online questionnaire that was put forward. Mr. Speaker, 
we looked at that. We listened to that. We consulted with 
experts. We consulted with the study that was done at the 
University of Regina. We looked at what was taking place in 
other jurisdictions. 
 
And we want to come up with a model that may not necessarily 
be the same as other provinces but that will work well and serve 
the province’s people as effectively as it can and protect the 
safety and security of our young people, the safety and security 
of people that are on our roads. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look 
forward to some support from the people across as we go 
through the process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s mismanagement 
at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] is costing 
Saskatchewan people more and more every day. The GTH’s 
debt continues to grow and now the GTH can’t even pay the 
interest on the debt it already owes. Every land acquisition at 
the GTH has ended up in court, costing taxpayers millions, 
except of course for the one where Sask Party-connected 
landowners made off with millions. 
 
Although there’s no civil case in that sale, we know that a 
criminal one is currently under investigation. So with millions 
of dollars already wasted, with all of those lawsuits, what is the 
Premier’s plan to fix the GTH mess? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be glad to go for a 
drive with the member opposite sometime in the next few days 
and drive through the GTH so she can have a look at the 
number of businesses that are there, the number of vehicles that 
come and go through that business each and every day, the 
number of semi-trailers that are backed up and unloaded at the 
Loblaw facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased and proud of the number of jobs 
that exist in that facility and we’re going to continue to work so 
that we’ve got consistent growth and that that facility continues 
to do what it’s intended to do. It has rail access, Mr. Speaker. It 
has road access. And there are literally hundreds and hundreds 
of jobs that are in place there now and, Mr. Speaker, there will 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3425 

be more jobs to come as more businesses move in. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a project that’s necessary for the growth and economic 
development of our province, and we stand behind it and want 
to see it continue to prosper. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Steele: — Ask for leave to make an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Steele: — Through you and to you, Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery I’d like to introduce some more councillors and reeves 
from the Southwest. They’re in for the SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] convention this week in 
Regina. 
 
We have from the RM of Happyland the reeve, Tim Geiger. 
Give a wave there, Tim. Oh, that’s a big one. Thanks, Tim. 
They’re running a little late. Basil Dietrich. Basil. Tony 
Wagner. Oh, there you go. Late night. Darcy Ausmus. There he 
is. And also from the RM of Deer Forks we have Reeve Doug 
Smith — good one, Doug — and Russell Job. Welcome to your 
legislature. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 121, 
The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have an overwhelming 
desire to say with leave, immediately, but I will say next sitting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative 
de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 122, 
The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 122, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. Première lecture du projet de loi. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday, March 13th, 2018, the Opposition 
House Leader raised a question of privilege concerning 
comments made by the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
in this Assembly on December 7th, 2017. 
 
The case of the Opposition House Leader is that the minister 
was aware of lawsuits against the Government of Saskatchewan 
resulting from land purchases for the Regina bypass project and 
the Global Transportation Hub, as well as details and specifics 
associated with the lawsuits. The minister is quoted as stating in 
response to a question that there were no lawsuits against the 
Government of Saskatchewan. The Opposition House Leader’s 
charge is that the minister intentionally misled the Assembly 
and that constitutes contempt of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Subsequently at the beginning of routine proceedings yesterday, 
the minister addressed the charge by offering his apology to the 
Assembly for making an incorrect statement to the Assembly. 
The minister went on to state, and I quote: 
 

. . . it never was or never is my intention to knowingly 
mislead any member of this House. I consider all my 
colleagues honourable members, and I assure you that I 
would never deliberately mislead this House in any way. I 
apologize unequivocally to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
I deferred ruling yesterday to carefully consider all matters 
related to the case including the minister’s apology. I am now 
prepared to address the case. 
 
With the apology, I don’t believe there is any dispute over the 
facts of the matter. The question for the Speaker to decide is 
whether the apology, together with the explanation that there 



3426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

was no intention to knowingly mislead the Assembly, is 
sufficient to end the case. 
 
In the section “Proceedings against members” found on page 
277 of Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, 24th edition, it 
states the following: 
 

When a Member has made an acceptable apology for the 
offence, the critical motion has sometimes been 
withdrawn. In two instances, the House condemned the 
Member’s conduct as a breach of its privileges, but 
resolved that in consequence of the full and ample apology 
[the Member] had offered to the House, or that having 
regard to his withdrawal of the expressions complained of, 
it would not proceed any further in the matter. 

 
Similarly, at page 267 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in 
Canada, Second Edition, in the section “Where a Member is the 
subject of a question of privilege” it is stated, “An apology by 
the offending Member will invariably close the matter without 
the necessity of putting the motion to a vote.” These are 
standards that have been applied in this Assembly on numerous 
occasions in the past. 
 
More recently, on June 2, 2016, in consideration of a question 
of privilege involving the leak of budget information, Speaker 
Tochor cited House of Commons precedent to rule that an 
apology is not always sufficient to end a case. In his view, the 
apology made with respect to the budget leak was not sufficient 
and he allowed the case to proceed. 
 
It is my belief that members come to this place with honourable 
intentions. When a mistake is made, the right thing to do is to 
apologize. There is no doubt that the consequence of a 
member’s action is an important consideration in determining 
questions of privilege. There might well be instances when an 
ample and genuine apology is not sufficient, but it is this 
Speaker’s general belief that the willingness of a member to 
make amends should be an important consideration in deciding 
cases. 
 
It is my decision that the minister’s apology is sufficient reason 
this case need not proceed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 77 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m still 

musing about things the Minister of Justice said in question 
period, and it sounded like he was asking me to go for a drive 
with him out to the GTH. I’ve been there several times so I 
don’t know if there’s anything there that he can show me, but if 
he wants to go for a drive, let’s do it. I think it would be a great 
opportunity to get to know him a little better and show him 
around the GTH, and show him all, I could show him all the 
land that was sold and then bought back by the GTH. I could 
show him the wide expanse of land that SaskPower bought 
they’re now trying to sell because they can’t use it anymore. It’s 
actually 140 acres, Mr. Speaker, and it’s two properties. 
 
So I could certainly show the minister around, and I could show 
him what’s really happening out at the GTH. So I’d be happy to 
take him up on that opportunity. 
 
However, what’s at hand right now of course, Mr. Speaker, is 
adjourned debates. And so I’m going to move into something a 
little more mundane, and that would be the bill before us, Bill 
No. 77, an Act to amend superannuation Acts. So if the minister 
needs to get to business here, I’ll move on to the superannuation 
Act. 
 
At any rate, these bills that are before us, we have a few finance 
bills up today, and this again is efforts on parts of the ministry, 
and certainly the drafters at the Ministry of Justice, to bring 
forward some administrative changes that are needed to 
facilitate the efficiency of the various superannuation plans. In 
this case we’re talking about The Liquor Board Superannuation 
Act. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, superannuation plans have 
certainly been around this province for many, many years and, 
you know, even the term itself tells us that this is a bit of a 
dated plan because we don’t use the word “superannuation” 
hardly anymore. Now we call them pension plans. 
 
But this bill is in relation to The Liquor Board Superannuation 
Act in particular. There’s two bills that are being amended, but 
the first one I’ll talk about is The Liquor Board Superannuation 
Act. And we know from the proud history of SLGA how 
important it is, to not only the people of Saskatchewan whom it 
serves very well, but also to the people that have the 
opportunities to build careers there. And the folks who have 
built a career at the SLGA and have had an opportunity to 
actually stay with it long enough to have the entitlement of a 
pension at the end of their work career, certainly kudos go out 
to them for good service. 
 
And, I think, too often these days when we talk about service of 
the public, or public service, it’s almost seen as a dirty word by 
some people. And having been a public servant for 17 and a 
half years, it gave me no end of pride to say that I was in Her 
Majesty’s service. To me, it’s one of the noblest careers that 
you can seek. And unfortunately, I think the public service 
sometimes gets a bad rap these days, where there’s an 
assumption that people in the public service can’t get the job 
done. And we heard that even today from the Minister from 
Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
So it’s unfortunate that that attitude prevails in certain quarters 
when really the work that the public service do is very good and 
they’re very capable. And they’re very good at things like 
distribution and wholesaling, and certainly SLGA has 
demonstrated their ability to do that. And the people of 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3427 

Saskatchewan wanted that and they trust the people of SLGA to 
do that, and yet we have a minister who just dismisses that and 
says it can’t be done and that they’re not capable. 
 
So it’s really unfortunate that that’s the attitude that we see 
coming forward from this government at this point in time. 
Now the folks at the Liquor Board, it’s now SLGA, but this was 
back when it was called The Liquor Board Superannuation Act. 
It actually, this was one of those old pension plans, and it’s 
been closed to new members since 1977. So if my math is right, 
that’s 40 years ago, Mr. Speaker. I was still in high school. And 
as of that time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Graduated in ’79. 
This was when the membership plan was closed, or the 
membership to the superannuation plan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So as the minister informed us, there really now is only two 
active members still using that plan. And they’ve exceeded 35 
years of service obviously, and they’re eligible to retire. So the 
government decided in 2012 to engage and review the 
governance of both the Liquor Board and the public service 
superannuation plan because there’s one for the public service 
as well. And because these closed plans, the membership is 
actively declining, and so there needs to be some adjustments 
made in terms of the administration and the work that’s 
required in administering these pension plans. 
 
So right now this particular plan, the Liquor Board 
superannuation plan, the only work that’s required at this point 
in time is simply to pay the pensions. There’s no more pension 
contributions coming in, and there hasn’t been for many 
decades. So the review from the third party . . . And the minister 
didn’t tell us who the third party was, but we know that they 
engaged a third party and the review was accepted by the 
former minister responsible for The Liquor Board 
Superannuation Act. Anyways, the key recommendation was to 
designate the minister as the sole member of the Liquor Board 
Superannuation Commission once the plan approached zero 
active members. And certainly as we get down to two, that’s 
very close to zero active members. 
 
Now the minister won’t have to do this by himself or herself. 
Actually it will be supported by PEBA [Public Employees 
Benefits Agency], the public employees benefits organization. 
So they will continue to provide any necessary administrative 
services. So if we look specifically at the changes to The Liquor 
Board Superannuation Act, we can see that this is being done 
through section 3 of the current Act, which reads, it says: 
 

This Act shall be administered by a commission to be 
known as The Liquor Board Superannuation Commission, 
which shall consist of three members to be appointed by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council, one of whom shall be 
nominated as chairperson. One at least of the members 
shall be an employee and representative of the employees 
of the Liquor Board. 

 
So as you can see, back in the day when employees were 
actively contributing, it was important that one of the members 
be an employee to ensure that the employees’ needs were being 
met. Now that there are no more contributions coming in, the 
new Act, the suggestions being brought forward in Bill 77 read 

as follows: 
 

3(1) This Act shall be administered by a commission to be 
known as The Liquor Board Superannuation Commission. 

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

(2) The minister is the sole member of the commission. 
 
(3) The necessary salaries and expenses of administering 
this Act shall be a charge on and be paid out of the Liquor 
Board Superannuation Fund. 

 
So that’s the way it’s going to happen now. I’m not sure why 
even a commission was retained, as of course when you have 
the minister being the sole member of the commission, it isn’t 
really a commission because I think the definition of a 
commission is more than one person. But this is the way 
they’ve chosen to word this. It seems appropriate for the 
minister to be handling this now, along with the assistance from 
PEBA. So this seems to be an appropriate change. 
 
The next change in the Act is an amendment to The Children’s 
Law Act, and what it’s basically doing is changing the name. So 
it used to be The Children’s Law Act and now they’re 
substituting The Children’s Law Act, 1997. So it looks like 
some very basic changes to The Children’s Law Act and very 
housekeeping in nature. 
 
Then the third change or the final changes is a change to section 
47.5(5) of The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
The current provision is expiry date of 1995 and then the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council then has the ability to change it 
from year to year.  
 
The minister indicated in her comments when this bill was 
introduced that this was to . . . They call it the restricted 
retirement option, or commonly referred to as RRO. It’s “. . . a 
means for executive government and the Crown Investments 
Corporation to offer early retirement to eligible employees in 
corporate downsizing or restructuring.” And all the amendment 
does is it removes the requirement for an annual extension, and 
now also the annual order in council. So it’s basically a 
housekeeping change to reflect the fact that this has been going 
on since 1995. So 23 years later there’s now being a change to 
remove that administrative requirement. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll certainly have more questions for 
the minister once we’re in committee, so that is the extent of my 
comments on Bill No. 77. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 77 be now read a second time. Is 
this the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 



3428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 77, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 
Bill No. 78 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 78 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
some engaging conversation going on today that I would really 
like to take part in, but I think I’m going to be stuck with 
addressing the bill at hand. 
 
So I’m looking today at Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2017. When you take a look at the 
comments by the minister back in November when the bill was 
first introduced, what it’s talking about here is some need for 
some changes brought forward by the stakeholders, the plan 
stakeholders themselves. 
 
The minister indicated that there are 25,000 plan members in 
the municipal employees’ pension plan. And when you think 
about that, that’s a remarkable, remarkable number of people 
that are employed in our municipal sector — 25,000 people in 
Saskatchewan in the pension plan. So again, these are public 
servants, Mr. Speaker, that are serving the people of 
Saskatchewan in their capacity as a servant of the public.  
 
And again, I want to give a shout-out to those workers and the 
important role that the public service plays in providing services 
to the people of Saskatchewan, in ensuring that our hospitals, 
our schools, our highways — all of those important services are 
being carried out to the best of their ability. And again I say this 
with pride as a former public servant, and certainly the service I 
think that we are doing even as MLAs continues, you know, to 
be service for the public. And I don’t think we can ever 
underestimate the importance of that. 
 
So the municipal employees’ pension plan is a defined benefit 
pension plan. Again as a federal employee, I was also a 
participant in a defined benefit plan. I think that’s one that’s 
seen as kind of a Cadillac of pension plans, Mr. Speaker, and it 
provides a lot of certainty to people in their retirement years 
that I think defined contribution plans don’t provide. And so it’s 
certainly a very important benefit for people to be part of. 
 
So having 25,000 plan members means this is still a very, very 
utilized plan and very important plan. There’s also 737 
employers participating in the plan. So if you think about all the 
urban municipalities and rural municipalities, 737 is likely a 
very, very large portion of those municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

Now one of the concerns that was brought forward to the 
ministry by the commission for the pension plan was the 
financial sustainability of the municipal employees’ pension 
plan, and I’ll refer to that as M-E-P-P for the Hansard here on. 
So MEPP, M-E-P-P, in consultation with their actuaries and the 
stakeholders, sought approval from the Legislative Assembly to 
remove some provisions that affect the financial stability of the 
plan. 
 
So the first thing they’re trying to do in the bill is “. . . to 
eliminate the portability of the pension benefit for members 
eligible for pension upon termination of employment.” So what 
happens there is that you can’t take out a lump sum of money. 
Apparently that’s something you could do now. Certainly in the 
defined benefits plan I have that is not an option. 
 
So it looks like that option, what it does is it puts pressures on 
the pension plan itself and can influence the steady stream of 
payments that they use to fund their members in retirement. So 
they’re asking to remove the eligibility for a payout at the 
termination of employment, and then the amendment will cause 
the option of a temporary pension to transferring members to 
become redundant. Consistent with the elimination of the 
portability, members who have pre-1994 contributions will not 
be allowed to remove a portion of those on termination or 
retirement as a partial settlement of their benefit. 
 
So it’s basically locking in, if I understand this correctly, 
locking in those contributions which will be continued to be 
paid out by the pension plan rather than a lump sum. 
 
Now once they’re retired or terminated, anybody who has given 
more than 50 per cent of the contributions may use the excess 
funds to increase the value of their monthly pension benefit. 
 
So under the bill, they’re going to be required to remove “. . . 
their excess contributions out of the pension plan within two 
years of their termination date or immediately upon their 
retirement.” So again, what this is doing for the MEPP and the 
commissioners that are overlooking it, it’s going to ensure that 
there’s no unforeseen liabilities coming out of these increased 
pensions. 
 
Also, “Amendments of a more administrative nature are also 
required.” So they are going to change a few things, review the 
composition. Currently the commission composition needs to 
be reviewed every five years, and this was done in 2015 and 
submitted to the Minister of Finance. And so the 
recommendations coming out of that is saying that the election 
of chairperson and vice-chairperson for the commission shall be 
extended now from one year to two years. That was the 
recommendation that’s been accepted. 
 
Also recommended that there be more members on the 
commission. And there’s no reasons given here why that was 
seen as necessary. But obviously the plan covers a large, wide 
swath of employees and employers, so perhaps there was a 
desire for more representation on the commission. As a result, 
the suggestions in this bill are that one member be appointed by 
the employers who employ firefighters and police officers. 
 
And we certainly know that firefighters always come here every 
year, Mr. Speaker, and present to us about some of the troubles 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3429 

they are having with their contract negotiations at a municipal 
level. And that is an ongoing battle for many of those 
firefighters who are amongst the lowest paid in Canada. And 
certainly we know that municipalities aren’t being given any 
extra funds to be able to deal with those pressures. But I think 
this is an opportunity for the government to maybe step in and 
provide some relief, not just to the firefighters but to the 
municipal governments that require their services. 
 
So there’s going to be a member now who represents the 
firefighters, and then a new representative appointed by CUPE 
[Canadian Union of Public Employees] that will represent the 
MEPP members on CUPE. So I don’t know how many of 
MEPP members actually belong to the CUPE union, the 
Canadian Union of Public Employees, but I imagine it’s 
significant, Mr. Speaker. And of course that is why they’re 
seeking representation on the commission itself. 
 
As I spoke in the previous bill, it’s always important for the 
employees to have a voice at the table when decisions are being 
made regarding their retirements. And we see what happens to, 
like, the folks at Sears who weren’t even able to access their 
pension plan because of debtors and creditors that were lined up 
when Sears went bankrupt. So definitely employees need to be 
represented and to have a voice on these commissions to ensure 
that their members’ interests are being protected. 
 
So the minister went on to say that this was to provide equitable 
representation for all stakeholders, which seems to make sense. 
And then there’s also some changes to enhance the 
administration of the plan. A definition of full-time hours is 
being created in order to facilitate a consistent interpretation of 
full-time hours. And it’s also simplifying reporting to the plan 
for the employers. 
 
The next amendment will require all employers to remit 
contributions within 15 days after the end of a pay period, and 
this will provide a more equitable basis for the timely 
remittance of all contributions to all employers. This seems to 
me to be very straightforward, and certainly I can’t see why 
those remittances would not be submitted for any period greater 
than 15 days. So those changes seem to be appropriate, and I 
think will help the commission do its business more efficiently, 
and also I think ensure that the municipalities are more tuned 
into the requirements of the commission and make sure that the 
remittances are done in a timely manner. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, we will be able to discuss 
more of this with the minister while we’re in committee. So at 
this point that’s the extent of my comments on Bill No. 78, An 
Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 78, The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 78, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 79 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This bill 
is also a bill in relation to pension plans. In this case it is PEPP, 
the public employees pension plan, which all of us are members 
of. And so of course it’s very near and dear to the hearts of 
those here in the Chamber today. 
 
And the changes that are being made are again more 
administrative in nature. But the minister began her comments 
describing the PEPP plan and, as she indicated, it was 
established in 1977. And I think that was the beginning of the 
defined contribution era for pensions here, not only in 
Saskatchewan, but I think across the board. That was a shift 
done around in the late ’70s, and it was meant to provide a 
savings for retirement and retirement income for the employees 
of executive government, government agencies, Crown 
corporations, and other employees. 
 
So I don’t know if you have a guess, Mr. Speaker, as to how 
many employees are in the plan right now, in the pension plan. 
It is 65,000 members that are currently members of PEPP — 
65,000 members of PEPP, 146 employers. So at some point all 
of those 65,000 members will receive a pension. 
 
And there are six amendments being proposed in the bill. The 
first would provide immediate vesting and locking in of 
required member and employer contributions. So vesting, what 
it does is it entitles the member to the contributions made by the 
employer on the member’s behalf. So as you know, our 
employer, the Crown, provides a contribution. And then if you 
terminate before the vesting, you would forfeit the employer 
contributions, which then would be used to defray 
administrative costs. 
 
So right now the requirement for vesting is one year, and 
locking in means their balance must be used to provide a 
retirement income. Currently locking in happens at one year. 
The proposed amendment will mean vesting and locking in 
occur when the member enrols in PEPP. So the vesting 
requirement is immediate now, and not one year. I think that 



3430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

will have, certainly make things easier for the administrators of 
PEPP, as long as employees have this explained to them, 
 
And I know when we first started employment for the 
government, I think, Mr. Speaker, you’d recall that day in 
November 2011 when all of us new MLAs were hauled in and 
explained all these things in great detail. And I have to admit I 
forgot almost all of it upon hearing it because there was . . . I 
know. Shock. A look of shock from the Law Clerk, Mr. 
Speaker. It kind of went in one ear and out a very befuddled 
head, and out the other ear. There was just so much going on. 
And often pension plans are the last thing you’re thinking about 
when you start employment with an agency that has a pension 
plan. 
 
So I think it’s important for the pension plans to ensure that 
they continue to remind members about these types of issues — 
for example, the vesting in. I know that recently we all got a 
letter in the mail from our pension plan explaining a few 
changes. And I actually read it for . . . I was quite proud of 
myself. I can’t remember right now what was in it, but I did 
read it, and I’m sure that PEPP appreciates if the employees do 
take the time to pay attention to those things. I guess I’ll have to 
go back and look at it again just so I can remember what’s in 
there. 
 
There are other amendments being proposed here. First of all, 
spouses of PEPP members are going to be given additional 
rights. In the case of a member’s death, there’s a clarification 
that the spouse of a deceased member may keep any amount left 
to him or her in a PEPP, so that will help spouses. I know that 
my colleague from Centre has introduced a bill about parentage. 
And I’m not sure how this would help a spouse if they’re 
same-sex, and I’m assuming that that would be eligible. But 
even the children, adopted children, or children from same-sex 
couples where the natural parent may pass away, would that 
child then be eligible? So I think those might be questions that 
we would have to look at and ask the minister in committee, 
and the minister’s staff. 
 
So this says the change will give the spouse the same rights as 
any other non-working member of the PEPP program. If it’s a 
breakup, a spousal relationship breakup, it would permit the 
spouse or ex-spouse member to keep in PEPP any amount 
resulting from a division of the member’s account balance. So 
when there’s a breakup, there will be an allowance for leaving 
that money in PEPP and not having to withdraw it. 
 
So with respect to that amount, they would have the same rights 
as any other non-working member to PEPP. I don’t know what 
other non-working members in PEPP there would be, but it 
sounds like this is a common occurrence. So there you go. 
 
There’s also another amendment that’s going to remove a 
15-day waiting period for the unlocking of voluntary 
contributions on termination of employment. Fifteen days 
doesn’t seem all that long, so I’m not really sure why that’s a 
problem. But perhaps those who are terminated would like 
immediate access to those funds if they’re eligible, so I suppose 
that would be one reason for that. 
 
Also there’s some changes with respect to the authority of the 
pension board. This board is a trustee of PEPP and the body 

responsible for administering it. And the amendments here 
would clarify that the board can make policy to administer 
PEPP with respect to out-of-province members and their 
monies which are subject to the laws of other provinces. So 
that’s the fifth amendment that’s being proposed here. Those 
are all from the recommendations . . . These five changes are 
being recommended by the Public Employees Pension Board. 
 
And there’s an administrative final sixth amendment being 
proposed, and it’s just reflecting a change in name from the 
union, Unifor. In the Act it’s currently referred to as 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union, but they’re 
now known as Unifor, so that is the administrative change that 
is being proposed. So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the actual 
changes themselves, the change to Unifor is found in clause 
3(4)(b)(ii). And if you look at that clause right now, 3(4)(b)(ii) 
says, one person appointed by the Canadian union . . . No, that’s 
not the right one. Here it is: “one person appointed by the 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada.” 
 
So if you look at the board right now there are a number of 
unions that are represented. There’s the government and general 
employees’ union, the Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union, SGEU; communications, Unifor is the 
second one now; the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers; the Canadian Union of Public Employees; and then a 
chairperson who is also appointed. 
 
So these unions are all currently represented on the pension 
board as well as people from the Public Service Commission. 
All three of the main Crowns — SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and 
SaskTel are the larger Crowns are in there. Also the 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic and the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, as well as Crop Insurance, Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
So it’s an interesting collection of agencies that have 
representation on the board, and certainly unions are well 
represented, as makes sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The next change is to section 5(1), and that is the powers of the 
board. This is being repealed, which has several powers that are 
described in the current, and it’s being rewritten. And I think 
these changes, if you look at the explanatory notes for section 5, 
the comments that were provided there say that it states 
explicitly, “The amendment states explicitly that the . . . Board 
has the ability to make policy to administer the Plan subject to 
the pension standards legislation of jurisdictions outside 
Saskatchewan.” So I think this is attempting to bring it into 
more of a uniform provincial application across the board — no 
pun intended. 
 
The next section that’s being amended is section 18, which is 
being repealed, and this is the vesting and locking in section 
that I referred to earlier. Section 18.1(1) is the place where we 
see the change to the 15 days after the date of termination. And 
then after subsection 21(7) there’s a new one being added, and 
this is the section that deals with the spouse and the benefits 
that may remain in the plan to a spouse, to add that clarification. 
 
A minor change to section 24(5), striking out “must be” and 
changing it to “may be.” So these are things that lawyers love to 
look at. And I’m not sure what the Law Clerk thinks about this, 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3431 

but he may like “must be;” he might like “may be.” He always 
has an opinion on the proper language and he’s, I would say, 
always right. 
 
Section 24(6) has an addition of (6.1) and this again is where it 
deals with the breakup of a marriage and the eligibilities or the 
opportunities the former spouse may have if there’s been a 
division in the pension and they can leave their funds vested. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to have some questions for the 
minister about this in committee and I look forward to that 
opportunity. So at this point I think that will end my comments 
in the debate on Bill No. 79, An Act to amend The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 79, The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To what committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate Bill No. 79, The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 80 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. This is another 
bill that the Minister of Finance introduced back in November. 
As the suite of bills that were introduced, the three previous 
ones deal with pensions, and this is now dealing with the 
Municipal Financing Corporation. And as you can imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, the municipalities and the important work that they do 
are always going to require access to borrowing in order to 
accomplish the capital needs and infrastructure needs that the 
municipalities face. 
 
So there’s been a corporation around for many, many decades, 
the Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan. And 
what’s being reflected in the changes today, as the minister 
indicated, is that the evolution of capital markets that have 
happened since the 1970s and the length of terms of borrowing 
have changed as well. So some of the amendments are going to 

be in relation to the borrowing requirements for municipalities, 
and I’ll get into that in a minute. 
 
The second change that they’re going to attempt with this 
amendment bill is to increase the corporation’s debt limit from 
350 million to 500 million. It was originally set at 250 million 
in the 1970s and it remained there for almost 40 years. But just 
eight years ago it was raised to 350 million and now it’s being 
raised again. 
 
So you might ask yourself, is the borrowing increasing such that 
there’s that much more indebtedness from municipal 
corporations? And then that leads me to the question of why 
municipalities are being put more and more into debt, and I 
think it’s something that we see that is concerning. And when 
municipalities are facing increased pressures . . .  
 
When I think of rural municipalities and the road infrastructure 
problems that they’re facing simply because of the increase in 
rain events that we’ve seen in the last five, six years — 
certainly you’ll recall the heavy floods of 2011 and 2012, 2013; 
the infrastructure damage that’s being done by large trucks. 
And, you know, you wonder whether or not new municipalities 
are able to access the funding that they need to adequately deal 
with their infrastructure needs, sewage works, waterworks. All 
of those are hugely expensive propositions. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Municipalities are dealing with landfill issues especially now 
when a lot of landfills are being required. And this is something 
I heard at SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] in the sessions with the ministers. I’ve gone for a 
few years now to the environment portion of the SUMA 
session. And every year there are several questions about the 
costs that municipalities are facing with respect to landfills and 
many of the concerns around inconsistencies in application of 
the guidelines, where municipalities aren’t really sure what 
they’re being asked to do and they’re getting conflicting 
information from the officers. Many concerns about costs and 
what municipalities see, the small urban municipalities see as 
unrealistic expectations on the part of the ministry when it 
comes to relocation or changing, going to a regional model for 
landfills. 
 
And I’m thinking of one community in particular who had met 
approvals after approvals after approvals for their landfill. They 
had great pride in their landfill and then one day, all of a 
sudden, it wasn’t good enough. And they didn’t understand 
what had changed. They knew they had a good, solid clay base 
for the bottom of their landfill and they were being told they 
had to spend several hundred thousand dollars on an 
impermeable liner for what they had been told for years was 
already a sufficient liner of clay. 
 
So those kinds of things are really frustrating municipalities, 
and you certainly hear it in the SUMA conventions when we go 
to the individual panels where urban municipalities bring up 
these concerns. And infrastructure costs don’t get cheaper, as 
we all know, and I think urban municipalities . . . This signals to 
me that the fact . . . We have to raise the borrowing limit from 
$350 million to $500 million tells me that municipalities need 
access to a lot more credit. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, who 



3432 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

pays for that credit is the taxpayers and the local residents of 
those communities through their property taxes. 
 
So it’s concerning and I’m not sure what it signals in the long 
run, but those are certainly questions that we’re going to want 
to raise with the minister. And is there a better way for them to 
access that capital rather than exceeding or increasing the 
borrowing limit? Their debt is, like the minister indicated, their 
debt is a self-sustaining debt just like the debt of SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and SaskTel, and it doesn’t affect the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] operating debt. Now of course we 
know that GRF operating debt is only one small part of the total 
debt of the public debt of this province. 
 
And we’ve seen, particularly with SaskPower, we know that 
their debt ratio is way higher than what is healthy and that their 
borrowing has also increased. We’ve seen bills like this for 
SaskPower in the last few years as well. So in a world where 
debt is becoming more and more commonplace . . . and I think 
even personal debt. We see alarming figures in Canada relating 
to people’s level of personal debt and concerns about some sort 
of correction in the market which could really significantly 
impact thousands of people. We see that now with our Crowns 
and certainly our municipalities. 
 
Local governments of course aren’t able to run deficits. And 
we’ve talked about that a lot in the House, and there are 
petitions that are coming forward about that. So they’re 
required to be balanced, Mr. Speaker, and if borrowing is the 
only way that they can deal with it, that debt becomes the 
burden for the municipality. So the minister acknowledged that 
there’s demand from local governments for infrastructure 
funding, for increasing their debt limit, and that is the way that 
they’re being given capacity to meet the needs of their citizens. 
So it’s sad when you think about increasing the debt is the only 
way to meet needs, and it makes you wonder how that’s going 
to work in the long run as we increase these debt levels more 
and more all the time. 
 
So I’m just going to speak now just to the particulars of the 
changes that are being proposed to The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Act. So the first one is simply a gender change to 
refer . . . rather “his,” it’s “his or her.” These are often ones you 
will see brought forward by the drafters to ensure that gender 
appropriate language is being used in the bills. 
 
Another change that we still see cleanups happening since the 
— my colleague from Saskatoon Centre talked about this last 
night — the change from department to ministry. So we’re still 
cleaning up that language as we go through these bills, and that 
happens in this bill. So Section 14(2)(a) is being amended to 
strike out “department” and substitute “ministry.” 
 
There’s another change in here that I will want to have a 
discussion with the minister about, because they’re changing 
Section 18, 19, 24, and 30 and 31 to change the reference to the 
Consolidated Fund and substitute the GRF. So we will have 
questions about why that change was needed. The minister did 
not talk about that in her comments in November, so we’ll have 
a question about that. 
 
Section 22(1) is being amended, and that’s what I talked about a 
few minutes ago, the increase of the borrowing limit from 350 

million to $500 million. I suppose . . . And again I’ll check with 
the ministry, but it would be, I assume, at favourable interest 
rates and that’s why this fund is so important. 
 
There’s a change to Section 28 and I’m just going to 
double-check the original section to make sure we cover this 
properly. Section 28 currently reads, “The Companies Act and 
The Securities Act do not apply to the corporation.” This is 
being amended to add The Business Corporations Act to the 
corporation. Also The Securities Act is being updated to 
reference 1988 which is the name, the new name of the bill. 
 
So these are again questions we can ask the minister at the time 
of committee, why The Business Corporations Act is now being 
deemed to not apply because that is not something she covered 
in her comments in the second reading speech. So for people 
that are curious about that, you’ll have to go to the committees 
page on the Hansard and hopefully that will be something we 
address at that point. 
 
And finally there’s some changes to the regulatory powers of 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. When it comes to this, 
currently there are three powers of regulation that the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council has, particularly prescribing the 
rates of interest that the corporation can charge for their loans, 
prescribing fees and charges, and governing the manners in 
which the corporation gives loans. Now those are being 
changed a little bit, and there’s always the catch-all phrase 
that’s being added in this clause: “. . . respecting any other 
matter or thing that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
considers necessary to carry out the intent of this Act.” And 
then (e) is also an addition: “. . . prescribing any matter or thing 
required or authorized by this Act to be prescribed in the 
regulations.” 
 
This is again something I often like to raise in the House, is the 
extension of regulatory authorities being provided in many of 
these bills, which basically means that those regulations do not 
go through scrutiny in the House. When regulations are passed, 
they go through Executive Council, and that is something that I 
think should be of concern. 
 
But as we get more complex and the regulatory world we live in 
gets more complex, I understand the pressure from the 
regulatory side to not have to have every little thing come 
through the House. So that’s always a give-and-take and a bit of 
a tug-of-war, Mr. Speaker. But I think when we only see the 
bills that come through this House and we don’t see the 
regulations, it is something that may escape scrutiny, and I 
think that is something of concern to the citizens of this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think as I indicated we will have questions 
for the minister when we are in committee on this bill, and we’ll 
raise them at that point in time. So at this point in time, I will 
conclude my comments in the adjourned debate on Bill No. 80, 
An Act to amend The Municipal Financing Corporation Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 80, The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3433 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate Bill No. 80, The Municipal 
Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 108 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 108 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter into the debate on Bill No. 108, An 
Act to amend The Statute Law. Mr. Speaker, I have been on my 
feet I think one or two times since you have been elected as 
Speaker, but it wasn’t appropriate at the time for me to 
congratulate you. I think we were right in the heat of question 
period. But let me now take the opportunity to congratulate you 
on your election as Speaker. I think you will do a fine and fair 
job in your new role. 
 
And since I am talking about the Speaker election I also want to 
take the opportunity to congratulate the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale for doing such a phenomenal job running 
and putting her name forward as Speaker. When you’re in 
opposition and you’re an opposition of 12 votes and you decide 
to put your name forward as Speaker, you know that you’re 
battling against the odds, Mr. Speaker. But I think she proved 
herself very effective in making it to the, I think it was the 
second-last round of balloting, tied for third, I suppose, place. 
And I think that’s commendable and absolutely wonderful. And 
while I’m very happy to see you in the role, Mr. Speaker, I do 
hope that some day soon we will see a woman in that chair, Mr. 
Speaker, some day in the not-too-distant future, Mr. Speaker. 
But please don’t take that as any indication of my 
commendation and my praise for you in this role and how well I 
think you will do in this role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s been a while since I’ve entered into adjourned debates. 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I was lucky enough to — or unlucky 
enough — to not be in adjourned debates last session while I 
was filling the role as interim leader. So forgive me if I’m a 
little rusty, Mr. Speaker, but I do have a few comments I would 
like to make about this bill this afternoon and I will try my best. 
 
This particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is essentially updating and 
modernizing the language in many statutes that we have in the 

province. It’s largely a housekeeping bill, Mr. Speaker, and that 
was highlighted by the Minister of Justice’s remarks at the time 
when he tabled the bill. But it does do somewhat interesting . . . 
It does reflect some interesting changes that are happening in 
our society right now. In particular, changes to some references 
to Her Majesty and changing them to references to the Crown. 
And we’ve seen this in a few other bills as well, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s, I think, reflective, or being made in reflection of the 
current age of our Queen. And it’s sort of a little, always a little 
depressing to think about the passing, or the potential future 
passing . . . I guess not potential, but the future passing of 
somebody, even if it’s someone you don’t particularly know 
well. But if you’ve lived your whole life, and we’ve all lived 
our whole lives with the Queen being alive, it’s just strange to 
think that in the potentially not-too-distant future we will have, 
instead of a Queen, a King. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And I don’t know too much frankly about the monarchy or the 
hierarchy of the monarchy or who is next in that line. I pay 
more attention to the antics, frankly, of Prince Harry and Prince 
Will. What can I say? They’re more my generation and they’re 
more interesting. They’re up to a little bit more shenanigans 
than their more senior members of their family, Mr. Speaker. So 
forgive me if I forget . . . Well as far as we know, I should say. 
Who knows? Maybe they’re just less effective at hiding what 
they’re up to. 
 
But I did watch The Crown over the course of Christmas break, 
and I was very fascinated to hear about, learn about a lot of the 
things that the monarchy has been up to and the background and 
the life of the Queen, which frankly I didn’t know about and 
didn’t care too much about, if I’m being perfectly honest with 
you, Mr. Speaker. But it seems like she’s lived a pretty 
interesting life, interesting enough to necessitate a few seasons 
of a Netflix series that’s actually pretty riveting and I’d 
recommend to anybody if they haven’t watched it, Mr. Speaker. 
Frankly I was a Princess Margaret fan more so than the Queen. 
But, you know, you can’t choose who gets to be Queen. She’s 
lovely too. Well my colleague informs me that Prince William 
is next on the list of . . . In any event, we’re going to have a 
King next, therefore we need to update our legislation. 
 
And there is a long process in updating the legislation. It’s a lot 
of things that we don’t necessarily think about, and it’s 
obviously something that wasn’t thought about at the time that 
the legislation was drafted. But she’s a pretty resilient Queen, 
and she’s toughed it out for quite a long time. She’s seen her 
way through a couple of world wars and a couple of other 
tragedies in her own life and tragedies in her country. And so I 
can understand why the drafters at the time, I suppose, thought 
she would never die, so we would never have to worry about 
that issue. But here we are today updating the legislation to 
reflect the fact and the reality of the day that some day she will 
end up having to pass on. 
 
The legislation also updates some other language that used to be 
standard language and is no longer standard language. For 
example, the legislation replaces the language ex parte to 
“without notice.” And that’s something that’s been happening 
throughout, I’d say, the legal world, Mr. Speaker. 
 



3434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

The rules of court in Queen’s Bench were recently updated to 
be more plain language so that folks who access the justice 
system— and more and more folks are accessing the justice 
system without counsel, frankly either because they choose to, 
but more often because they can’t afford counsel — and they’re 
able to do that and look at legislation and look at the rules of 
court and actually understand what is being written and be able 
to hopefully follow those rules accordingly. 
 
So ex parte is a Latin term. Most people, myself included, don’t 
know extensive amounts of Latin — nor should we, frankly. I 
know what I need to know. I know what ex parte meant and 
that’s pretty much the extent of it. But it just makes sense to 
modernize it and to change it to “without notice” because that’s 
what it meant in Latin. And it makes sense for us, if we want to 
have a more inclusive justice system, if we want to be more 
inclusive as legislators, if we want to have a more inclusive 
legislative process, that we’re making the language reflect that 
inclusivity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This legislation is also replacing any phrase that’s . . . or any 
time it says “department” with “ministry.” I know my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre had a few things to say about that last 
night, and I was privileged to hear that fiery second reading 
speech. He’s always good for giving a fiery speech, especially 
in the evening, which is nice to re-energize the room after a 
supper break, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think I can do justice to 
what he did yesterday, so I’d ask if anyone is watching or 
reading my remarks, check out my colleague’s remarks from 
Saskatoon Centre because he had a few things to say about how 
long it’s taken to update “department” to “ministry,” Mr. 
Speaker. But it is interesting that that’s being changed. But 
considering I don’t know when it was changed, when we used 
to call it department and then we called it ministry — it was a 
bit before my time of being elected — but it does make sense to 
update that as well. 
 
Another one that’s being changed is replacing outdated 
references to legislation that’s contained without certain Acts. 
Sometimes you’ll be looking through legislation and you’ll find 
that it references an Act that doesn’t exist anymore, which can 
be very frustrating when you’re trying to find an answer for 
somebody or trying to figure out how a process is supposed to 
work within government or what the rules are within a certain 
situation and then you go and you find out that it’s referencing a 
section of an Act that doesn’t exist anymore or an entire Act 
that doesn’t exist anymore. And then you have to try and figure 
out what that means and what it should be referencing even 
though it’s not referencing it anymore, Mr. Speaker. So I’m 
happy to see that some work has been done to clean that up. I 
think it’ll create some more efficiencies and hey, maybe it’ll 
save somebody a few bucks on their next legal bill because it’ll 
save them a little bit of time to look something up. 
 
Another change that’s happening is this bill is removing the 
language “as amended from time to time” which frankly is a 
redundant thing to say, Mr. Speaker. Bills can be amended from 
time to time whether or not that specific wording is in there. So 
it’s not really necessary. So it makes sense to get rid of that 
reference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I know I’ve had several of my colleagues already 
weigh in on this particular bill, so I know I’ll have some 

questions at committee for the Minister of Justice. I have a lot 
of questions for the Minister of Justice on a lot of issues, 
especially around what is happening with respect to the 
cannabis legalization and how that whole process is rolling out. 
But I will also have some questions at committee for the 
Minister of Justice, more particularly on this bill. So as such, I 
will end debate, move this bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 108, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 108, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 109 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 109 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 
modifiant le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise yet again this afternoon to speak to this companion bill of 
the bill I was just recently speaking about, Bill 109, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2017. Similarly to the last bill that I was 
speaking about, this bill makes several housekeeping changes to 
many Acts including, similar to the last bill, replacing the Latin 
phrase ex parte to “without notice,” updating some references 
to outdated departments. So similar to the last bill. 
 
I’m not too sure why we had two bills that are doing a similar 
thing — if it was one of the statute law amendment bills was 
already created and ready and then some more updates were 
found after the fact — and why this couldn’t have been rolled 
into one bill all together. I trust the work of the extremely 
qualified Justice lawyers, and I know that their work is always 
thoughtful and strong, so in no way am I questioning, if it was 
the decision of a Justice lawyer to create two separate bills. But 
if it wasn’t, then I’m not too sure. I’m just not too sure why we 
have two bills that seem to be doing the same thing, but with 
different pieces of legislation. 
 
But here we are with these two bills. Again, similar to the last 
bill that I just spoke about, it’s removing some language like 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3435 

“as amended from time to time,” Mr. Speaker, which makes 
sense like I already said, because it’s redundant. I think I’m 
being redundant. But then again we have two bills which are 
doing similar things, so I’m going to speak again about things 
that I spoke about in the last bill. Frankly there’s no need to put 
“as amended from time to time” in the legislation. 
 
I’m really glad to see that the former minister of Justice is 
paying very close attention to my very riveting speech. Frankly 
all of my speeches are riveting, so I would hope that he pays 
close attention to every single one. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, 
frankly, that it’s not the former minister of Justice that I will be 
asking hard-hitting questions about Bill 109 to, that it’s the 
current Minister of Justice that will have to take the hot seat 
when I really get to the core of what’s going on with respect to 
this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And frankly the former minister of Justice should count his 
lucky stars that the new Premier was kind enough to get him in 
an easier role like Education so that he was gone from my hot 
seat. And now he has to face the much kinder, lovelier member 
from Regina Lakeview who I am sure will give him nothing but 
an easy time when the two of them meet in estimates or in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, which I’m sure is why he’s listening 
so closely to my speech is because he’s very, very upset over 
the fact that, you know, he won’t be having the opportunity to 
answer my questions at committee or in estimates. 
 
But I do hope that he’s warned the new Minister of Justice that 
he better be really prepared, especially when he comes to 
committee on Bill 108 and Bill 109, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, because it’s going to be a real, real riveting 
evening of discourse, Mr. Speaker. And I do quite look forward 
to it, and I know the former minister of Justice is quite upset 
over having to miss that opportunity. 
 
But you know, you never know what could happen, Mr. 
Speaker. Perhaps this summer there will be a cabinet shuffle. 
Perhaps he’s, you know, angered the Premier in some way and 
he moves him out of the cushy job of Minister of Education and 
into the riveting job that the Minister of Justice is. 
 
And I speak somewhat in jest, but the Minister of Justice does 
have a very important job, and it’s not just putting forward and 
remembering to actually show up for his . . . Or did he show up 
for his second reading speech? Or what did he mess up? 
Forgetting to . . . [inaudible] . . . and just continually standing 
and standing and not putting forward legislation. 
 
So the Minister of Justice’s important job, not just, you know, 
putting forward and remembering to put forward many, many 
important pieces of legislation, but it’s an important file and it’s 
an important ministry, Mr. Speaker, where a lot of . . . We see a 
lot of issues in other ministries all end up coming to Justice in 
one way, form, or another. 
 
So it is a very important . . . And frankly the Ministry of Justice 
is one of the places where you can’t, I guess you can’t drop 
your users. It’s not like Social Services, where someone doesn’t 
qualify, therefore they cannot be a client of the Ministry of 
Social Services. Justice is there, and Justice is supposed to be 
there for everyone. And Justice ends up dealing with a lot of 
society’s issues. 

[15:30] 
 
So it is a very, very important file. And I know the former 
minister of Justice took that role very seriously, and I’m sure he 
will do the same thing in his current role as Minister of 
Education. But in the meantime, the current Minister of Justice 
will have to answer some of my questions with respect to Bill 
109. 
 
So with that, and I don’t want to give away too much to the 
current Minister of Justice as to the questions I’m going to ask 
on Bill 109; I’m going to leave the suspense for him for that 
evening. But I do have many questions I do want to ask him at 
committee. So as such, I would like to move Bill 109 to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 109, The Statute Law Amendment 
Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 109, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 72 — The 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into debate on Bill No. 
72, An Act to amend The Privacy Act. I will have several 
thoughts on this because I’ve been following the development 
of this, especially since it was brought forward in the fall. And I 
know that many of us have been watching the media in terms of 
the whole issue of social media, both at the political level, 
whether it’s about the Russians interfering with the political 
situation in the United States and other countries, or whether 
it’s simply privacy issues that are happening on social media 
here in our own neighbourhoods, our communities, and what 
does that all mean, and particularly what that relates to — 
bullying and all of that. 
 
But I think that this bill itself, in and of itself is worthy, and it’s 
one that we can have a good discussion on. And at the end of 



3436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

the day I can’t see us having a lot of problems with it, but I 
don’t want to give away our hand too soon. But it’s one that 
really opens the door to a much larger conversation and this is 
the value of our system that we have here today, Mr. Speaker. 
The government, through . . . whether it’s consultation or 
whether it’s through its members or whether it’s through its 
civil service, through its public service, bring forward ideas that 
are important and relevant to today’s society. And in this case 
they have, but I think in many ways — and I’ll make my case, 
Mr. Speaker — that we’re just seeing the tip of the iceberg in 
terms of some of these issues that are happening in Europe and 
in Canada. And I’ll raise them so that the members at home can 
think more about this and what does this mean here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, we look in a very interesting way what’s happening 
to the president of the United States and the Russian situation, 
and we feel that hasn’t had anything to do with us, that 
somehow that’s remote. But we’re curious. But the fact of the 
matter is that there’s lessons to be learned. And I think that the 
Ministry of Justice, the government, and all of us should be 
really thinking about what it means in terms of social media, 
what it means in terms of privacy, what it means in terms of 
violation of privacy. 
 
So today, yes, the issue before us really is around what the 
minister quite rightly has talked about in his opening remarks 
around revenge porn and that type of thing. And he talks about 
the bill, and I’ll go through his comments and relate it back to 
The Privacy Act. And then I want to talk about what The 
Privacy Act in the 1970s, when it was brought forward under 
the government of Allan Blakeney, what that meant. And, you 
know, the issue . . . And we really need to be cognizant of the 
fact of what’s privacy. What’s privacy of information? What’s 
privacy? What’s confidentiality? All of those things are very, 
very important concepts but they don’t all mean exactly the 
same. And we should be very careful about how we learn about 
this, so we’re accurate in our terms and mean what we say and 
say what we mean. 
 
But specifically Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
introduces some additional options for someone who has had 
intimate objects of themselves shared with others without 
consent. And as I said, this is often referred to as revenge porn. 
And this was an issue that was identified by the former premier, 
Brad Wall, in his last Throne Speech, and how this allows the 
victim to pursue civil action and outlines that in the legislation.  
 
It talks about reverse onus, that this legislation is unique in that 
it allows the victim to press charges or action without proof. 
The accused must establish that they were given permission and 
consent to produce this image. And this is an interesting idea 
and I think quite appropriate. But I tell you in the world of 
social media, the onus of proof and who owns what information 
and all of those issues are becoming more and more complex. 
And so legislation has got to be clear and mean what it say and 
not have unintended consequences. 
 
It also outlines actions against those who distribute 
non-consensual images ranging from awarding damages to the 
victim and recovering any profits that might have happened. 
And they do this through small claims. 
 

So the minister of the day brought this forward November 7th, a 
few months ago, and there were some really key points that I 
want to highlight. And of course he talks about that we are 
aware — and he talks about the MLAs here — are “. . . aware 
that distributing intimate images of a person without consent 
has become all too common in the digital world, and revenge 
porn or cyberbullying with intimate images is an ongoing 
problem.” 

 
And it is an ongoing problem. And I agree with the minister. 
And whether it’s revenge or whether it’s bullying, active 
bullying . . . And we see this in schools and we see this with 
people, that it’s just something that is more than a problem in 
many ways. If it’s your family that’s involved, your school, it’s 
becoming a crisis. 
 
You know, I think of when I was in high school and university. 
In fact, I was going through cleaning up some of my papers. We 
used to write letters, and we used to . . . You know, I was 
thinking about that, and I saw letters I had written where I had 
got back from my brothers, my friends, my sister. It was not 
uncommon to write letters and letters to your family members, 
and it was private. It wasn’t something posted on social media 
for everyone to see, and it wasn’t somebody else’s property. It 
was the property of whoever received the letter. 
 
And so the world has really changed and here we are, the 
decision makers who come from that kind of a background, to 
now where we have these kind of things happening with Google 
and Facebook and others. I have to say that I’m a bit of a 
Luddite when it comes to all the different forms or platforms 
that this can take place on. But this is something that we need to 
take very seriously because it just doesn’t stop with feeling 
badly, you know. 
 
We see the range and we have seen this, whether it be in the 
Maritimes with suicides, right across the country I’m sure, with 
young people who have been forced to a very dark place in their 
lives because of what’s been posted, either as revenge or 
they’ve been suggested to, in some ways, get into an 
unfortunate photograph or picture that they may think is private 
but is actually not, can be made very public very quickly. 
 
So the member talks about the bill becoming an additional tool, 
and I quote, “. . . an additional tool for victims of this tragic 
practice. It will amend The Privacy Act to create a new tort for 
the non-consensual distribution of an intimate image.” And it 
talks about what an image is, a virtual image including photos 
or videos in which a picture is nude, partially nude, or engaged 
in explicit sexual activity, and recorded in circumstances where 
that person thought they had a reasonable expectation of 
privacy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to go on to the next comment he 
made because this makes the link too that the ministry is 
thinking about federal situations, and I’m going to talk about 
the federal Privacy Commissioner in a few minutes. But he 
talks about “In 2015 amendments were made to the Criminal 
Code to create a new offence to address distribution of intimate 
images.”  
 
And he goes on to say that they think they can do more about 
this outside the criminal sphere to help victims. And fair 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3437 

enough. So they’re aiming to complement the federal initiatives 
by providing “. . . additional avenues for redress for victims 
[and] proposing additional steps to allow victims to pursue a 
civil action.” And so this is what they’re hoping to do. “Finally 
the amendments will remove the requirement that an action of 
The Privacy Act proceed only in Court of Queen’s Bench.” And 
so there allows more venues. So there you go. 
 
The small claims process where the damages claimed are less or 
capped at $30,000. So “. . . working with victim services and 
with technical experts in the computer field to ensure that 
adequate supports can be provided to victims of this tort to 
remove these images and use legislation in addition to criminal 
proceedings.” So that’s very straightforward, and I think that’s a 
summary of the bill before us. 
 
What I want to talk about though is again, and I highlighted this 
last night, this binary way that we’re thinking. And the drafters 
here when they talk about this, keep talking about “his” or 
“her.” And in this particular case, even more important I would 
argue, that we should be using the word “their” so that it’s 
non-binary, so we don’t have a situation of confusion here when 
we’re trying to address a modern issue. And our modern 
thinking now has come to realize more and more that many 
people are not identifying with a “his” or “her,” but they can be 
safely included with the pronoun “their” or “they.” And I think 
this is an important issue. 
 
And this may end up being a bit of a problem because this 
becomes very binary in the language that is used, where we talk 
about what an intimate image is, in which the person depicted 
in the image is nude or exposed in his or her genital organs or 
anal region or her breasts. Now interestingly, I think that we 
should be talking about their breasts. I mean it’s sort of, we 
need to get out of this binary thinking that, for whatever reason, 
you know, I just feel we need to be more inclusive, and this is 
problematic where we have drafters who are thinking in a 
binary stereotype. Everything’s related to male or female, and 
we need to be much more inclusive. And when somebody’s in 
this very tragic situation, we don’t want to be arguing about 
language. We want the language to be inclusive. And so this I 
think would be a friendly amendment that we might talk to the 
minister about. But it becomes very clear about the place that 
the writer of this legislation is coming from and with all best 
intentions, but we should be thinking more clearly about that. 
 
So as well it talks about, you know, the “Interpretation — 
distribution of intimate images.” And again it goes “. . . if he or 
she publishes, transmits, sells, advertises . . .” I think it would 
just work if we could say, if they publish, transmit, sell. That 
works. I mean I’m a grade 8 teacher. I think that’s 
grammatically correct. Now “they” usually refers to plural, but I 
think that that would be correct. 
 
And it talks about “When expectation of privacy not lost.” You 
know and again it goes: 
 

(a) if he or she: 
 

(i) consented to another person recording the image; or 
 
(ii) provided the image to another person. 
 

And I appreciate that they’re saying another person. It could be, 
if they or a person consents to another person recording an 
image. I mean it doesn’t . . . It moves away from the binary 
thinking. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The one part I wanted to make highlight here is also around the 
“Defence — public interest.” And this is interesting what it 
replaces. It just is a simple statement: 
 

It is a defence to an action for the non-consensual 
distribution of an intimate image if the distribution of the 
intimate image is in the public interest and does not extend 
beyond what is in the public interest. 

 
So I’m curious to have a better definition of what is public 
interest in that case. So if somebody can make the case it’s in 
the public interest that I distribute these images of my 
ex-partner, and my case is that it’s everybody’s interest to know 
that. And I would want to know why that is. I think that there 
needs to be a more specific example of that and why is that. 
What is the public interest? 
 
And if we look at the old privacy Act and this was something 
. . . And it’s interesting because as we look at the time periods 
that these things were written in, this was 1978. And I don’t 
have the adjourned debates on this. It would be interesting to 
read them actually because again, as I was saying, this is a very 
important, very important right that we have. Again it’s 
different than confidentiality and it’s different than privacy of 
information, even though it’s related. 
 
I was talking about the right for defence. And it goes on. It’s 
quite extensive actually, Mr. Speaker. It’s section 4. It talks 
about an act or conduct or publication is not a violation of 
privacy, where it goes on to describe several pieces of where it 
is the case that somebody could make the case that it’s not a 
violation of privacy. And it goes on, it talks about whether: 
 

it is consented to, either expressly or impliedly by some 
person entitled to consent thereto; 
 
[that] it was incidental to the exercise of a lawful right of 
defence of person or property. 

 
So incidental, that would be, you know, I mean they’re talking 
about different reasons why you might break the privacy right:  
 

it was authorized or required by or under a law in force in 
the province or by a court or any process of a court. 
 

It was that of a peace officer attending in the course or within 
the scope of his or her duties, or they were engaged in 
investigation in the course and needed to do this, and it “. . . 
was neither disproportionate to the gravity of the matter subject 
to investigation nor committed in the course of trespass.” 
 
So they’re really limiting . . . And this is one that I find very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that you could violate the privacy of 
another person if it was that person was engaged in a news 
gathering for a newspaper or other paper containing public 
news, or broadcaster licensed by the CRTC [Canadian 



3438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission] to 
carry on a broadcast transmitting undertaking “and such act, 
conduct, or publication was reasonable in the circumstances and 
was necessary for or incidental to ordinary news gathering 
activities.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in this case, it’s very interesting that we talk 
about newspapers and broadcasters that are licensed by the 
CRTC, but we’re not talking about social media. Because social 
media, in many ways, are not licensed, not to the same degree, 
and this is something that they’re arguing about in the States 
and in Europe. And some ideas that are brought forward in 
Canada that maybe we should be taking a look at this.  
 
We know that Google and Facebook particularly have faced 
heavy criticism for their work around news and whether it’s 
accurate or if they’re putting forward a particular point of view 
and it’s not balanced. But they’re not licensed. They’re not 
regulated by anyone, any agency, for that. But in this case, your 
argument, if you’re . . . You just can’t be an ordinary . . . You 
can’t be a free-range broadcaster in Canada. You have to be 
licensed by CRTC. So this is something, this is something that I 
think we need to really look at. We really need to examine, 
what does that mean? I mean we have these situations with 
blogs. We have these situations on Facebook where people are 
operating free range, and we think that this is worthwhile. It’s 
an expression, a freedom of expression. But I wonder if we’re 
paying a price for that that was worthwhile. 
 
And then it does go on: 
 

A publication of any matter is not a violation of privacy 
where: 
 

there were reasonable grounds for belief that the matter 
published was of public interest or was fair comment on 
a matter of public interest; or 

 
the publication was, in accordance with the . . . law 
relating to defamation, privileged. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, those were the views in 1978. And I think 
that’s very worthwhile to reflect on in terms of when they talk 
of a defence that’s only limited to a matter of public interest. I 
think that we need to know more about that, and I don’t think 
there should be very many grounds for defence when it comes 
to revenge porn or bullying. That’s simply unacceptable. I’m 
not trying to create defences. But I’m looking back at the work 
that was done in 1978 and wondering if it meets the same 
standard, the same bar of interest, and when we look back to 
1978, the thoughtfulness that was going on at the time. 
 
And so I do want to spend a minute . . . And you know, it was 
interesting when we talk about . . . You know, in my work as 
human rights critic, and I am very honoured to be that in 
partnership with the critic for Justice. And we work together on 
this, but I’ve come to understand and appreciate how important 
privacy is. It’s a fundamental right that we’ve had from 
medieval times and it goes back to the original peeping Tom. 
And we had that situation where you would have in villages the 
guy who would walk around looking in windows. And what do 
you do about that? Nobody liked that. The villagers didn’t like 
that. They thought that was creepy and it was really 

inappropriate, and won’t somebody do something about it? 
 
So the idea of privacy started to come in that your home was 
private, and nobody should be looking in the windows. And that 
was understood to be a reasonable claim, that the state or the 
local peeping Tom did not have the right to come look in your 
windows. You must go to the door and knock on the door and 
ask to be let in. You didn’t have the right just to come in. There 
was an assumption of privacy. 
 
And so that in many ways . . . Now I’m not an expert on the 
history of privacy, but it was explained to me that in many ways 
that was where the original concepts come from. And now we 
have got to this place that we’re in social media and all over the 
world this can be happening. And at one point you might be 
thinking, well it is private and we’re just sharing it. We’re just 
sharing it digitally. But then with a touch of a button it can be 
shared and then we have a problem. 
 
We have a problem because now we’re in the age of 
information, and now we have the issue of right to privacy. And 
we have these huge corporations, whether they be Google or 
Facebook, who think because you’ve signed on . . . Now we 
haven’t actually signed on, but many of us have come to the 
point where, if you want to partake on the platform, you have to 
click on the “I agree.” And how many of us have actually taken 
the time to read all the fine print? 
 
And I know that there are circumstances when we have our 
iPhones and when I’ve had some people explain to me some of 
the things that I’ve agreed to, and I’m kind of surprised about 
where people know what I’ve been doing. I’m a little bit 
surprised. And it’s even when you go online and you search. 
This morning I was searching for a radio and I was looking 
where to buy one. And the thing was can so-and-so have access 
to your location, and you go okay because I want to know 
where the closest store is. But it’s a lot more complicated than 
that. It’s a little bit more complex than that. So we’re sharing 
too much. 
 
So this privacy Act is one that I hope will give us some 
opportunity to really reflect on privacy in this new age. And so 
when we have here . . . And I just want to . . . He talked . . . And 
I did talk about what the definition of the images were, but it 
doesn’t talk about the definition of privacy. And of course I’m 
just going to go through the section of The Privacy Act, the 
section no. 3, examples of violation of privacy. And they have 
the same violation of privacy, section 2, “It is a tort, actionable 
without proof of damage, for a person wilfully and without 
claim of right, to violate the privacy of another person.” 
 
And then further to that, it gives examples of the violation of 
privacy: 
 

Without limiting the generality of section 2, proof that 
there has been: 
 

(a) auditory or visual surveillance of a person by any 
means including eavesdropping, watching, spying, 
besetting or following and whether or not accomplished 
by trespass; 
 
(b) listening to or recording of a conversation in which a 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3439 

person participates, or listening to or recording of 
messages to or from that person passing by means of 
telecommunications, otherwise than as a lawful party . . . 
[to]; 

 
And I would think that might refer to, Mr. Speaker, if you 
remember the days of rubbering. I don’t know if . . . Some of us 
would know that. The old days on the phone when the party line 
and we weren’t supposed to be on the line, but you knew whose 
ring that was, and it wasn’t yours. And so there’s a little issue of 
privacy there. 
 

(c) use of the name or likeness or voice of a person for 
the purposes of advertising or promoting the sale of, or 
any other trading in, any property or services, or for any 
other purposes of gain to the user if, in the course of the 
use, the person is identified or identifiable and . . . 
intended to exploit the name or likeness or voice of that 
person; or 

 
(d) use of letters, diaries or other personal documents of 
a person; 

 
without the consent, express or implied, of the person or 
some other person who has the lawful authority to give the 
consent is prima facie evidence of a violation of the 
privacy of the person first mentioned. 

 
So that was a different era when we talked about the use of 
letters, diaries, or other personal documents of a person. You 
know, we talk about a person identified, “intended to exploit the 
name or the likeness or voice of that person.” You know, now 
we’ve really got into the digital photography of the world and 
what that really means, and that’s something that is very, very 
significant in terms of the change. 
 
And so I think it’s a time that we really do need to reflect. And 
as I said earlier, this is a bit of the tip of the iceberg because it 
has been happening around the world, the discussion about the 
use and abuse of collecting private information. And it’s not the 
diaries, it’s not the letters, but it’s the posts and the pictures that 
people are gathering. And really I think we have to take a stand 
on this in terms of where do we stand with the individual. Is it 
their privacy that’s being violated, or is it the corporation’s right 
to own that data, and in fact even into death? 
 
You know, I was reading this earlier about Facebook. When a 
person passes away, it’s not the data belonging to the 
individual. Facebook says we will memorialize it. We’ll keep it, 
but it’s ours. We’ll put something nice on the . . . I don’t know 
what it looks like actually to tell you the truth. I haven’t visited 
a Facebook page of a friend who’s passed away. I’ve had 
friends who have passed away, and it’s kind of a sad day when I 
see their birthday come up again and we know that they’ve 
actually passed away. But I don’t know what that looks like. 
But they really don’t want to give up that information. They 
really want to stick hard and tight to the data that they’re 
collecting, for whatever reason. And it’s interesting, because as 
I said, this is having a huge impact. And this is having a huge 
impact on these large corporations. 
 
[16:00] 
 

And of course I just was picking up this article today, and it’s 
about Facebook. “Facebook unfriended. Russian meddling is 
only one challenge facing the social-media giant.” And this 
came out February 22nd, 2018. And in the article it talks about, 
“Young Americans are using it less, costs are soaring and 
regulation looms.” And it’s something that I talked about when 
we talked about broadcasters earlier, where you had . . . New 
sources had to be licensed, broadcasters had to be licensed, but 
now we’re seeing that this is moving outside that because of the 
implications. 
 
You know, clearly I want to make sure we understand the 
significant risk that when you have countries that are meddling 
in other countries’ democracy, that is a huge problem, and it’s 
because of our free and unfettered access to motivate or cause 
issues to arise through social media. And this is a big problem. 
But young people are now seeing more and more that Facebook 
can be a place that you may not want to hang out in because of 
the challenges you have in terms of what may be shared. 
 
And while we’re constantly looking and seeing if we can gather 
new friends, are we being as particular as we might be? And 
what does that really mean? And of course . . . I just want to 
read this one quote here. They talked about several risks, and of 
course the risks are actually that . . . they talked about how 
there’s . . . I couldn’t believe this number, Mr. Speaker, when 
they talked about the fact that since this has started, or in the 
last year there’s been some, I believe, 50 million hours less on 
social media. It showed that . . . yes, here it is: 
 

Last month when Facebook . . . [announced its] earnings, it 
announced a decline in daily active users in America and 
Canada for the first time and estimated that, globally, users 
were spending around 50 million fewer hours per day on 
Facebook. 

 
How do you do that? How do you get 50 million hours less per 
day? Like how many hours are there possibly to be on 
Facebook? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Millions. Millions. Millions. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Millions and millions. So this is having a huge 
impact. So this translates into 15 per cent less over the year and 
this is actually . . . And it says: 
 

In America, Facebook is steadily losing users under the 
age of 25. Youngsters are spending more time on other 
apps such as Snapchat, and Facebook-owned photo-sharing 
app Instagram . . . 
 

And so on and so forth. But one of the issues that it talks about 
that I think that as we need to wrestle with here is this. And the 
third, and I quote: 
 

A third risk, and the biggest, is new regulation. Politicians 
have hardened their attitudes toward Facebook. It has 
swallowed up smaller rivals and has few friends among the 
political elite. Regulators could scuttle new deals, impose 
new restrictions on data-sharing between Facebook’s 
various apps . . . 

 
And that’s a big deal. And we’re talking about that in another 



3440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

piece of legislation where you have data sharing. 
 

. . . between Facebook’s various apps, or fine it for 
anticompetitive behaviour and privacy violations. This is 
especially likely in Europe, but even at home watchdogs 
may get fiercer. 
 

And this is the part that I do want to talk about, that I think is 
very interesting and I’ve thought about over the last several 
months, and the implication here for us in Canada. But what’s 
happening in Europe is this whole issue of the right to be 
forgotten. Now I have had some comments here earlier about, 
you know, fools shouldn’t be forgotten, but this is not about 
that. In fact it’s an extension of the right to privacy. 
 
And I just want to take a look, a quote from the Guardian. And 
this was back in August 2017 and the headline is, “The right to 
be forgotten is the right to have an imperfect past.” And what’s 
happening is the EU, the European Union, is looking at a way 
to ensure that people have the ability to de-index anything on 
the Internet that refers to them. Now there are limitations to that 
but Facebook and Google have considered this a real invasion 
of their right to what they have set out as a business model. So 
the title is “The right to be forgotten is the right to have an 
imperfect past.” 
 

The data protection bill is about refusing to give ownership 
of our identity to the likes of Facebook and Google — 
because we all make mistakes when young. 

 
Now I have to tell you it’s not only when we’re young that we 
kind of make mistakes. I don’t think the young own that 
completely. They don’t have the copyright to that. But I really 
feel that it’s an issue that we all need to take very seriously 
because this is happening in Europe. This started in I think the 
early 2010s. They’re in the middle of a major battle with 
Google, and of course Google is not an easy company to go to 
court with. I mean this is a company that has very deep pockets, 
very deep pockets, and of course comes with that very capable 
lawyers. 
 
And you know, when governments take on some of these mega 
corporations, it really becomes an issue of resources where the 
corporations, while they do have a bottom line and they can 
only go so far, for governments there is a balancing of 
resources. There’s only so far that they can go. 
 
Some of the comments that this writer, Suzanne Moore, makes, 
and she describes the situation in which she was on a bus in a 
European city and a child was having a meltdown because she 
couldn’t remember her password. And so the thing is, did the 
mother know the password, and was the mother going to give 
the child the password to her iPad on this public bus? 
 
And so I’ll read parts of this because I think this is very, very 
important: 
 

One consequence of an increasing ease with technology 
over the past decade or so is that we now have young 
adults who’ve only ever known a world in which personal 
information and images are circulated online. A world in 
which an online presence is deemed a necessity. The 
violation of one’s own privacy has been part of the deal for 

this “exposure” — despite the fact that increasing numbers 
are learning the hard way that once something is online, it 
never really goes away. 
 

And it goes on to say: 
 

All those embarrassing Facebook/Instas of drunken antics 
and incessant posing with blunts, bongs and gangsta signs. 
Do you really want future employers looking at this? Or 
anyone? 

 
But this kind of legislation goes on: 
 

In this culture of self-surveillance, privacy has been 
forfeited and these changes in the law are an attempt to 
claw some of it back. 
 
It is a recognition that we all make mistakes, especially 
when young — and that a stupid picture should not be an 
indelible stain. A gesture, perhaps more hopeful than 
workable, towards huge companies such as Facebook and 
Google. An attempt to answer the question: who owns 
personal data, them or us? It can be difficult to get a 
Facebook page taken down even when someone has died. 
Facebook instead offers to “memorialise” it. 

 
So I think that this is an important issue we have before us, and 
it’s one that has a lot of questions. And I think that, as I said, 
it’s a bit of the tip of the iceberg. The minister has made the 
connection that they were talking to the . . . and watching 
what’s happening federally. And I think we need to do the 
same, the same thing. And we need to have that conversation. 
And I don’t know how we do this, you know, in this House, 
whether it’s a committee that looks out to this type of thing. I 
think that would be a good idea. 
 
Something that . . . Really we talk about privacy as a basic right 
and we’d be prepared in our province to have that conversation. 
Because as I said, the 1978 legislation, the original legislation, 
refers to letters and diaries. It doesn’t talk, it doesn’t have the 
idea that we’re going to be dealing with online pictures, digital 
pictures, that type of thing. 
 
I want to go on to another article in the Guardian. It talks about 
. . . And this is the headline here, and this is from July 2017: 
“ECJ to rule on whether ‘right to be forgotten’ can stretch 
beyond EU: Final step in three-year legal battle between Google 
and France will determine whether nations get to choose 
whether data is removed.” 
 
And the writer, Alex Hern, talks about: 
 

The European court of justice is set to rule on a landmark 
case over whether or not the so-called “right to be 
forgotten” can and should stretch beyond EU borders. 
 
It will be the final step in a three-year legal battle between 
Google and France to determine how . . . the search engine 
should . . . guarantee the privacy of European citizens who 
want their pasts to be wiped from the historical record. 

 
If Google wins, France says, then the right to be forgotten 
becomes meaningless. This right . . . requires the search 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3441 

engine to remove links to pages that “appear to be 
inadequate, irrelevant or no longer relevant or excessive 
. . . in light of the time that had elapsed.” Even accurate 
data which was initially legally published can be removed, 
the court said, since . . . “in the course of time become 
incompatible with the directive.” 

 
And France goes on to say, “France’s concern is that the right is 
only worth anything if it applies universally.” 
 
So this is something . . . Of course this is the issue of the 
Internet. It’s international. It goes around the world. So if it 
only happens within a country, then it’s not worth much. And 
we’ve seen legislation here that talks about international online 
contracts, that type of thing. And so the argument is it has to be 
universal, and I think that’s a very strong point. 
 

[So] France’s concern is that the right is only worth 
anything if it applies universally. Otherwise, the country 
has argued, a hypothetical complainant could find their 
past remains easily visible to American colleagues, or even 
a “geeky curious neighbour” who can simply fake their IP 
address to a non-EU country. So the French data . . . 
regulator . . . has consistently fought Google’s attempts to 
limit the extent of the right, first to just Google.fr and other 
European Google domains, and then to [other] . . . Google 
user [across] . . . Europe. 

 
[So now] on the other side, [it’s interesting] Google argues 
that the extension of the right would pose a serious risk . . . 
[to] other countries with more egregious limitations on 
freedom of speech [which] would similarly attempt to 
universalise their restrictions. 

 
And so, for example . . . And this is fair enough. They use an 
example in Thailand. Thailand might, in their world, in their 
understanding of democracy, attempt to force Google to apply 
its laws that ban insults against its king, worldwide. So fair 
enough. But then this becomes a situation of defence where we 
talk about, is it in the public interest? And clearly when it’s a 
private thing, a private citizen, it’s very much different than the 
king of Thailand. 
 
And so this is something that has . . . It talks about the bills. 
Google was fined 100,000 pounds in July 2015 for failing to 
comply. But this is just I think the beginning of what we come 
to understand over these issues here. 
 
Now I do want to take a minute to now draw this back to 
Canada. And I think this is very important to understand that 
now we’re . . . Europe has been a pioneer in this thinking about 
what does it mean to be, to have the right to be forgotten in 
Europe. 
 
So now we see: 
 

. . . the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada 
released a draft position on online reputation which 
includes a call for several measures that would help protect 
Canadians, including the right to ask search engines to 
de-index web pages and removing information at the 
source. 

 

And this happened . . . This article here is from Slaw. It’s a law 
book in January 28th, 2018. So anyways, s-l-a-w. I’ll send this 
up to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s a blog. Okay. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And anyways, it talks about Daniel Therrien, our Privacy 
Commissioner at the federal level, wrote in a press release: 
 

There is little more precious than our reputation. But 
protecting reputation is increasingly difficult in the digital 
age, where so much about us is systematically indexed, 
accessed and shared with just a few keystrokes. Online 
information about us can easily be distorted or taken out of 
context and it is often extremely difficult to remove. 

 
“Canadians have told us . . .” And he goes on, and this is a 
quote: 
 

Canadians have told us that they are concerned about these 
growing risks to their reputation. We want to provide 
people with greater control to protect themselves from 
these reputational risks. Ultimately, the objective is to 
create an environment where people can use the Internet to 
explore and develop without fear their digital traces will 
lead to unfair treatment. 

 
So this is a very important concept. So we see this now being 
raised in Canada, and I did raise it with the Privacy 
Commissioner here. I hope he’s taking a look at it. I hope we’re 
all taking a look at it because these are the kind of challenges 
that we’re facing in our world. And we could say in 
Saskatchewan, we could say in Saskatoon or Regina, but clearly 
the Internet is a universal thing and it’s a very, very important 
issue that we have before us. 
 
And we know that, he goes on to talk about, “The basis for 
de-indexing or source takedown mentioned in the draft 
[proposal] . . . is Personal Information Protection and Electronic 
Documents Act,” and that he argues, should apply to online 
content and search results. And so: 
 

This includes allowing individuals to challenge the 
accuracy, completeness and currency (the extent to which 
the information is up-to-date) of results returned for 
searches on their name. Such challenges should be 
evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and decisions to remove 
links should take into account the right to freedom of 
expression and the public’s interest in the information 
remaining accessible. 

 
So again, here we have that word, “public interest.” So what 
does that mean, public interest? Is it the right to know, the need 
to know, or I would just like to, I want to know? And we’ve 
come to a situation where that seems to be interchangeable, 
whether it’s the I need to know about this person or I want to 
know about this person. I’m curious and I have the right in this 
world to be satisfied, that my curiosity is satisfied. 
 
And I think that is not right. I don’t think that matches up with 
our fundamental understanding over the course of centuries of 
right to privacy. So freedom of expression is something that we 
should take very seriously, we need to safeguard, but when it 



3442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

intersects with the right to privacy we need to make sure we 
understand the public interest. 
 
So this is something that I hope we take some time and talk 
about. There is another article that I think that it’s important 
that we take a moment and think about. This is a Globe and 
Mail article that was published on January 26, 2018, and it’s 
Michael Geist. And I believe many of us are familiar with him 
in terms of privacy and other issues. He’s quite well known in 
his opinions. I’m not sure I agree totally with him, but again 
this is where we have these kind of opportunities to have a 
fulsome discussion about the pros and cons. Because once we 
get into this, when we talk about rights we need to make sure 
there are no unintended consequences. 
 
So his argument, and the opinion is entitled, “Why a Canadian 
right to be forgotten creates more problems than it solves.” He 
says, and I quote: 
 

The right to be forgotten, which opens the door to public 
requests for removal of search results that are “inadequate, 
irrelevant or no longer relevant,” has been among the 
world’s most controversial privacy issues since it was first 
established in Europe in 2014. The new right responds to 
concerns with potential reputational harms from inaccurate 
or misleading information online, but faces the challenge 
of balancing privacy protections with the benefits of the 
internet for access to information and freedom of 
expression. 

 
And I think that’s clear that there has to be a balance. But I 
think he’s clearly . . . and I think that this is where the problem 
is. When we talk about our reputation, how precious that is, 
how fragile that is, then he’s really understating the case that 
it’s just with potential reputational harms from inaccurate or 
misleading information online. I think that’s really softening 
what might happen. It’s not just reputational harm. That’s a 
pretty soft way of saying the damage that could be done by 
comments that are wrong and that are not in any kind of forum 
that has any kind of regulation. It’s not regulated. It’s 
self-regulated but it’s not regulated by any public body. 
 
And so he thinks this is an issue, that there is something that we 
need to examine more closely. And I couldn’t agree with him 
more, but it’s one that we cannot ignore — we cannot ignore. 
And I think this is important. 
 
So he talks about the idea of the right to de-index search results, 
and that may be a tricky thing to do. And again, you know, it 
sort of reminds me of many things when we’ve asked the 
private business world to do things. And for a variety of reasons 
they may have, maybe thinking this is not a good thing to do, 
that it will affect the bottom line. And I think about, particularly 
from my experience and environment, when we talk about 
recycling and some corporations — not all, but some — right 
off the bat said this is something that we cannot do, that in fact 
it will ruin our company. It will ruin our bottom line, and will 
be . . . It’ll just destroy us. 
 
And I think particularly of examples that I was involved with 
and that’s when we talked about recycling computers and 
electronics. And that was a tough one because, you know, it 
was very different than . . . You know, we grew up recycling 

beer bottles or pop cans and that type of thing, and that seemed 
to be a relatively straightforward thing to do. But it got a little 
bit more complicated when we got to paint and recycling 
computers. But, you know, it can be done. It can be done, and it 
can be done in a way that businesses can say, hey we were part 
of the solution; we weren’t part of the problem. 
 
And so I would really think that if we got together on this, that 
we understand the right to privacy, how it intersects with the 
right to freedom of speech, right for freedom of information. 
But those two, I think that because of the devastating results or 
impacts it has on young people, that clearly we need to do 
something about that. So, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your 
indulgence as I’ve talked a little bit about this, but I have . . . I 
really have been thinking about this a lot over the course of the 
year, and I hope that in some small way that we can move this 
forward in a bigger way. 
 
Of course Bill 72 speaks specifically to revenge porn and 
cyberbullying, which is clearly an issue that needs to be 
addressed. It’s a big issue and it’s important, but these other 
issues are becoming more and more prevalent, and whether it’s 
at the national level where we see the claims of Russians 
meddling through Facebook in national elections in 
democracies, that’s a big, big issue, and we’re seeing issues 
now that are very, very important in terms of harassment. 
 
These are issues that we need to take very seriously, and we 
need to make sure that we’re prepared and can stand and make 
sure that the implications of freedom of speech, freedom of 
expression, don’t curtail or harm the right to privacy because 
that has been a fundamental right, as I said, for centuries. I 
don’t know the original . . . I don’t know when it would have 
started, but I can tell you some of the very old ones. It just 
didn’t happen a couple of years ago. This is a fundamental 
principle that we have, and we can see the devastating results 
when it’s not taken seriously or set aside because of our demand 
to satisfy our curiosity. And that is something that we’re 
becoming a society where our curiosity for whatever seems to 
take over, and it’s an issue that we need to have the appropriate 
responses. 
 
So we’ve come a long way from simply rubbering on party 
lines or the peeping Tom in the old medieval village. This is 
very, very different, and the writers of the legislation in 1978 
clearly did not have in their minds the idea of the Internet and 
what the outcomes are. And so while I applaud the government 
for tackling the issue of cyberbullying and revenge porn — 
very, very important — I urge them, I truly do, that if they want 
to do more . . . And they seem to be interested. I do see them 
talking about issues around uniform law and that type of thing, 
and even paying attention to the United Nations and its 
international standards when it comes to online contracts. 
There’s much more to be done in this kind of world. So with 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to move to adjourn Bill 
No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Something was happening. The member from 
Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, 
The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3443 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 73 — The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
Mr. Speaker. I am sorry about that. My apologies. You may not 
have heard my slight mistake there, so I’ll repeat it. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. I won’t repeat my mistake though. 
Thank you very much. I appreciate standing up and being able 
to enter into the debate on Bill No. 73, An Act to amend The 
Insurance Act and to make related amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
This one is a very important one. It’s interesting how this 
happens because the minister actually alluded to the fact that the 
big piece of legislation, The Insurance Act, was passed in 2015 
but has not been proclaimed, is not in force. So as the clock has 
been moving on since that time, things have been happening in 
the world. And things have been happening in the world that 
have a huge impact in terms of insurance needs for people in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan, and so we need to be prepared for 
those. We need to be on top of those. Even, in this case, we’re 
beyond being prepared; we’re responding. It’s past tense for 
prepared. You know, the things that have happened need to be 
dealt with at hand. 
 
And so it’s very important that we take a look at this piece of 
legislation and see what we can do to satisfy the needs of those 
folks who have insurance and expect to be covered in an 
up-to-date, modern way here in Saskatchewan. Of course the 
big question is why hasn’t that legislation been proclaimed. It 
took a lot of work and there’s people who were expecting that 
that would be the case. And it needs to be the case that why are 
we taking time to do that. 
 
This bill makes several changes to how insurance is provided 
across the province, including, as the minister said, several 
housekeeping amendments. But it includes a new section that 
addresses the medical assistance in dying. So as I understand it 
. . . And I’ll take a minute and I’ll read the minister’s comments 
because I want to make sure this is right. Of course he said that, 
and I will quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, since The Insurance Act was passed in 2015, 
the Supreme Court of Canada issued the Carter decision 
[and we’re very familiar with the Carter decision], and 
medical assistance in dying provisions were added to the 
Criminal Code. The amendments [referring to The 
Insurance Act amendments] will incorporate the definition 
of “medical assistance in dying” in the Criminal Code into 
The Insurance Act and will confirm that the section in the 
Act respecting suicide does not apply with respect to a 
death resulting from medical assistance in dying. 

 
[16:30] 
 

So I think that’s a very important clarification. And while the 
Carter decision has come out and been in place, clearly there 
needs to be a clarification that the medical assistance in dying is 
not similar to suicide. And as tragic as suicide is . . . And we 
clearly think that’s a societal issue, but that’s for another debate 
in another place, another time. But before us today is this 
insurance Act amendment, and I think that’s very important. 
 
And so as the minister says, so we’re supportive of that. It’s 
important that families that are going through some very, very 
difficult times when the illnesses that are terminal and 
life-ending — and of course there are standards that needs to be 
met for people who have made that choice — that the last thing 
they need to be worried about is their insurance that they have 
purchased, that it would be there for them, and that they don’t 
deal with that issue around suicide and whatever that may mean 
in terms of their own insurance. So this clarifies that, and that’s 
a good thing that is relevant and, of course, is modern and very 
much something that we need to have. 
 
The minister talks about that the industry has identified some 
minor technical wording and issues and concerns that needs to 
be brought up to speed with this. So this is very important. And 
so we’ll go with that. 
 
And also it adds two new sections. Well I talked about the 
medical insurance, and also “. . . recovery by innocent persons 
so that those provisions can be used by victims of interpersonal 
violence, and others, as soon as possible before the new Act 
comes into force.” So this is important that they’re recognizing 
there’s issues, that people who are victims of interpersonal 
violence have needs that need to be met, and insurance could be 
the appropriate way for that. But because of the situation before 
us, that in fact may not be met because of problems with the 
new/old Act, the old/new Act. Or it’s actually still in the bill 
stages, and that’s a problem. 
 
I just want to take a minute. I want to just verify, when does this 
piece of legislation come into effect? Because we still have that 
same old issue with the old piece of legislation that, when does 
it come into force? Because, and this is something that we’ll ask 
in the House or in committee, is when does it come into force? 
Because I think people are getting curious about what’s actually 
happening there. 
 
And we saw yesterday, we had the Saskatchewan Young 
Brokers here, and it’s great to see them here. It was an 
interesting situation. I’ve not really thought about it this way, 
but when they were introduced in the House, somebody said, 
well you’ll have a post office, you’ll have some sort of 
community rink or something like that, but nine out of ten 
you’ll also have a broker. You’ll have somebody in there who’s 
looking after people’s insurance needs. And it’s one that we 
often think of. Whether they’re working out of their home — 
they may not have a fancy office — but everybody has had 
those needs, and it’s very important that we think about keeping 
our insurance needs and insurance legislation up to date.  
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would be moving that we adjourn 
Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 



3444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 74 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 74 — The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur 
la preuve be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s 
nice to rise again to enter into this debate around The Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2017, Bill No. 74. And while it’s relatively 
straightforward in terms of improving the language and making 
sure that it’s current in the day-to-day needs that we have, it 
talks about housekeeping changes around the changing 
language, from “facility” to “mental health centre,” references 
to “mental capacities” to “capacity,” “mental disability” to 
“intellectual disability,” which I think is very, very important. 
 
And I remember — and I think the other side were very 
supportive on this — when we had the issue around the R-word 
and how we need to be clear in our language that we reflect 
good, current practices. And the R-word was one that’s very 
offensive to the intellectual disabilities . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. And I know that when I raised that issue, 
the former minister of Justice was very quick to make sure that 
any references in legislation that had that was dealt with. 
 
Now I know we’ve got some puzzled looks over there 
wondering . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s helping you out? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes. No, you did. You did. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We went through every Act. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You did. You went through every Act. But it is 
one of those things that’s very interesting . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Those pieces of legislation were scoured 
for you. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Scoured, and I’m glad. I’m glad. Because there 
are people . . . And on a serious note, and I know the member 
opposite called me a good soul today and it was very kind of 
him to refer to me as . . . I didn’t catch all of it though because 
somebody was talking at the time, so I don’t know what was 
said . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it in Hansard. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I’ll read Hansard tomorrow. I’ll have to catch 
that. But we digress, Mr. Speaker. 

But I wanted to say that that was an example of how it’s 
important to keep language current so it’s not offensive, and 
what was once an appropriate term now has become understand 
to be not. And in that case when we did that work around the 
R-word, it was a case . . . Now I know the member opposite 
would say they scoured. I don’t know if he personally scoured 
all the legislation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Or he did, yes. 
I know how they scour over there. And so myself, I just did a 
simple Google search for the word, and so I would recommend 
that. That would be easier . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m 
stopped in my tracks. 
 
But anyways, Mr. Speaker, I think this is important that we do 
have that, and I encourage them though to go even further, as 
I’ve said, in terms of drafting standards and how we can be 
leaders in that circumstance. 
 
So this is important, when we talk about people who are in 
vulnerable circumstances. And now that’s a good thing. We 
talked about recordings are now required to be certified in a 
manner set out in regulations, and that routine administrative 
proceedings do not need to be certified. 
 
Now again as I alluded to last night though, we need to make 
sure we don’t go too far in making things a little too easy. 
Because we do have a problem if we have a situation where 
mishaps can occur, particularly when it comes to evidence and 
access to evidence. And so I think that this is a serious issue, 
and while we want to make sure that, especially in the arena of 
law, that people have access to law and that it seems to be done 
in an effective, efficient manner, that it’s not bogged down in 
legalese. But at the same time there were practices put into 
place to ensure that we didn’t move too fast, that in fact the due 
process has a certain place. And so when we get into moving 
into regulations, are we moving too far? And I know for 
example we had a good discussion about red tape today, and we 
know this government is keen on removing red tape in certain 
areas, but we see where in other areas they’re actually creating 
more red tape, particularly for those in vulnerable 
circumstances. 
 
And I just feel that we need to be careful about this and that we 
don’t, we don’t simplify things too much. Now maybe I’m an 
old Luddite and as I refer to letters and diaries and not being 
keen on the Internet — I am — but there’s a place and a time 
for it. And when we move into regulations, sometimes we’re 
moving it out of the spotlight. And you don’t need to be in the 
spotlight all the time, but we don’t need to hide it under a chair 
either. And so the processes of law, processes of justice, you 
know, it’s not only that justice is done but it’s seen to be done. 
And people have great reverence for evidence. Clearly it’s 
something that is hugely important. 
 
And if we get into a situation and, you know, I mean like, boy, 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are in, you know, 
a bit of a situation over handling of evidence when it comes to 
the Colten Boushie case, where evidence was not handled in a 
way that some would expect that it should’ve been done. Some 
of the processes weren’t carried out in the ways that some 
would expect it to have been done. And so let’s be very mindful 
of some of these changes. 
 
Again I think it’s very appropriate that we keep our language 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3445 

current, that it’s respectful and inclusive, and mindful of the 
changes in current language, but that we don’t move too fast 
down that road of not taking the time, as I said, for due process. 
 
People have a lot of expectations. And my colleague today, 
while she was giving the former Justice minister a bit of a hard 
time about leaving the Ministry of Justice into something easier, 
I kind of winced when she said that because education is not an 
easier one. But I knew what she meant. I knew what she meant. 
She says she’s defending herself by saying, “being sarcastic.”  
 
But I feel that Justice is hugely important. It affects us all. And 
we all, if we’re not personally involved, we all have that 
understanding that in fact we will have that, that due process 
will protect us, that there are people who are qualified in the 
legal system, and that it’s not made so easy that mistakes can be 
made because as we lower that bar and we are making it easier, 
that somehow the respect for the institution is being lost.  
 
And I don’t think that’s the intention here. The intention is to 
make sure that we are doing the right thing. But it’s just 
unfortunate that we have this situation before us. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And really when we talk about The Evidence Act, you know, 
when you look back at the records of how important evidence 
is, or cases that have been lost, cases that we thought were 
going to, the public thought were going to go one way, they go 
another way because of the evidence and how it was handled. 
So I’m thinking that we need to make sure that we remain that 
reverence for that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 
Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The Evidence Act. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 74, The Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 75 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 75 — The 
Electronic Communications Convention Implementation 
Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les 
communications électroniques be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 75, An Act 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the United 
Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications 
in International Contracts.  
 

And again this a fairly lengthy bill and it’s, you know, 
important. And I don’t want to go into the same discussions that 
I had really much earlier about the situation or the state of 
affairs when we start talking about international implications of 
the Internet. But clearly this government is on this. And it talks 
about the United Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic 
Communications in International Contracts.  
 
And it talks about “The States Parties to this convention 
reaffirming their belief that international trade on the basis of 
equality and mutual benefit is an important element in 
promoting friendly relations among States.”  
 
And so this is very important that we look at this. And we’ll 
have questions about this and what are the implications of this. I 
mean, it is one that is clearly something that’s important to the 
province because we do have a lot of international trade. And 
one that I had raised in the fall was Myanmar, which was 
having some issues in the world, particularly the issues around 
genocide or what many people believed to be the genocide of 
the Rohingya people and the implications of that. 
 
And for us the interesting thing with Myanmar was the fact that 
we had, the federal government had lifted the ban on trade 
about four or five years ago with that country because of the 
way it was handling its democratic elections in the country and 
the fact that there was issues there and they had come a long 
way in doing that. So we had resolved that and so we started 
trade with that, and in fact we had been trading more and more 
with them. 
 
So this is the kind of thing that it’s important to have a standard 
when in comes to international contracts, if they are carried out 
using electronic communications. And so this is not a small 
piece of legislation before us but it’s a critical tool in terms of 
our economy here in Saskatchewan as an exporting province. 
And it’s one that we need to take very seriously. 
 
We’ll have some questions around this, I’m sure, because as I 
said that the implications . . . I’m just delighted to see that 
they’re looking at United Nations conventions and how 
important that is. And it’s good for us to be part of that. And 
while I know it takes some time to do this — I see that in fact 
this was agreed to in 2005 — but I know it does take time to 
work its way through the national level down to the provincial 
level. 
 
So with that, there may be more questions on this, but at this 
point I’m going to move adjournment on Bill No. 75, An Act 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the United 
Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications 
in International Contracts. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 75, the electronic 
communications implementation Act, 2017.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



3446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2018 

Bill No. 101 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 101 — The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise this afternoon and enter into the debate on Bill No. 101, 
The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act. Now I know a 
few of my colleagues have already weighed in on this debate 
and have put forward, I think, some very important and very 
strong comments and some criticism on the bill, some feedback 
on the bill. And I will do my best to add to that discussion this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bill does some housekeeping things but also some things 
that are a bit more substantive. And I’m sure our critic will 
provide some fulsome discussion and fulsome questions to the 
minister responsible at committee, as I know she does very 
effectively, especially on this file, Mr. Speaker, and I know will 
continue to do so. 
 
Some of the more mundane parts of the bill, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s some housekeeping and language changes throughout 
the bill including making the bill a little bit more gender neutral 
in its language. 
 
Some a bit more interesting ones, potentially, that are changes 
in this bill is . . . The bill repeals the definition for “repair.” It 
removes other references to “repairs” and instead references 
either “parts” or “parts and service.” I’m not totally sure exactly 
what that change will mean for those who rely on this 
legislation, but I know those questions will be asked by our 
critic at committee. 
 
Furthermore the bill repeals the section that outlines that the 
minister can appoint employees for the purpose of this Act. 
Now based on the explanatory notes that were provided 
accompanying this bill, apparently this change is made because 
this is already covered under The Public Service Act, so I’m 
sure some work will be done just to ensure that there’s nothing 
being left to have fallen through the cracks in terms of this 
change, now that it’s in existence. 
 
Another change that’s a little bit interesting is the bill will allow 
for notices to go out through other prescribed means. So what 
that means, Mr. Speaker, is that it will allow for the use of 
digital forms of communication. So perhaps email will be used. 
I’m not entirely sure. Now it’s possible that that’s loosening 
some of the requirements that were originally provided in terms 
of how communication, with respect to provisions in this 
legislation, can be sent out. There’s always the risk, when 
you’re loosening those types of rules that it might be easier to 
provide that communication notice, but some folks frankly 
don’t, in this day and age, still don’t use digital forms of 
communication, either because they choose not to or they can’t. 
And we still have locations in Saskatchewan that don’t have 
access to Internet at all, or access to a reliable Internet, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think we, as legislators, need to be cognizant of 

that when we are affecting any sort of change. 
 
Furthermore the bill will allow for the minister to impose 
penalties on a dealer or distributor. Now this used to be the 
mandate of the board to impose these penalties. So now, instead 
of having a board determine the penalties, the minister 
themselves can impose those penalties. There’s always some 
concern when more power is being given to government, when 
more power is being given to cabinet, and when more power is 
being given to a minister because it lacks that level of oversight 
that, as an opposition, we think is incredibly important, that 
government should always be subject to and governmental 
decisions should always be subject to. And sometimes when 
more minds are at the table, better decisions are made, Mr. 
Speaker, and perhaps there might be a loss of expertise and a 
loss of knowledge here, Mr. Speaker. But I’m sure that our 
critic will be asking some very strong questions about that as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill proposes also to abolish the Agricultural 
Implements Compensation Fund and instead move all 
compensation or penalties that are associated with the Act will 
now flow directly through the General Revenue Fund, Mr. 
Speaker. While at the same time, the bill is increasing many of 
the penalties that we see in the Act, such as there’s a maximum 
award for compensation for a farmer under section 10, which 
increases from $10,000 to $50,000. There’s a maximum penalty 
for distributors who fail to pay an amount to the board required 
by section 12, which is increased from $5,000 to $25,000. 
There’s penalties for distributors under section 24, which 
increase from $5 a day to not more than, so a maximum of 
$25,000; and penalties under section 25 for the supply of repairs 
by distributors increased from $5,000 to $50,000. 
 
So these are pretty substantial changes to the amount of 
penalties that are owed, and I know our critic will be looking to 
see what sort of consultation was done with respect to these 
changes because they can, when we’re talking about monetary 
penalties, they can have very significant impacts on those who 
are faced with them. And the hope is that the consultation has 
been done to ensure that these penalties are appropriate for 
these specific instances, and we do have a government right 
now that has failed often in terms of its consultation. So there’s 
always a concern on this side of the House as to what level of 
consultation has occurred, and I know our critic will be asking 
questions around that. 
 
Furthermore there’s always concerns when funds are moving 
from what is a specifically designated fund into the General 
Revenue Fund. And we’re seeing more and more of this happen 
where funds that used to be designated for a specific purpose, 
and therefore would specifically not flow through the GRF, are 
now going through the GRF. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it makes it 
more difficult for us — us as taxpayers and us, the smaller us as 
opposition — to track what government is doing with our 
money. When more and more flow directly to the GRF, it 
makes it more difficult for us to be able to trace that money and 
determine exactly what’s happening with that. 
 
I know I have . . . I’m cognizant of the time, Mr. Speaker. I 
know there are other individuals who want to enter into this 
debate on this bill, so at this time I will adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 101. 



March 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3447 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, The Agricultural 
Implements Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Now that we have reached the time 
of adjournment, this House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.]  
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  Steele .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3417, 3425 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3417 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prairie Dog Celebrates Its 25th Anniversary 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 
 Canada 150 Medal and Senate 150th Anniversary Medal Recipients 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 
 Nutrition Month and Dietitians Day 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3419 
 Moose Jaw Women Honoured at Awards Event 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3419 
 Young Athlete Achieves Remarkable Success 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3419 
 Rural Municipality and Towns Combine Fire Services 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3420 
 Quinn Stevenson Memorial Rink 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3420 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Delays in Rail Transportation of Grain 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3420 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3420 
 Funding for Special Dietary Needs 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3421 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3421 
 Tariffs on Steel Exports to the United States 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3422 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3422 
 Investment in Prince Albert and Hospitals 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3422 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3422 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3523 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 
 Consultation Regarding Cannabis Distribution and Regulation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3423 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3424 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3424 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3424 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3424 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3425 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3425 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question of Privilege 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3425 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3426 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3428 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3429 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3429 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3431 
 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3431 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3433 
 Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3433 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3434 
 Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3435 
 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3443 
 Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3444 
 Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act 
 Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les communications électroniques 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3445 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3446 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


