


















































March 15, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 15, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3449 
 March 15, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce someone who is no 
stranger to the legislature here. Mr. Rob Norris is sitting up in 
the gallery today, better known as Rob the thesaurus, I think, by 
some, with love. He’s now at the research partnerships office 
for the VP [Vice-president] of Research at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He is, as you know, the former MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Greystone and the 
minister of Advanced Education. 
 
With him today is a special guest, Dr. Jerzy Szpunar, who is a 
renowned professor of nuclear engineering who joined the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] from McGill. And so I 
would like to say to you, sir, welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly and also welcome to our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the minister to 
welcome Rob Norris back to his Assembly. Certainly he’s a 
friend. At times we had debate across the Assembly. He is a 
thesaurus of sorts. But he’s doing good and important work 
with the University of Saskatchewan, an incredibly important 
institution, not just within our province but from a global 
perspective. 
 
I am also pleased to welcome Dr. Jerzy Szpunar, professor, to 
the Assembly. I’m thankful for his work and his leadership at 
the University of Saskatchewan. So it’s my honour to join with 
the minister to welcome Rob Norris and Dr. Jerzy Szpunar to 
the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to welcome 
Ms. Marsha Crossman and Ms. Megan Min to their Assembly. 
They’re seated in the front row in your gallery. 
 
Marsha Crossman is a tutor. She is a civil servant that works for 
occupational health and safety, and I’m thankful for her work 
there. But she’s a tutor at the English as an additional language 
tutorial program out of the Regina Public Library, assisting 
those that are settling to Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Megan Min made the choice to build her life in 
Saskatchewan in 2011, immigrating with her son who’s now 18 
years of age, was here for a year on her own before her husband 
could join her. And she’s a fine example of those that are 
building and bettering our province by building their lives here 
in Saskatchewan. Megan Min recently passed her citizenship 
exam with a score of 100 per cent. So we’ve got a bright mind 

in our Assembly here today and within our province. So I’m 
pleased to welcome Marsha Crossman and Ms. Megan Min to 
their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to 
introduce some guests that are here for the annual convention of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, or 
SARM, as they’re better known. SARM is the biggest annual 
convention in the province. It alternates between Saskatoon and 
Regina. This year Regina is hosting. 
 
We have some delegates from my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
from the RM [rural municipality] of King George. We have in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, the reeve, Norm McIntyre. Norm, 
give us a wave, if you would. We also have a number of 
councillors and the administrator. We have Les Dawe, Bonnie 
Simonson, Ed and Shelly Omiecinski, and the administrator, 
Kelly Dodd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of us will be at the convention later this 
afternoon and of course tomorrow for the annual bear pit and 
the Premier’s speech. We’re very much looking forward to that. 
We welcome the delegates here. They’re looking forward to 
seeing question period. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the 
House to give them a warm welcome to their Assembly. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce somebody in your gallery. I have three 
constituents of mine here from SARM convention. I’ll go by 
age and then you can figure it out from there. We have the reeve 
from RM [rural municipality] of Good Lake, Dave Popowich. 
Give a wave. And the reeve from RM of Buchanan, Don 
Skoretz, and then we have the mayor of the village of 
Buchanan, but he’s the councillor of the RM of Buchanan and 
he’s also the president of my constituency and a good owner of 
G.W. Construction, Sean Wilson. He wears many hats and if 
you look at his hair, he needs them. I’d like everybody to 
welcome to this constituency . . . I mean to the House. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the members across and also welcome these delegates for the 
SARM convention here: reeves, the councillors, and the 
administrators. Your roles are really important and you’re 
strong municipal leaders. And we really respect the information 
that we receive from you. And we really appreciate all the hard 
work that you do to make sure that your communities are 
thriving and the work that you do for the province of 
Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official opposition, we want 
to welcome to your legislature, and I’d ask that all members 
welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



3450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I would like to introduce 
some very special guests who are sitting in your gallery. With 
us today is Patricia Anne Whitebear and her granddaughter 
Xavier, if you could give us a wave. Thank you. And Letitia 
Racine and her son Thunder, and as well Carrie Bellegarde of 
Punnichy. 
 
These folks here are board members of the Sixties Scoop 
indigenous survivors of Saskatchewan, and they want us to be 
aware of some of the issues that are facing the Sixties Scoop 
survivors. Tomorrow there will be a rally right across Canada in 
nine major cities. The theme is I’m Not the Only One. It’s a day 
of solidarity for those folks who are surviving the initiative of 
the Sixties Scoop. So I would ask all members here to give a 
warm welcome to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I want to introduce some people close to me that are sitting 
in your gallery. No strangers to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, of course, they’re my parents. They are here today, 
Donna and Owen Sarauer. 
 
But joining them are several very close family friends: Dennis 
Slade from Regina, very close family friend. Actually a 
colleague of mine just asked if he was a brother of my dad’s. I 
think they just spend so much time together that they’re starting 
to look alike. As well as Bev and Dave Pawliw from Saskatoon. 
I believe they’re from the Deputy Premier’s constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve been family friends of ours for a very, very 
long time. I often call Bev my second mom. For better or worse, 
my upbringing is partially because of her, so thank you for that. 
 
I’m very surprised they made it to a 10 a.m. sitting, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, as they were doing some celebrating last night as it 
was my mom’s last day of work. She retired from SaskCentral 
and is now enjoying a lifetime of watching session, apparently. 
So I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
welcome our Sixties Scoop survivor folks here and thank them 
for their diligence and hard work on a very important issue that 
we’ve got in front of us. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Chelan, Porcupine Plain, Weekes, and Bjorkdale. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 
on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the underfunding 
and the cuts to post-secondary education. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens from 
Moose Jaw. I know that there’s many concerned citizens down 
in Weyburn as well, but I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our 
children’s classrooms. Those who have signed this petition 
today wish to draw our attention to some of the following facts: 
that the Sask Party has cut at least $674 million for every 
student across the province, and this has been the case despite 
taking in an additional $67 million in education property tax, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As might be expected, these cuts have had devastating impact 
on classrooms across the province, including such impacts as 
the loss of pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs for children who 
have been diagnosed with autism, children who are deaf and 
hard of hearing, despite promises by this government to the 
contrary that those programs would not be cut, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course, that is having devastating impacts. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support the education system pay the price for this 
government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Martensville and Preeceville and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3451 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics. And we know people are very concerned 
about this issue because the Saskatchewan outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals — even those 
living outside the province — to make unlimited donations to 
our province’s political parties. And we know that 
Saskatchewan people deserve to live in a fair province where all 
voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. And we 
know that over the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party has 
received $12.61 million in corporate donations and of that, 
$2.87 million come from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong 
to Saskatchewan people. And we know that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit 
this influence and level the playing field by banning corporate 
and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, and to put a ban on 
donations from corporate and union donations, and to put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a seniors’ advocate in the province 
of Saskatchewan: 

 
In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately appoint a seniors’ advocate to ensure the 
rights of seniors are upheld and that all seniors across the 
province have the supports they need and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Invermay and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Donors Give $1 Million to Saskatchewan Hospital 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
in the House today to thank and recognize two very generous 
donors to the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Irene 
and Leslie Dubé have donated $1 million to the Saskatchewan 
Hospital for the New Beginnings campaign. This gift will bring 
the capital campaign to 75 per cent of its $8 million fundraising 

goal. 
 
After that ceremony on Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, we were 
given a tour of this state-of-the-art facility, and the attention to 
detail by Graham Construction has left the hospital staff 
literally over the moon with excitement. Mr. Speaker, as we 
toured the Pathway to New Beginnings sponsored by the 
Dubés, as well as various other areas of the hospital, the entire 
build site was a beehive of activity, with close to 450 staff 
working hard to bring this tremendous project to completion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dubés are known across this province for their 
philanthropy and caring spirits as well as being passionate 
advocates for mental health. This project is so significant for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I applaud this government for 
utilizing a P3 [public-private partnership] model for this build, 
saving the taxpayers of Saskatchewan millions of dollars. Mr. 
Speaker, what I find so truly unfortunate is that the members 
opposite still struggle to overcome their ideological notions and 
see the great and positive work that’s being done on this 
project. 
 
I now ask that all members please join me in thanking Irene and 
Leslie Dubé for their donation of $1 million to the 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Educator Wins Outstanding Principal Award 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise 
and join with my community in celebrating the completion of 
the rebuild of Sacred Heart Community School and gymnasium 
in the fine constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Sacred 
Heart School students moved into the new building on April 
24th, 2017. It’s a great new learning environment with the latest 
in technology, and I’m looking forward to attending the official 
grand opening today for the gym as students, parents, and 
educators attempt to break the record for a school ribbon 
cutting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to recognize the work of a tremendous 
educator in our community. In February, David Magnusson, 
principal at Sacred Heart Community School, was named one 
of the 40 most outstanding principals in Canada. Magnusson is 
just one of two teachers in Saskatchewan receiving that award 
this year. Each year the winners of Canada’s Outstanding 
Principals program become members of the National Academy 
of Canada’s outstanding principals. The award winners are 
recognized for innovation, leadership, and creativity in finding 
solutions and opportunities within their school communities. 
 
David has served as principal of Sacred Heart for the past three 
years and prior to that he was the vice-principal. And he 
certainly follows the tradition of great leadership at Sacred 
Heart, Mr. Speaker, coming on the heels of principals like 
Grebinski, Currie, and Tetreault. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating principal David 
Magnusson on being named one of Canada’s outstanding 
principals and congratulating the community of Sacred Heart 
Community School for a great day in the history of the Sacred 



3452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

Heart Community School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Robotics Team Invited to World Championships 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand in 
the House today to speak about an extraordinary achievement 
by a brilliant group of young students. Neilburg Composite 
Robotics Team has been invited to the Vex Robotics World 
Championship in Louisville, Kentucky. The team, dubbed 
360X, consists of three 10 to 12 students: Carter Cammidge, 
Craig Hewko, and Hunter LeDrew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Neilburg Composite High School robotic program 
is remarkable and innovative. It consists of a practical and 
applied arts survey class for grades 10 to 12 and an afterschool 
club for junior high students. The program has been developed 
to teach students, science, technology, engineering, and math, 
and how to apply these skills in a competition. This allowed the 
students to develop the skills needed to succeed in this 
competition, and it truly paid off. 
 
The team earned the Design Award and the Mixed Team of the 
Year Award at the Edmonton regional event and was crowned 
tournament champions and Excellence Award winners at the 
Calgary regional event. All of this culminated into the invitation 
to the Vex championship. The competition brings to upwards of 
500 high school teams from around the world together to 
celebrate their accomplishments and participate with the 
brightest minds in robotics and engineering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I wish the 
absolute best to team 360X as they compete at the Vex Robotics 
World Championship. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Emerging Filmmakers Screen New Work 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The talents of three 
emerging Saskatchewan filmmakers were on display this past 
month with the premieres of the short docs, To Wake up the 
Nakota Language by Louise BigEagle, Talking at Night by Eric 
Thiessen, and The Ride by Kristin Catherwood, all produced 
through Doc Lab Saskatchewan, a new initiative led by the 
National Film Board of Canada in collaboration with Creative 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Film Pool Cooperative. 
 
I was delighted to attend the screenings on February 23rd at the 
Remai Modern in Saskatoon along with a standing-room-only 
crowd. Talking at Night focused on Saskatoon’s mobile crisis 
centre that provides 24-7 crisis resolution to people in distress, 
and workers take calls from individuals in urgent situations and 
respond in person when help is needed most. Director Eric 
Thiessen captures the behind-the-scenes experiences of the 
crisis centre staff, crafting a compelling portrait of a critically 
needed but largely unknown service in the city. Mr. Speaker, 
the centre takes about 26,000 calls a year. 
 
To Wake up the Nakota Language centred on Armand 

McArthur, one of the last fluent Nakota speakers living on the 
Pheasant Rump First Nation, Treaty 4 territory, and the 
importance of language and culture; while The Ride told the 
impressive story of Liam Marshall growing up in the Big 
Muddy Valley training to become a bareback bronc champion. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these filmmakers in their new work capturing the 
Saskatchewan spirit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

4-H Provincial Curling Tournament 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month Maple Creek had the privilege of hosting, and I had the 
privilege of attending, the 2018 Provincial 4-H Curling 
Competition. The best junior and senior division teams across 
the province, 17 teams with over 200 total participants, came to 
Maple Creek to compete. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to 
report it was a total success. The Hilltop Club from Yorkton 
and area was victorious in the junior draw, and the 
Hilltop/Springside rink won the senior draw in the fierce final 
game that had to go into extra ends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an event like this that draws hundreds of young 
people in small-town Saskatchewan has an immense impact on 
local economy and atmosphere. The opportunity for members 
of our community to show off their town is always welcome. I 
wanted to take a moment to acknowledge Nora Schock and her 
organizing committee for the hard work they put into making 
the tournament a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Assembly, I would like to thank 
the organizing committees and the town of Maple Creek for 
hosting the successful 4-H curling tournament. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

High School Coach Has Winning Record 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
acknowledge Scott Hundseth, an exceptional coach and leader 
from Holy Cross High School in Saskatoon. Holy Cross is 
located in my constituency in Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood, 
and is my alma mater. 
 
When Coach Hundseth began his career with the Holy Cross 
Crusaders girls’ basketball program in 2009, the team had only 
won three city championships in their previous 46 years in this 
sport. Mr. Speaker, to summarize this coach’s success, he has 
led the Crusaders senior girls basketball team to a total of eight 
city championships, four provincial championships, and 11 
tournament titles. In addition, he has 94 consecutive wins in 
regular play in Saskatoon. Scott also received the Roughrider 
Recognition Award from Football Saskatchewan and the Rider 
organization. 
 
He dedicated many seasons to the high school’s football 
program, coached the Senior Bowl numerous times, and has 
been involved at the highest level of under-18 programs, 
representing Saskatchewan at the Football Canada tournaments. 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3453 

Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable career, and his presence will 
be missed at Holy Cross. Many of his student athletes and 
colleagues are very grateful for his commitments to sport in 
Saskatoon and wish him well on his next adventure in life. I 
now ask that all members please join me in congratulating 
Coach Scott Hundseth on a remarkable career and thank him for 
all he has done for the sports community in Saskatoon. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Opposition’s Platform 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The new Leader of 
the Opposition is only a few days into his first session and it’s 
already become clear that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
continue to live in denial. You don’t have to look any further 
than his two and a half billion dollar per year platform, a 
platform that their party has clearly endorsed by electing him 
leader. With no realistic way of paying for his promises, this 
will be the return of the big orange credit card, unless of course 
the NDP carbon tax is big enough to cover this incredible 
amount of spending. 
 
Speaking of carbon, Mr. Speaker, we watched the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana cherry-pick stats to drive an incorrect 
narrative about carbon capture this week. Two million tonnes of 
carbon captured at BD3 [Boundary dam 3]. That’s not shuffling 
money. That’s not taxation. That’s actual carbon reduction, Mr. 
Speaker. And it doesn’t stop there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some members are in denial more than others. The 
member from Regina Lakeview said on Tuesday about P3s, and 
I quote, “. . . this is a failed model that has failed in every other 
place on the planet.” Well here’s a reality check for the 
members opposite. From Columbia to Ontario, Australia to 
Alberta, Germany to Albania, Bangladesh to Mexico, P3s are 
being used and, Mr. Speaker, the last time I checked all of those 
places actually exist on this planet. 
 
When we can save Saskatchewan taxpayers money by using 
P3s, we absolutely will. Mr. Speaker, the choice between our 
two parties is very clear. While our focus is on saving taxpayers 
money, the NDP’s focus continues on spending it. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — It looks like we’re in for an energized session. 
So with that, question period. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Supports for Indigenous People 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you well know, 
we’re gathered here today on Treaty 4 territory. And that 
acknowledgement is something we’re doing more and more, 
and that’s very positive. As we look towards a focus on 
reconciliation, those words matter. But of course words are not 
enough. We need to move beyond words to real action, to close 
the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous people in 
health, in justice, in income, and education. 
 

But today in our province over 80 per cent of the people in our 
prison system are indigenous. We have high levels of HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus], diabetes, suicide, and other 
conditions related to marginalization, related to poverty. Thirty 
to 50 per cent less is spent on a kid’s education if they live on 
reserve than if they live in the rest of the province. Over 60 per 
cent of the children living on reserve in this province live in 
poverty. 
 
The last 10 years has been described as a decade of inaction on 
jobs, on education, on training, on justice, and a decade of 
weakening relationship with indigenous communities. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier, is a call to action. 
This is a top priority for us and we want to see movement. How 
will the Premier elevate this issue to the priority it deserves? 
What specific measures will he take to close the gap between 
indigenous and non-indigenous people in health, justice, 
income, and education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for what is a very important 
question for this province and in communities across the 
province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we have had 
commitment and we have had investment over the last decade 
— over the last number of decades, to be fair, I think — in our 
First Nations communities, in our First Nation . . . closing the 
gap, if you will, in our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education sector, both on- and off-reserve. 
 
We’ve had targets that we’ve put forward, Mr. Speaker, and we 
are starting to achieve some of those, work towards achieving 
some of those targets, Mr. Speaker. But there’s much more to 
do in our K to 12 system. Mr. Speaker, there’s opportunities 
that we have invested in to date, but there needs to be further 
investment as we move forward in post-secondary education, 
Mr. Speaker, and in job creation, Mr. Speaker, in the industries 
that are already present across this province. 
 
And I would point to some of the positive outcomes, Mr. 
Speaker, up in some of the communities where I live, Mr. 
Speaker, in the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Meadow Lake, I think, has experienced similar positive 
effects in both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal communities, 
Mr. Speaker, in that industry. But the Leader of the Opposition 
is correct, as we need to continually do more to work with our 
communities across this province, First Nation and non-First 
Nation communities, so that we can all have a better 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Response to First Nations and Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned the need to 
move beyond words to real action to close that gap. But of 
course words still matter. We need to acknowledge past wrongs 
if we’re to avoid future injustices. 



3454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

Since 2015 we’ve heard repeated promises from this 
government to issue an apology for the Sixties Scoop, the 
Sixties Scoop that separated First Nations and Métis children 
from their families. But we’ve never seen this government 
follow through on that province. Now during the leadership, the 
Premier said that he would reach out to First Nations and Métis 
leadership and meet to proceed with that. Accountability 
matters. Words matter. When, when will the Premier keep his 
word, keep his government’s word, and issue that long-overdue 
apology for the Sixties Scoop? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know there was an apology that was offered by the previous 
premier. I have said before and I say here today that there will 
be an apology that is offered by this Premier, Mr. Speaker. We 
will work, as I said, through the Minister of Government 
Relations who will, as we speak, will be setting up contacting 
First Nations leaders, contacting leaders in the province, and 
contacting our Métis Nation’s leadership in the province as 
well, Mr. Speaker, so that we can work with them on exactly 
how that apology would be delivered on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it would be 
delivered by myself. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, right after he 
took office the Premier promised to deliver his part, but so far 
has failed. And dragging out this promise over the past two 
years has caused real harm and real damage in the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, they should know better. If 
they really want to apologize they should try some genuine 
sincerity and offer some real good faith. What is the 
government’s timeline? What is the timeline? When will they 
apologize for the failures of governments of all stripes during 
the Sixties Scoop? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
timeline will be as soon as we are able to put this together, work 
with our First Nations leadership in the province of 
Saskatchewan, work with the leadership of the Métis nations to 
put this together so that it can be delivered in an appropriate 
fashion on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So the timeline, to be clear, is as soon as possible and 
as soon as we’re able to work with those leadership 
communities on how this will be delivered. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, that’s not 
good enough. This is a timeline that we need some specific 
dates . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, it’s been two years. 
And I look over there and some of them are wincing. It’s been 
two years. And this is on behalf of all stripes of governments 
who’ve been in power. Please, will the government today make 
a commitment to a real timeline with real dates? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations; First Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, we understand the 
relevance and certainly the urgency of what we need to do to 
reconcile various actions, that we need to continue to have those 
dialogues with our First Nations and Métis Nation. We’ve had 
numerous changes in structure, in political structure on both 
sides of the discussion. We’ve had changes in leadership on our 
side. We’ve had changes in leadership in the Métis Nation. So 
as we can continue to have that dialogue with all our leaders, 
we will get this put forward as soon as possible. It is certainly a 
priority on this government’s part to ensure that that discussion 
and that apology is given as soon as possible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow there will be a day of 
solidarity for people standing with the survivors of the Sixties 
Scoop. It’s critically important that we move forward on this. 
People are becoming more and more impatient. It’s been two 
long years. And while I understand the changes that have 
happened, this has not changed. And I call on the government 
today to make that commitment that they work with the people 
of the Sixties Scoop and get to work making sure this is a real 
priority. Will you make a commitment today to make sure that 
it happens? Tomorrow is a big day. It would be really good for 
you to make a statement for tomorrow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations; First Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if it’s the 
responsibility of this government to arbitrarily select a date that 
we need to . . . without consultation of our very important 
partners in this action. So we will endeavour to do this as soon 
as our First Nations partners, our Métis Nations partners, and 
ourselves have a very, very fruitful discussion as to what this 
apology is even going to look like, how we’re going to deliver 
it, and what they expect in that deliverance. So we are not 
arbitrarily going to set any date for this to move forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Gaming Framework Agreement 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, one partnership that has been 
very successful for the province of Saskatchewan is the gaming 
framework agreement that exists between the Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, that agreement has created 
hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars of economic activity 
and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And perhaps the member 
from Cannington can get back into cabinet and then answer the 
questions from the floor. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Speaker, the question is this: the gaming 
framework agreement has evolved over the years, and one of 
the outstanding items in that agreement is the fact of the 
crossover with revenue. This means that millions of dollars of 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3455 

revenue that are earned in SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority Inc.] casinos are clawed back by the province and are 
not available to First Nations for economic development, for 
education, and for the various activities of the First Nations 
Trust. 
 
This is something that the government can move on very 
quickly. Will they take that opportunity today to say that they’re 
going to end the crossover and make First Nations dollars that 
are earned in First Nations casinos stay in those casinos and 
those communities to provide that economic development 
benefit? Will they do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just 
recently we signed an extension of the agreement, just in the 
time I’ve been minister. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a partnership 
between the government and FSIN [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations], who have had a long-standing partnership 
in this area. And I think it works well. It works well as a 
partnership. 
 
In its most recent iteration of the agreement, we agreed to 
extend the agreement in order to help financing with the 
Lloydminster casino, Mr. Speaker. So it’s an important source 
of revenue and I think we share that . . . Some of the money 
comes I know in the Community Initiatives Fund. That’s part of 
it. Some of that goes to the Clarence Campeau fund as well. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I think this works well. 
 
I will note, I will note that the current agreement is 25 per cent 
that comes to the GRF [General Revenue Fund] from SIGA 
casinos. Under the NDP it was thirty-seven and a half per cent. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there is that point as well. So we value the 
agreement. We value the partnership, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
working well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the answer is no from that 
minister. And I guess I’d invite him to reconsider that, because 
certainly the dollars that have flowed to those communities 
under the gaming framework agreement have been vital in 
terms of economic development and education in addressing 
community priorities with SIGA as a tremendous partner, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I guess if the answer is no on that . . . and again I’d invite 
him to reconsider that. Certainly right now in the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation there is an open collective agreement that 
is currently being bargained, and one of the terms of the 
agreement around the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and 
Casinos Regina and Moose Jaw is that we would have 50 per 
cent First Nations and Métis employment at the casinos. And 
that is a goal that that government has consistently failed on 
each and every one of the past ten years that this government 
has been in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will they commit to making that a hard target with real 
penalties, that if they don’t actually accomplish that goal and 

instead fail as they have continued to fail, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s an actual consequence for it, for that government? Will 
they make good on 50 per cent indigenous employment at 
Casinos Regina and Moose Jaw? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
NDP began this with, I think, what they’ve heartfelt . . . and we 
agree, a sentiment of respect for First Nations and Métis people. 
And this side of the House agrees with that. 
 
And then they go down this line of questioning where we have 
a negotiated agreement through SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority] with First Nations people, that 
obviously they think we should negotiate with them, that they 
would get a better deal than the First Nations did, which I feel is 
disrespectful. 
 
And now he’s talking about the collective bargaining 
agreements which, again, we need to respect the process. We 
need to respect the collective bargaining, unlike the NDP that 
are showing that they feel that they should renegotiate here on 
the floor and disregard that respect. We don’t agree on this side 
of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Support for Indigenous Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder than words. 
And while the Premier’s decision to remove the former 
Education minister from her role after her comments regarding 
treaty education in the classroom were welcome, there is so 
much more work to be done when it comes to the education of 
indigenous students in this province. 
 
The education funding gap between on-reserve and off-reserve 
students is simply indefensible, and it’s leaving students behind. 
Graduation rates for indigenous students remain persistently 
low, and the education funding gap costs the province more 
than a billion dollars each year. We simply cannot let this 
injustice go on any longer. The former premier said that we 
need to be vigilant on closing this gap. 
 
My question is this: will the Premier do the right thing and give 
every child in Saskatchewan a fair shot by filling this gap and 
sending the bill to Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of 
the funding gap, Mr. Speaker, but I am pleased to stand in the 
House today and report to the House that graduation rates are 
increasing for First Nations students in our systems, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m also pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that there’s more 
relationships that are being developed between local school 
boards and local First Nations with respect to ensuring that First 
Nations children are getting the education they deserve. 
 
But there is certainly a funding gap, Mr. Speaker, and we 



3456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

continue to have an ongoing dialogue with the federal 
government with respect to filling that gap. And I’m 
encouraged by some of the things that we’re hearing from 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, in terms of support for First Nations, not 
just in education, Mr. Speaker, but support for First Nations 
with regard to the economy, with regard to health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m encouraged by those ongoing discussions. We’re going 
to continue to have them, Mr. Speaker. But we want to be 
focused on making sure that we fill that gap, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re going to do that as a result of our ongoing consultation, 
not just with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, but with 
First Nations and with local school boards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the education funding gap 
is a disgraceful injustice that none of us should tolerate. It limits 
the futures of young people. It holds us back economically. It 
hurts our entire province. And it’s past time to be punting 
around jurisdictional responsibility and kicking the can down 
the road. Instead of stepping up and funding all students fairly, 
the Sask Party has sat on the sidelines, let Ottawa off the hook, 
and the costs are paid by Saskatchewan people, young people 
all through our province. 
 
The associated savings of closing this gap would more than pay 
for themselves with the costs in social services, in justice, in 
health — economically, Mr. Speaker, and the massive 
contributions that these young people can make to their 
communities and of course to our economy. It’s a matter of 
basic decency, fairness, and rights, Mr. Speaker. When will the 
Sask Party stop the excuses, give every student the chance to 
live up to their full potential, fill this gap, and send the bill to 
Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I answered it in the 
first answer, Mr. Speaker, with respect to what this province is 
doing, Mr. Speaker. In the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission] calls to action, they call on the federal 
government to eliminate the discrepancy, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
conversation that this province continues to have with the 
federal government, and we’re seeing some real progress, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re seeing graduation rates increase, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re seeing the funding gap start to narrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s certainly an acknowledgement, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
prepared to stand here today and acknowledge to the people of 
the province and my fellow members in the House that that gap 
continues to exist, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going to fill it by 
having our ongoing conversations with the federal government 
to ensure that they understand what their responsibilities are 
with respect to First Nations education. But we’re going to 
continue to do this work, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue 
to do it with our partners in education, with local school boards, 
and with local First Nations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The funding gap should be tolerated by 

none of us. Children across Saskatchewan, they can’t wait for 
another decade, another two years, another three years. We need 
to step up today. Will the Premier of Saskatchewan, will he 
commit to fill that gap and send the bill to Ottawa today? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’m committed to 
continuing to have our ongoing conversations with respect to 
filling this gap with the federal government, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m committed to continue to have that ongoing dialogue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a federal government responsibility. Certainly the 
education of our children and the effects that the funding gap 
has, and the educational opportunities gap, has an effect on our 
whole province, Mr. Speaker. But this is an ongoing 
conversation. It’s an ongoing dialogue and collaboration with 
all partners including the federal government and First Nations 
and school boards, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be vigilant. 
We’re going to be diligent as we move this conversation 
forward. And I can assure my friend on the other side of the 
House that I will be leading that discussion and will be moving 
it forward as quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Indigenous Land Use and Duty to Consult 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Ongoing dialogue does not help our youth in 
our province here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, hometown leaders 
will tell you that the Saskatchewan Party does not like to 
consult. When it comes to First Nations and Métis communities 
they have even refused to ensure that there is meaningful 
consultation with issues that affect their rights. Leaders have 
real concerns to share about how decisions made by 
government impact the ability for indigenous peoples to use the 
land as outlined in the treaties. 
 
The Sask Party’s policy on the duty to consult was rolled out in 
2010, but for years it has been criticized as inadequate and 
ineffective when it comes to making sure indigenous voices are 
heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask Party update its policy on the 
duty to consult to ensure that First Nations and Métis peoples 
can have meaningful consultation when their rights are 
infringed upon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for her question. So we’ll just get into a little bit in 
background as to duty to consult. First Nations and Métis 
consultation policy framework outlines necessary processes to 
meet requirements of the Crown’s legal duty to consult and 
accommodate. CPF [Consultation Participation Fund] was 
released in July of 2010. And after a lot of consultations with 
our First Nations and Métis and northern partners and other 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3457 

stakeholders, we’ve fulfilled that process. 
 
So since 2007-2008 this fund — there is a First Nations and 
Métis Consultation Participation Fund — has issued over 173 
grants totalling 6 million, over $6 million. We can go through 
those if we like, but we have done a very extensive process. 
We’ve gone through the duty to consult process on virtually 
every file that involves our First Nations, Métis, and northern 
partners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Justice Programs for Indigenous Communities  
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, indigenous people make up a 
disproportionate percentage of our province’s prison 
population. The government should be working to lower that 
number and reduce the rates of recidivism. They claim to agree 
with that, Mr. Speaker. In fact, when the Sask Party talk about 
addressing the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s calls to 
action, they point to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
problem is, Mr. Speaker, they cut funding to that very program 
which means fewer people are providing this crucial assistance. 
They also cut community-specific centres like the Buffalo 
Narrows Correctional Centre. Will the minister admit that 
making cuts in these areas not only fails to reduce disparities, it 
increases them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we regard the relationship 
that we have with First Nations people as something that’s 
incredibly important, and we want to do more to try and ensure 
that our First Nations partners and indigenous people in our 
province are able to participate fully in the growth and 
well-being and the prosperity that our province has to share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve hired a second full-time victim services 
coordinator. We’ve increased funding to support another 
half-time position with the La Loche Friendship Centre. We’ve 
continued support for the Aboriginal justice program in 66 of 
the 72 First Nations in Saskatchewan. We contribute nearly $8 
million for Aboriginal justice programs annually, and in those 
there are included community justice and alternative measures 
programs, Aboriginal crime preventional initiatives, northern 
victim services, interpersonal violence and abuse programs, 
transition houses, northern youth violence reduction program. 
 
We’ve done some of those things in response to the La Loche 
tragedy. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do those 
kind of programs because we want to make sure that the First 
Nations people in our province continue to grow and continue 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Education minister was on his feet shortly and 
talked about the increase in the graduation rate. We’ve set that 
as a goal for our province. And we’re going to continue to do 
that, because that’s the best thing we can do for our people is to 
have them well educated and participating in the economy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Truth and Reconciliation Calls to Action 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, reconciliation is something that we 
as a generation must get right. And we’ve heard so much today 
about the need for further action, to move from words to action. 
A key guide to that action are the truth and reconciliation calls 
to action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Premier’s estimates in 2016, we saw a list of 
the steps that have been taken to address the calls to actions that 
really applied to the province. We haven’t seen any further 
reports since that time. However we have seen steps backward. 
We’ve seen cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. 
We’ve seen cuts to Aboriginal education outreach workers. 
We’ve seen the elimination of the NORTEP [northern teacher 
education program] program. And we see no meaningful action 
on poverty, no meaningful action on overrepresentation of 
indigenous people in our prison system, no meaningful action 
on unemployment or the education gap. We need action and we 
need accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit to a formal report to this 
Assembly on the province’s progress towards meeting those 
calls to action, on what progress has been made, and what more 
needs to be done? And if so, what form will that report take? 
Will we be able to have that commitment from you today to 
bring this forward to our Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we will commit to that 
here today, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to report to this Assembly 
and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan that 22 of the 
34 calls to action are being supported through various ministries 
across government as we speak, here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — which tells me that we have accomplished 
some, Mr. Speaker, but there is much more to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just speak to what has been accomplished 
so that we can replicate some of our success stories. And I will 
close with a personal success story in my . . . in the area of the 
province where I come, Mr. Speaker, but almost half a billion 
dollars invested since 2007, directed specifically into training, 
Mr. Speaker, of our First Nations, our Métis people across the 
province of Saskatchewan. It includes over 100 per cent 
increase in funding to an organization known as SIIT 
[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. We see what’s 
happening at our post-secondary universities, our Sask 
Polytech, our regional colleges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would close with this. I would close with a forest 
management agreement that was signed a number of years ago 
by this government, Mr. Speaker, with the Agency Chiefs 
Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker. The community of Big River First 
Nations, Mr. Speaker, took the profits of that agreement, of that 
business, Mr. Speaker, and invested them in the Darby Morin 
Centre of Excellence for Business Development, Mr. Speaker. 
And they have partnerships with those very organizations like 
the University of Saskatchewan, SIIT, the North West Regional 
College, and they are training their individuals from their home 
community, Mr. Speaker, for jobs that remain in and around 
that home community, Mr. Speaker, so those individuals from 
that community can stay at home. They can be employed, Mr. 



3458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

Speaker, and be part of the better Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
We are proud of our record, Mr. Speaker, in Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal communities in this province, and we will 
continue to work with everyone in this province. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Fiscal Support for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
enter this debate today, especially on a day like today when it 
seems the folks on the other side of the House are particularly 
ornery and grumpy, so I’m hoping that that means that we will 
have a very spirited debate. 
 
And frankly I would be grumpy too if I was on the other side 
and had to, you know, wear a lot of the horrible decisions that 
were made, in particular with respect to the issues that we are 
talking about today, but also with the last budget. And one of 
those decisions were the mass cuts to our hometowns and 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and the amount of downloading 
that we’re seeing from the provincial government to our 
municipalities and by extension the fallout that that has on 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families. So I guess 
I’m not super surprised that they’re as grumpy as they are 
today; I’m just disappointed, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think this is an important topic for us to talk about this 
morning. As I said, the last budget in particular really hit 
hometowns in a very difficult way which, as a result, we’re 
seeing growing . . . each municipality trying to struggle with the 
amounts of downloading and the rising costs through tax 
increases. It’s interesting coming from a government who likes 
to pretend that they don’t increase our taxes. Instead they try to 
do everything they can to make other elected officials like our 
municipal leaders wear their mismanagement of our finances, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the problem, when you force municipalities to wear this, 
one of the many problems is that they can’t carry a debt load. 
They’re not allowed to by law to carry a debt load, so they end 
up having to cut very crucial programs that we as citizens rely 
on and at the same time hike our taxes in a way that is very 
difficult for many, many families. 
 
Municipalities have been clear. Municipal leaders have been 
very clear. They need consistent funding. And one of the many 
reasons why our municipal leaders were so upset over the last 
budget, where not only were they caught off guard by the cuts 
to grants-in-lieu, but they felt that the cuts were massive, first of 
all, and second of all that they were improperly consulted. 
 
Many municipalities had already passed their budgets, and then 
had to go back to the table after all of the work that their staff 
had done, after all the work that these municipal leaders had 
done, because they had no idea that this cut was on the potential 
chopping block. They hadn’t even thought that that was a 
situation, when the former premier would like to say that he had 

told SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
that everything was on the table. When he says that . . . when 
we were asking questions about were these groups, were these 
elected officials, were these leaders properly consulted. 
 
That’s not consultation, Mr. Speaker, when you walk into a 
room and you say everything is on the table. That’s not proper 
consultation, Mr. Speaker. And that doesn’t allow for elected 
officials who are, like us, answerable to their constituents to be 
able to effectively do their job. And I think that’s why we saw 
so many municipal leaders speak out about the impacts of last 
budget and how much it affected them. 
 
In particular, we’ve quoted him a few times on this side of the 
House since the last budget. And I am proud of the city council 
members in Regina who spoke out against this, and there was 
quite a few. But we have quoted him before, and I want to quote 
him again. Former Sask Party candidate actually, but current 
Regina ward 2 councillor Bob Hawkins called the last budget “a 
thief in the night,” he said. As the complete quote, “This is a 
budget that comes like a thief in the night,” Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s a pretty accurate statement for how many municipal 
leaders felt about this last budget and felt about how their lack 
of, the disrespect that was provided to them by members 
opposite to them as elected officials by not properly consulting, 
by not talking to them about what the impact of this cut would 
actually be. 
 
Another former conservative candidate, I suppose, and 
Saskatoon ward 5 councillor Randy Donauer also had a few 
things to say about the impacts of the last budget and he said, 
“This is a transfer of a tax burden from one level of government 
to another because they can,” Mr. Speaker. And that adds to 
what I was saying before. Really what this amounts to is a 
downloading of a responsibility by the provincial government 
onto the municipal government. Not only are we seeing that 
from the financial end, but we’re also seeing that from the 
service end as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So more and more municipalities are left to pick up, to provide 
essential services, services that matter to all of us as citizens 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, and to do so with less money being 
provided to them by the provincial government. 
 
[11:00] 
 
So it’s a double hit, Mr. Speaker, and it makes it very, very 
difficult and frustrating for our municipal leaders. It has a very 
serious impact on our municipalities. Regina Mayor Michael 
Fougere said, “It came out of nowhere. Many municipalities 
have already set their budgets and that’s why there’s some angst 
and concern and anger from this council.” Again echoing what I 
had already said, Mr. Speaker. Many municipalities had already 
passed their budgets and then were hit with this and then had to 
go back to the table to pass their budgets again. 
 
We are now seeing many municipalities talk about what their 
next budget is going to be and that we’re seeing rate hikes being 
called for in many communities. And the concern is they don’t 
actually know yet what the 2018 budget’s going to look like — 
we don’t know that either — though they sure hope that they’re 
being properly consulted this time and that they’re not going to 
have to go back to the drawing board because of another 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3459 

surprise cut. But the Sask Party has had a history of blindsiding 
organizations, blindsiding communities, and blindsiding elected 
officials, so you can understand why there’s a lot of angst in the 
room when they talk about this. 
 
I do want to mention some of the budget, the tax increases 
we’re seeing so far for 2018. And again who knows if the 
elected officials will have to yet again go back to the drawing 
board once they see what the 2018 provincial budget looks like. 
But already we’re seeing tax hikes further from the tax hikes we 
saw in 2017 by our municipalities. These are really frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, Sask Party tax hikes. They are not at the . . . they 
should not lay at the feet of these municipal leaders. In fact you 
hear a lot of councillors talk about how . . . And actually I’ve 
watched some city council meetings, and I’ve heard them ask 
about whether or not they could actually separate the part of the 
tax that they feel, and is, a Sask Party tax hike that is as the 
result of Sask Party downloading or Sask Party cuts to the 
revenue that municipalities used to see. 
 
Regina passed their budget last month. They hiked property 
taxes 4.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and that’s on top of a hike of 
6.9 per cent that we saw in 2017, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
problematic thing. 
 
And I can hear the member for Regina University saying that 
these city councils have reserves and they should be tapping 
into those reserves. Everybody . . . Well I guess I can’t say 
everybody knows this, but if you talk to city council members, 
who are very passionate about ensuring that our municipalities 
stay healthy throughout the future, those reserves should not be 
used for operational means because you’re tapping into a 
resource that depletes. And the problem with our current 
provincial finances is that’s exactly what the Sask Party did, 
and that’s why we’re in the situation that we’re in right now. 
 
Moose Jaw, for their 2018 budget, they approved a 6.4 per cent 
mill rate increase, along with a 9 per cent water rate increase 
and a 6 per cent sewer rate increase. And that just happened just 
this week, Mr. Speaker. And that’s in addition to a 6.24 per cent 
increase that we saw in the 2017 budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Swift Current homeowners are facing a 13.14 per cent tax 
increase this year, and they’ve actually, city council members 
there, blamed a full 6 per cent of that increase directly on the 
province. 
 
Prince Albert is looking at a 1.5 per cent tax increase, and 
they’re also looking at eliminating nine jobs to deal with the 
$3.5 million shortfall. And that’s after a 1.5 per cent tax 
increase in 2017. 
 
I want to add a few more from the 2017 budget. We don’t know 
what all of the municipalities’ tax rates will be for this year, but 
we do know what they were for last year and we do know who 
is to blame for those. Yorkton saw a 9.4 per cent tax increase in 
2017; Melville, 8.36 per cent tax increase; Estevan, 8 per cent 
tax increase; North Battleford, 6 per cent tax increase; 
Humboldt, 5.7 per cent tax increase; Saskatoon, 4.8 per cent tax 
increase; Melfort, 4 per cent tax increase; Lloydminster, 4 per 
cent tax increase; Weyburn, 2.7 per cent tax increase. Mr. 
Speaker, these are Sask Party taxes, plain and simple. 
 

Again I think the elected officials who are having to deal with 
this very difficult situation that they’ve been put in by the Sask 
Party say it best. So I want to continue with a few more of their 
quotes. Moose Jaw city manager Matt Noble said, “This is out 
of the blue. It’s a total blindside.” Yorkton Mayor Bob Maloney 
said, “Just to pass along what’s been dumped on our plate 
would need a 10 per cent increase in taxes.” 
 
So Mayor Maloney is talking about, again, about the 
downloading that’s happening. So in addition to the cuts to 
grants-in-lieu and the effect that that had on municipalities, also 
the amount of downloading we’re seeing the provincial 
government onto our municipal leaders and our municipalities 
has really had quite a double whammy of an impact, Mr. 
Speaker. North Battleford Mayor Ryan Bater said, “Well, 
outrage is putting it lightly. We were absolutely blindsided by 
this budget,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So like I said at the beginning of my remarks, you can 
understand why they’d be so concerned about this upcoming 
budget after the blindsided way the Sask Party introduced the 
cuts in the last budget. We hope they’ve learned their lesson. 
There is a new Premier, but frankly everybody else is still the 
same and that’s a concern for many of our municipal leaders. 
 
We are all elected officials in here, Mr. Speaker. We all answer 
to those who elected us, and the same goes for our municipal 
counterparts, Mr. Speaker. We need to respect the work they 
do, and we do respect the work they do by proper consultation. 
Oftentimes they are more connected or they’re the first line of 
contact for many constituents. When they have challenges, 
when they have concerns they want to see addressed, often they 
find their city councillor to be one of the first people that they’ll 
contact when they’re looking for a service or they’re looking for 
. . . when they have a complaint or they have an issue with 
government. 
 
They do very good work. They do very important work, Mr. 
Speaker, and we need to respect them as elected officials and 
you do that by not . . . by first of all respecting them as 
counterparts by having consultation, having ongoing dialogue, 
not blindsiding them with cuts and not blindsiding them by 
downloading responsibility, and not blaming them for not using 
reserves when those should be used for, as I’ve been told by 
city councillors in Regina, those should be saved for special 
projects. Those should be saved for emergencies. Those should 
not be used for operations. 
 
So with that I know I have many colleagues on this side and 
some colleagues on that side who want to enter into this debate, 
so I will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports hometowns and 
acknowledges that our cities, towns, and villages deserve 
better than a freeze to municipal revenue sharing or cuts to 
grants-in-lieu which are forcing hometowns to raise 
property taxes and cut vital services. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is my motion and I will move it. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved the following motion: 
 



3460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

That this Assembly supports hometowns and 
acknowledges that our cities, towns, and villages deserve 
better than a freeze to municipal revenue sharing or cuts to 
grants-in-lieu which are forcing hometowns to raise 
property taxes and cut vital services. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
my place this afternoon and enter into the debate. And 
congratulations to you on your election victory on Monday. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you that I was really very 
close to supporting this motion when the member from Regina 
Douglas Park read it. In fact I was excited when she started 
with, “That this Assembly supports hometowns . . .” I thought, 
yes, we do, absolutely we do. But then, you know, it kind of 
went downhill from there, so I won’t be supporting the motion 
— that comes as no surprise. 
 
When I saw the motion, Mr. Speaker, I had to do a little bit of 
research on my own. So I did extensive research through 
Google, and I found a couple of definitions here. So the 
definition of “support” is “to agree with and give 
encouragement to someone or something because you want it to 
succeed.” And I think absolutely, with that definition, we do 
support our hometowns. 
 
But I have to wonder, what did our hometowns and cities and 
towns and villages do in the past that . . . They must have 
behaved very badly, Mr. Speaker. So I’m going to take us back 
a little ways. The year is 1994 and, believe it or not, I actually 
worked for the city of Saskatoon and I was part of a union. So 
in 1994 revenue sharing between the province, the NDP 
government, and the city of . . . all the cities in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan — in 1994 it was just over $45 
million for every city, town, village, and municipality in 
Saskatchewan. So that was just over $45 million.  
 
You know, that year, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon — for several 
years actually — we had an NDP mayor who refused to raise 
taxes. We had a city that was falling apart. We had potholes 
galore. We had streets reduced back to gravel. This is in a 
thriving metropolis, Mr. Speaker, of over 100,000 people. We 
had gravel streets because we didn’t have any money to fix 
them. $45 million for the whole province of Saskatchewan. 
Every city, town, and village had to share that $45 million. And 
we had a mayor that wouldn’t spend the money to fix our 
infrastructure, so it was actually falling, it was falling down. 
 
1994, all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, everybody went on strike. 
Everybody who worked for the city, union members, went on 
strike. So not only was the province not supporting us, the city 
wasn’t doing its part, and finally the workers had had enough. 
They revolted and that was the end of that. So that was 1994. So 
all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, that $45 million that the NDP 
government spread out throughout every town, city, and village 
in our province just wasn’t enough. So I wonder, what did our 
cities do so badly, how did they behave so badly that we 
couldn’t support them? 
 
Went a little bit further, Mr. Speaker. In 2005 it didn’t stop with 

the cities, Mr. Speaker, it went out into the RMs as well. So 
let’s skip forward to 2005 when we had a tax revolt from our 
RMs here in Saskatchewan. I don’t know a lot about that 
because there’s not a lot of farm land in Saskatoon University, 
but I can tell you right now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
There’s a little bit. There’s a little bit of farm land in Saskatoon 
University. But the RMs revolted, and it was because they were 
paying huge amount of taxes and it wasn’t going to the proper 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Education property tax only accounted for 30 per cent of what 
. . . Thirty per cent of it was going to education. That’s it. And 
these irate taxpayers finally said enough’s enough. We need it 
to be closer to 60/40 or 70/30 the other way, with the GRF 
contributing 70 per cent and the EPT [education property tax] 
contributing 30. And government . . . I love this quote, Mr. 
Speaker. Government Relations minister of the day, NDP 
Government Relations minister, Len Taylor, said if all goes 
well with consultations with SARM and SUMA, there will be a 
long-term solution in place by the year 2007. And I think that 
you can agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that there is now a 
long-term solution in place . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. 
I think so. That’s right. There is a long-term solution here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
When we start talking about supporting our hometowns and 
supporting our cities, Mr. Speaker, this year Saskatoon, my 
hometown, is going to share . . . Their portion of the revenue 
sharing is $46 million, Mr. Speaker, $46 million in one fiscal 
year. One city, one fiscal year — $46 million. Forty-five 
million dollars, Mr. Speaker, was shared throughout every city, 
hometown, and village. The whole province shared 45 million. 
My city’s going to share 46 million, Mr. Speaker.  
 
That is on top of a record number of investments that this 
government, this Sask Party government, has invested into my 
city alone. And I’ll read off a few of them, Mr. Speaker. A few 
of them I was involved in as a city councillor as well. The 
Remai art gallery, over $13 million; water reservoir upgrades, 
$7 million; flood control, two and a half million dollars. How 
about the 25th Street upgrade, $815,000. One that was near and 
dear to my heart, noise attenuation, $600,000. Mr. Speaker, it 
goes on and on and on here and I won’t belabour it but I will 
come back to a few of these. 
 
And now we talk about . . . We heard from the member from 
Regina Douglas Park about how cities had to raise taxes to fill 
the gap, how they couldn’t do it when we . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . through revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. The 
revenue we gain in PST [provincial sales tax] went down two 
years ago, so naturally revenue sharing went down this year, 
last budget year, in Saskatoon to $46 million. Naturally it did 
that. That’s our agreement. We share 1 per cent of the PST. 
 
So I want to go back and look when I was a city councillor in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and I just want to draw some parallels 
here. So in 2015 revenue sharing was just over $47 million and 
we raised property taxes 5.33 per cent. So in 2014 we shared in 
almost $46 million and we raised taxes 7.43 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatoon. 2013 revenue sharing was over $47 
million and we raised taxes almost 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3461 

This year revenue sharing went down a touch to forty-six and a 
half million dollars, Mr. Speaker, and we raised taxes 4.8 per 
cent. So, Mr. Speaker, the last four years have had record 
municipal revenue sharing in Saskatoon, and yet this year when 
it was down a little bit, they raised taxes the least. In the last 
five years this is the least amount of property tax increase. How 
does that work? That’s astounding math. Now I was part of that. 
I was part of that and fought against it and said, we have record 
revenue coming into the city; why do we need to keep raising 
taxes? I fought the battle but I lost. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more important infrastructure 
projects and important investments that we’ve made into the 
city of Saskatoon that I would really like to bring our attention 
to because sometimes, you know, when you have a lot of 
something and you have a wealth that comes in, we forget about 
those things that got done with the help of this provincial 
government, the things that didn’t get done for the 16 years 
prior under that government, Mr. Speaker.  
 
How about the Blairmore civic recreation centre and walking 
track, over half a million dollars for that, Mr. Speaker. The east 
fire station in Saskatoon, very important to keep our citizens 
safe, $4.8 million. The Confederation Drive sewer system. 
Every time it rained hard, their houses were flooded that were 
in the flood plain. Saskatoon did what they could, and they did 
it over and over and over. This government came to the plate to 
the tune of $7.2 million, Mr. Speaker, to have those citizens not 
have to pay over and over and over. 
 
As I conclude, Mr. Speaker, and with friends like these you 
don’t need enemies, I won’t be supporting the motion. Thank 
you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I’d like 
to say that since I’ve been elected I was chosen to be the critic 
for municipal relations. And I do have to say that I’ve been 
really enjoying this profile and this portfolio and been enjoying 
the time that I’ve been having to spend with municipal leaders. 
And I was really happy to see that our new leader has chosen 
for me to stay in this portfolio and continue my relationships 
with our community leaders because, Mr. Speaker, I truly do 
believe that that’s a very important role to play is having that 
relationship with our municipal leaders. They play one of the 
most important roles in our province. They’re the ones that are 
running all the day-to-day operations in our communities, and 
so I’ve been trying to get to speak to as many as I can. 
 
And I want to tell you a little bit though, Mr. Speaker, about the 
history of some of the topics that we’ve been discussing here, 
such as the grants-in-lieu and the municipal revenue sharing, 
because I’ve been spending some time with some people who 
have been in the municipal sector for many, many years, and 
they wanted to share with me the importance of these two 
programs and why we continuously bring those up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the grants-in-lieu were for royalties — or also 
they would call them concession fees — and that was secured 
under a contract with SaskPower for the sale of the municipal 
power production’s distribution and sales rights. Mr. Speaker, 

many of the small towns and cities produced their power before 
we decided to make it a provincial power corporation. And so 
in the ’20s and the ’30s, the past mayors and councillors had the 
foresight to establish these power stations in their communities 
that provided the power to their communities but also to the 
surrounding areas. 
 
So these were community-owned power corporations that 
generated most of the revenue that was needed in these 
communities. For many communities, that revenue generated 
from their power plants covered 65 per cent of their budget, Mr. 
Speaker. So you think about that. Being able to keep taxes low 
so that . . . because they were using the royalties and the money 
that they generated from these power corporations for these 
communities to equal that in their budget. 
 
So we know that these communities, in order to establish a lot 
of these power generation plants, they put a lot of investment 
into it. And the financial resources to be invested into these . . . 
And I know for my city that I belong to, Mr. Speaker, Prince 
Albert, some of the financial investment that they put forward 
came at a cost. And Prince Albert paid for that for many years 
but because they were trying to have the foresight and were 
wanting to do good for our city. 
 
So when we talk about these royalties, they’re so very important 
to look at why the province gave these royalties was because 
they knew that these communities were losing out on their 
financial abilities to gain that investment from that. So when the 
province decided to establish a province-wide power 
corporation, they approached these communities and offered 
them a deal which included grants in lieu of royalties. 
 
And so I think this history is very important to remember when 
we think about how important these grants-in-lieu agreements 
were. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of these communities still had 
their agreements in hand from those years back and basically, 
when this government decided to quit honouring those 
contracts, it was ripping up these contracts. And how can you 
trust a government who will just go behind your back and rip up 
a contract? And that was signed and agreed on, and that you 
need . . . You rely on that funding because that was revenue that 
was agreed on many, many years ago. 
 
And actually the residents in those communities, they see a little 
bit of extra costs on their bills, and that was how the 
government subsidized that grants-in-lieu. The community 
members in those communities are not getting that money back. 
It’s still sitting on their bill. So like, where is that money going? 
It’s not going back to their communities anymore, and that’s not 
very fair. So they’re paying more in power and their 
communities are getting less. So I think that’s really important 
that we look into how much that’s impacting our communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I also wanted to talk about the 
history of the municipal revenue sharing as well. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, the municipal revenue-sharing formula is very 
important. It was, like the member across was saying, it was 
first established and started the discussion, the dialogue with 
SUMA and SARM officials and northern officials on what the 
formula would look like when our party was in government. 
But municipal leaders are very happy that this government 
that’s in power now decided to take on this funding agreement 



3462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

and incorporate it while they were in power as well. 
 
And so I think when you talk to most of the municipal leaders, 
they give credit to both parties, because it was started under the 
NDP but it was continued under the Sask Party. And it’s an 
agreement and a formula that, if you talk to municipal leaders, 
pretty much every one of them will agree that this is a very 
important formula, that they rely on it to know what the 
province is providing them. There was a lot of unpredictable 
funding arrangements prior to that, but this, they know that it 
will fluctuate based on the percentage of the PST or the 
resource of the PST. They understand that, and they know it’s 
two years back, so they can predict about how much they’re 
going to be receiving. 
 
And so I’m going to tell you some of the quotes from the 
ministers who have talked about how important this formula is. 
So the previous minister of Government Relations but the 
current Minister of Health said, “Our government understands 
that our municipal partners rely on these predictable, 
sustainable and unconditional grants to invest in local priorities 
and keep Saskatchewan strong.” 
 
And our former premier also said: 
 

“The new funding formula provides a predictable, 
sustainable way to ensure municipalities know the amount 
they will receive in the coming years,” Wall said. “This 
will help municipalities with their future planning as they 
work to improve their communities and the great quality of 
life we all enjoy in Saskatchewan.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is so very true. Like there’s often times 
we don’t agree on things, but I will have to say that that is so 
very true. So when the municipalities lost the grants-in-lieu but 
then they found out the PST was increasing 1 per cent within 
our province and that a lot of the exemptions were being 
eliminated, they thought maybe this’ll have an affect on our 
municipal sharing revenue. 
 
Of course communities should benefit on that increase, you 
know, and the 1 per cent increase that we’ll receive on that 
because we know that the PST, because of the increase of the 1 
per cent and the elimination of the exemptions, that this is going 
to be a billion dollars’ revenue for this province. So if you 
incorporate how much that’s going to increase the municipal 
revenue sharing, if that was included in that, that would be a lot 
of money going back to the municipalities who could really use 
this at this point. Because when we sit and think about the 
population growth within our province, a lot of those people 
who come to our province, they’ve come to our urban sectors 
that are the ones that have been hit the most with the 
grants-in-lieu funding being eliminated and the municipal 
revenue sharing. 
 
Now the minister has indicated that they’re not going to 
incorporate this extra PST revenue into the municipal revenue 
sharing so, in essence, they are not going to be agreeing to the 
contract that they made with municipalities. They signed an 
agreement that they would get one point of the PST, so that 
should include the increase of the PST revenue and it should 
include all of the extra revenue that this province is going to be 
getting. But this minister said that he’s not going to honour that. 

And they’re also not going . . . They’re going to freeze the 
municipal revenue sharing for the next two years, so that’s not 
part of their agreement either. That’s going back against what 
the municipalities and the ministers had agreed a long time ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again that’s a little wrap-up about what the 
history with the grants-in-lieu and the municipal revenue 
sharing is and how the importance of it for communities within 
our province, and the fact that this government has totally 
disregarded that and ripped up these contracts and is not 
honouring them. And I think we deserve more and we would 
expect that our province, our provincial government would 
honour their contracts with municipalities. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to . . . And 
congratulations to you on your new job. I’m happy to join in on 
the debate today that was the motion passed by the minister 
from Regina Douglas Park regarding freezing revenue-sharing 
grant . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Minister? 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Minister, sorry. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s member. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Member, member. If I apologize for nine more 
minutes, I’m okay. Anyway, I just wanted to just bring up a few 
things I heard them . . . The member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Northcote wanted to know, she was talking to some of the 
municipal sector. And I have a little experience. I was on the 
municipal government for 20 years. 1994-2000 I was a 
councillor for the town of Canora; and 2000-2014, I spent five 
terms as mayor. A couple of them elected, and a few of them, a 
few of them nobody ran after me. I also spent 31 years as a 
grocery store owner in Canora, in a small business in rural 
Saskatchewan. So I’ve spent some time examining both life 
living under the NDP for 16 years, and the current government 
for about the last 10 years — and make the best shishliki in the 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about revenue sharing, my 
hometown, which has increased over 110 per cent from 2007 to 
2017 with a consistent formula of one per cent . . . Mr. Speaker, 
under the NDP there was no formula when I was on council, 
then mayor. And I just want to give you a few examples. In 
1996 to ’97 there was a . . . Canora got $158,321; ’97-98 we got 
108,512; ’98 to ’99, 108,512; ’99 to 2000, 108,512 — this is not 
a recording — 2000 to 2001, 108,512; 2001 to 2002, 108,512. 
Five years of frozen revenue sharing, five years in Canora. And 
then at 2000 we had a big jump to 123,472; 2003 to 2004, 
103,278. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So they cut it. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Well, no. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just a little. 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3463 

Mr. Dennis: — A little. And 2005 and ’06 it was 182,850, and 
then another freeze again in 2006-2007, 182,850. With no 
formula, it was basically they just gave us all the leftovers or 
the chicken feed that they had left. Then 2007 came in, and 
Canora jumped up to 206,000 and in 2008 we got 240,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was government then? 
 
Mr. Dennis: — There was a new government formed in those 
10 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was there? 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Yes. And 2009 it was three hundred and six 
thousand, eight hundred and fifty-four thousand. And then it 
stayed the same; there was a slight freeze. 400,000 in 2011; 
445,000 in 2012; a jump of 497,000 in 2013; 2014 it was 483; 
and then 499 in 2015; and a jump to 511 in 2016-17. And we 
had a drop because of the grants-in-lieu and our resources to 
432,000. 
 
Revenue sharing in Saskatchewan went up from 85,000 to 257 
. . . sorry, 86.6 million in 2007, all the way up to . . . In 2017 the 
revenue sharing jumped up to 257.78 million for our province. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say that not only our revenue 
sharing has doubled over the last 10 years, but our infrastructure 
has also doubled in our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about grants-in-lieu being cut, this is 
a formula that was unfair, inequitable, and confusing. 
Grants-in-lieu only covered 13 out of 16 cities for the 
SaskPower. SaskEnergy grants-in-lieu only covered 109 
communities out of 358. Some were paid 3 per cent; some were 
paid 5 per cent, with no consistency whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I’d like to talk to you about some cuts to vital 
services. Since 2007 there were some 750 more doctors, over 
3,400 more nurses, and we opened long-term care facilities, 
schools, and much more in our province. Those don’t sound 
like cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Canora since 2007 we opened 35 daycare spots 
in 2008 and 35 more daycare spots in 2013, for a total of 70. In 
2013 we also added three classrooms to our Canora Junior 
Elementary because of all the increase in our population. Our 
population went from 2,200 to 2,845. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now let’s look at the record of the NDP when they 
were in. They closed 19 long-term care facilities with 1,200 
long-term care beds, 52 rural hospitals, and 176 schools, with 
over 800 jobs lost. And here are some of the schools that were 
in my constituency: we’ve got the Endeavour School; we’ve got 
the Willowbrook School; we got the Rhein School; the 
Theodore School; Norquay School; Sheho School; Ebenezer 
School. We’ve got the Arran School, the Fort Pelly School, the 
Togo Elementary School, Buchanan School, and Canora Senior 
Elementary School. I’ve had to highlight them because there’s 
so many damn schools were closed . . . darn. 
 
I’d like to tell a quick story, a little story about back in 2004 
when we talked about vital services in Canora. When I was 
mayor, Mr. Speaker, when I was mayor, the previous Premier 
Calvert gave me a call and wanted to know about meeting with 

me and some of my area people for rural revitalization . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it was good. So there was 15 of 
us. I got RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]; I got 
ministers; I got farmers; I got business people. And we all met 
with Premier Calvert and his crew, entourage came down, and 
we met for a full day and we had a very good discussion, good 
thoughts on how to build rural Saskatchewan. Well that next 
day, Premier Calvert announced the closing of our rural centre 
in Canora, along with 21 others, and a layoff of 120 staff, 
Agriculture staff. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That happened right in Canora, didn’t it? 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Yes, there was layoff notices. Also there was 
20 . . . in Meadow Lake, Lloydminster, Unity, Humboldt, 
Hudson Bay, Kindersley, Biggar, Rosetown, Davidson, 
Watrous, Wynyard, Kelvington, Canora, Maple Creek, 
Shaunavon, Assiniboia, Indian Head, Moosomin, Estevan, and 
Carnduff. 
 
When we look back at the last 10 years, I think our commitment 
and our record speaks for ourselves. We have given back to the 
province and it shows in the trust and the number of seats we 
have in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give you a few quotes from the 
StarPhoenix over the past years. “Rural patients waiting longer 
for care.” That was from the Leader-Post on March 9th, 2007. 
“Hospital closures are still possible.” “Long-term beds on the 
chopping block” in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I can’t believe this motion was brought 
forward and I will not be supporting the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I join you today in the 
year 2018, Mr. Speaker. You know, there was a budget last year 
and there’s a budget coming very soon this year. April 10th I 
think is the date that they’ve decided on, Mr. Speaker. And 
judging by the general mood across the way, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know if they had a treasury board meeting yesterday or 
cabinet didn’t go real well or, you know, the grappling with the 
decisions continues. 
 
But I understand how it is. Like maybe they look at this as 
therapy. Maybe it’s like a trip to the spa or something, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to float around in their own warm bath 
water and feel better about themselves if but for 75 minutes, 
Mr. Speaker. But you know, this debate will come to an end. 
And then they’re going to have to go back to treasury board and 
to cabinet, and then they’re going to get confronted with the 
reality of what they have presided over, Mr. Speaker, and where 
the finances have wound up, after how many years of this 
government? Twelve years now? Dirty dozen? Where are we at 
now in terms of Sask Party? Since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess the 11th anniversary is coming up this fall and I’m sure 
it’s going to be an interesting one. I’m not sure if it’s . . . What 
do you get for that one? Do you get lead? Do you get tin? I 
don’t know, Mr. Speaker. We’ll see. 
 



3464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

An Hon. Member: — Wood. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Wood, wood. Oh, they’re going to lay on the 
lumber for the 11th anniversary, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll see how 
that all goes. 
 
But it’s interesting listening to the various speeches that get 
given in this place, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the, you know . . . I 
guess I wouldn’t want to talk about my budget if I was this 
government either. You know, I wouldn’t want to talk about the 
way that they ran in the 2016 election and said, we’re going to 
keep Saskatchewan strong; everything’s going to be great. I 
wouldn’t want to talk about the way that the switcheroo went on 
after that, Mr. Speaker, in terms of like, well you know . . . 
Wasn’t days after the election where it was, like well it’s time 
to crank up the transformational change agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
Transformational change — you remember that one, eh? Like 
it’s sort of the kind of language that you get in a cult, where it’s 
like, you know, we’re going to transformational change you to 
the next level or something like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, people are not to be fooled. People saw through 
that pretty quick, and they’re like, okay, it was keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Now it’s transformational change. Uh-oh, 
something’s coming down the line here, Mr. Speaker. And what 
in fact was coming down the line? There was a lot of tap 
dancing went on in the interim, Mr. Speaker, but we had one of 
the worst budgets we’ve seen in the history of this province 
brought down by that government last April, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, I think back to what they tried to do on 
libraries, what they tried to do on libraries, Mr. Speaker. And 
you know, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, the then 
minister of Education, fought a game fight around trying to hold 
on to those cuts, Mr. Speaker, and the way that it was patently 
obvious that they didn’t understand what was happening in the 
library sector. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, they came forward. They got a 
good talking-to from library supporters right around this 
province. And you know, to their credit, you know . . . And they 
also then tried to take credit for listening, Mr. Speaker, but it 
was hard not to hear the way that they were being tuned in right 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. So they backed down on that. 
And we’ll wait to see what happens in this year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, because of course they just said, well we’ll put a pin in 
it for this year. And we’ll see what comes back in this budget. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And again in terms of casting some thoughts on what the 
general mood is over there, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the 
reality’s setting in. You know, the surreality of some of the 
speeches that go on in this place across the way, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think they’re going to cut it for very long because the bill 
comes due at the end of the day. And maybe you can 
camouflage it and hide it until after the election, but certainly 
the bill came due last election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. You know, they’ve reversed 
the library decision. They partially walked back some of the 
more head-scratching, regressive decisions they’d made out in 
Social Services, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, in terms of Advanced Education, I wish my 
colleague across the way good luck with that. But in terms of 
what the sector needs, the sector needs a partner they can count 
on instead of this, you know, coming around mid-term, you 
know, clawing back whatever meagre increase had been 
promised. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s where I get to today’s . . . You know, 
so there were . . . Different exercises like that went on after the 
budget dropped and after this government, you know, got a 
drubbing in a couple of by-elections. The premier of the day 
reconsidered what his future plans were, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, he lit out to the speech circuit. 
 
And again, you know, it’s great. We just received a fine lecture 
from the Premier on fiscal probity, fiscal probity, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of the proper administration of the finances of 
Saskatchewan. You know, I guess my first response was like, 
well how about a little fiscal probity when you were actually in 
charge of the finances, Mr. Speaker, instead of presiding over a 
decade of the best times this province has had and then come 
around and say, well is there a sovereign wealth fund at the end 
of the rainbow? Well no, there’s not. You know, did we save a 
dollar? No. No, they blew through the rainy day fund then, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then, you know, the . . . presides over an election where 
it’s keep Saskatchewan strong and here we go, here we go, Mr. 
Speaker. The budget that’s come down last April, you know, I 
think it’s only just begun in terms of the kind of decisions that 
this government is making, and making the people of 
Saskatchewan pay the prices for the mistakes and the bad 
choices of the members opposite. We see that certainly in our 
municipal sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, last year’s budget . . . And you don’t have to take 
my word for it but Bob Hawkins, you know, city councillor 
here in the city of Regina, on the board with SUMA . . . And 
who is Bob Hawkins? Well he was a Sask Party candidate in 
2007, Mr. Speaker. Pardon me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
instruction, the guidance. But of course, Dr. Bob Hawkins said 
that last year’s budget came “like a thief in the night.” It came 
like a thief in the night, Mr. Speaker. And you can check the 
record for that in terms of city council and, you know, the 
interviews he’d given with Global and with the Regina 
Leader-Post. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s I think a pretty accurate 
depiction of the way that all these different partnerships 
throughout the province that count on the provincial 
government to be an honest broker and straightforward in their 
dealings and took them at their word when they said they were 
about keeping Saskatchewan strong, took them at their word 
when they were going to be honouring agreements around 
grants-in-lieu that had been in place for decades, Mr. Speaker, 
when that, of course, was given the old switcheroo with last 
year’s budget. 
 
You know, maybe there’s some kind of magic solution coming 
along here, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think year 2’s going to be 
much better of this trajectory that the government’s got the 
province on. And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because the 
province deserves so much better. The partners that count on 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3465 

this government to provide the services, to provide the things 
that we all value in common in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going to be looking to this government and saying, you 
know . . . 
 
And of course, you know, there are a lot of people in very 
vulnerable situations, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this 
government. So they’re hoping that the listening and the 
backtracking and the repenting that went on after last year’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker, they’re hoping that that’s going to stick; 
it’s going to take somehow, Mr. Speaker; that the new 
Premier’s going to make it work somehow. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think, you know, if past is indeed prologue, 
or the . . . I forget who was, who’s fond of saying this, Mr. 
Speaker. Oh yes, it was the premier. He was saying that the best 
indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour. And so, you 
know, what are we to take from the behaviour of this past 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that it was one of the worst, if 
not the worst budget in the history of this province? And what’s 
going to happen in this year to come, Mr. Speaker? What 
lessons will have been gleaned from this experience, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So in that we’ll be standing up alongside Saskatchewan people 
every step of the way, calling that government out, calling them 
to account. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Congratulations on your election to Speaker of the Assembly. 
It’s an honourable position, and I am sure you’ll do it well. 
 
You know, listening to the members opposite in their 
presentation today really reminded me of the 1982 NDP 
election platform. The family of Crown corporations is strong. 
That was their slogan, Mr. Speaker, while interest rates were 
running at 20 to 24 per cent and families across the province 
were losing their homes, they were losing their farms, and they 
were losing their businesses. 
 
That lack of understanding of reality is clearly seen in today’s 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. And fact is, if you take a look at the new 
Leader of the Opposition’s statements and calls from the 
members today, it’s continually spend, spend, spend. And fact 
is, the Leader of the Opposition, in his platform to win the 
leadership, promised to spend $2.8 billion per year. And the 
only place that it looked like in there he could find the money 
was by imposing a carbon tax on Saskatchewan. Totally 
irrelevant to the people of Saskatchewan. No realization of the 
facts on the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, as an example, the member for Regina Douglas 
Park thinks that we were ornery today. You know, from her 
point of view I can understand — I can understand — where 
she comes from on that, because the truth makes it very difficult 
to keep promoting your philosophy when it’s absolutely wrong, 
Mr. Speaker. So I can understand that she would think we were 
being ornery. 
 
The member for Regina Douglas Park wants consultation with 
municipalities. And we do that, Mr. Speaker. And yet her 

colleague, the member for Saskatoon Centre, wants us to 
arbitrarily, without consultation, set a date to declare an apology 
to First Nations for the Sixties Scoop that happened — that 
happened — under the NDP and the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. No 
consultation on that; just do it arbitrarily, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, they are split in their caucus. There are factions all 
over the place in that caucus, and they don’t consult each other, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, councillors say that they want to identify the budget 
cuts in municipal budgets. Well as I look back over history, Mr. 
Speaker, looking at what has happened in the past when the 
NDP were government, most if not all of the budgets of rural 
and urban municipalities would have identified it as NDP cuts. 
 
Let’s take a look at what was actually happening. So this past 
year, this past year, the spending on urban municipalities was 
165 million, and indeed that was a reduction from 174 million 
the year before. Let’s look at the year that we formed 
government. First budget, 2008 — 77 million using the formula 
that was in place under the NDP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There was no formula. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well there was no formula. It was 
simply grants given out. The 2006 budget for urbans was 44 
million, and we had almost doubled it in the year that we were 
government. And yet today the NDP are saying, oh my God, the 
sky is falling for municipalities, both rural and urban, because 
we’re giving them more than twice what they were getting 
under the NDP. It’s a terrible thing when you have more money 
than you’ve ever had before. 
 
Rural municipalities under last year’s budget got almost 73 
million; 2006 under the NDP, 37 million; almost twice as much. 
You know, you go back a little bit earlier, go back to 1993, 
rural municipalities were getting 31 million and in 2006, 37 
million. Wow, what an increase under the NDP, what an 
increase. You know, so municipalities, like every form of 
government, whether it’s federal, provincial, or municipal, if 
you give them money they will spend it. 
 
So they never want to see a reduction. We don’t want to see a 
reduction. Federal government doesn’t want to see a reduction. 
But you can’t ignore the realities on the ground, which is what 
the 1982 NDP campaign was trying to do, was ignore reality. 
That is also what the current Leader of the Opposition, in his 
campaign to win that position, was ignoring reality of where are 
you going to come up with two and a half billion dollars a year 
to pay for his promises unless you cut, let’s say, 50 per cent of 
the Health budget, or both the Education and Advanced 
Education budgets to zero. You know, you might get two and a 
half billion dollars there, you know. So there’s no reality in 
what he was . . . what he raises. 
 
You know, the member for P.A. Northcote is always talking 
abut the need for a second bridge in P.A. We have said we 
would pay, we would put up one-third of the money if the feds 
would put up one-third of the money and P.A., like everybody 
else, puts up one-third of the money within a P3. No, no, no, we 
can’t have that. No, no, we can’t do that. So, Mr. Speaker, they 
just continue to ignore the realities. 
 



3466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

And the municipalities, under last year’s budget, continue to 
receive 1 per cent of the PST that they agreed to and that we 
agreed to, and they still do that today, Mr. Speaker. So they’re 
. . . Yes, they all want an increase. We want an increase as well, 
you know. But we also have to deal with the realities of the 
world today, and when you lose 10 per cent of your revenues, 
reality strikes home really quick. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the non-realistic 
motion of the member for Regina Douglas Park and her 
colleagues because it’s bound to fail. 
 
The Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. Questions. I 
recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The tax burden for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses is lower now than it was 
10 years ago and revenue sharing is also significantly higher 
than it was. In fact, in my home community of Swift Current, 
we’re at 138 per cent higher than it was prior to 2007. Yet the 
members opposite critique both of these areas actually, while 
also proposing a massive $2.5 billion per year spending 
increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. To pay for this two and a half billion dollar plan, 
will you burden our RMs and municipalities with a tax increase, 
or will you cut much needed programs? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s pretty rich for them 
to be talking about taxes when we have the highest property 
taxes in Saskatchewan’s history. They’ve raised the PST. They 
eliminated the exemption. They’re forcing municipalities to 
raise their taxes and raise their service fees. So that’s pretty rich 
coming from you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I just wonder 
if the member from Cannington could clarify because, you 
know, sometimes it gets a little off the trail and, you know, 
things start to get kind of gauzy. But could he clarify for us, at 
very least the Premier has indicated that the province would pay 
for 100 per cent of some kind of yet-to-be-determined P.A. 
bridge. At least he got that part right. The member from 
Cannington said something very different. Could the member 
from Cannington tell us who is right, the Premier or the 
member from Cannington? 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we see 
an example of the misunderstanding and the misdirection 
provided by the members opposite. The Premier said earlier 
today that the Saskatchewan Party government would fund 100 
per cent of the hospital — not the bridge, Mr. Speaker, the 

hospital. With every tertiary hospital in the province is paid for 
by the province, be it Saskatoon, Regina. We’re paying for the 
North Battleford hospital, Mr. Speaker. We’re paying for the 
children’s hospital. It was the members opposite as government 
that closed the hospitals around this province, 52 hospitals 
including the Plains hospital here in Regina because it had 
asbestos and then they turned it into a school after that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Mr. Speaker, we find this motion just a little 
bit hypocritical. The members opposite say they’re all for our 
cities, towns, and villages deserving better on one hand, and 
then on the other hand, including their own leader has stated 
openly that he supports the carbon tax — a carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker — that hurts ag producers, the energy industry, and 
many other people in between. This tax, Mr. Speaker, can and 
will cause job losses as well as significant increases to costs at 
the pumps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is posed to the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. How can you honestly say that the people 
deserve better, yet support a tax that negatively affects every 
person living in every city, village, and town? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add to the fact that 
this government’s trying to deflect from the fact that they 
haven’t consulted with municipal leaders when they’re making 
these decisions. And they make these decisions on the floor of 
the Assembly, when they had meetings with municipal leaders 
but they didn’t even inform them of the decisions that they were 
going make. Have some respect for our municipal leaders. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The interim CEO 
[chief executive officer] of the Meewasin Valley Authority, 
Doug Porteous, issued a letter last week in which he wrote, and 
I quote: 
 

It is essential to the survival of Meewasin that the 
Government of Saskatchewan . . . [does] the actions from 
last year, and in its budget this fiscal year, reestablishes 
long term sustainable funding . . . 

 
And speaking to Global News, Porteous was very clear. I quote, 
“Meewasin cannot exist without statutory funding.” 
 
To the member from Saskatoon University, a former Meewasin 
Valley Authority board member, so he knows this issue well: 
what has he got to say to the CEO and the supporters right 
across the province, and in particular in his own riding, that 
want to see that statutory funding re-established? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member for the question. Meewasin is a vital, 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3467 

important part of the city of Saskatoon and Saskatoon 
University constituency. We’re working hard with the 
Meewasin board and with the Meewasin Valley Authority to 
find a path forward to continue to support this very important 
initiative. 

And on another note, we also are supporting many other things 
in Saskatoon that are very important initiatives. I forgot to draw 
attention to the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon 
University, $235 million; two bridges, Mr. Speaker, $147 
million; U of S got $346 million for capital funding. The Gordie 
Howe Complex was one and a half million dollars; and lest we 
forget, the Remai art gallery, $17.1 million. 

I’m proud to stand on our record that we have established over 
the last 10 years and will continue to do that. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Regina Douglas Park has been very vocal about revenue sharing 
and yet is critical of our government’s plan to balance the 
budget. Today she mentioned that we had cut her community 
funding, and yet in Regina alone, since our government took 
over, there has been a 157 per cent increase in revenue sharing, 
bringing that total up to $40.5 million in the 2017-2018 year. 

So since the Saskatchewan Party took over in 2007, your 
constituency as well as mine are getting a bigger piece of a 
bigger pie. And so my question is for the member of the Regina 
Douglas Park. If you’re so determined to increase revenue 
sharing for your city more than we already have, and since you 
can’t have your cake and eat it too, what programs would you 
cut in order to pay for it? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 

Ms. Sarauer: — I appreciate the question. And I’d like to 
welcome all of the new members, and welcome them to their 
first 75-minute debate, and look forward to when they are 
participating in the debate portion of the event so we can ask 
them some questions. But I’m happy to see them join in. 

I do want to point out the member’s own constituency, own city 
of Melfort’s tax increase last year was 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re trying to provide for a better province. I’m not just 
talking about Regina. I’m talking about the whole province. The 
whole province received a devastating cut from this Sask Party. 
If they don’t want to believe us, then they can believe the 
municipal leaders, and they can believe the quotes from the 
municipal leaders who are working on the front lines, who are 
dealing with these budget cuts, who are really dealing with the 
situation that the Sask Party put them in. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course one of the 
cuts to hometowns that was announced in last year’s budget 
was devastating cuts to our regional library system. And it was, 
with some credit, eventually turned around, but not before we 
saw the second-largest protest in the history of this province. 
And people of Saskatchewan took that fight to over 90 locations 

around the province. Mr. Speaker, at that time the minister 
indicated that there would be a full review of library funding in 
this province, but we’ve seen nothing but radio silence on this 
up until now. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina University, my 
question is this. We know what your response was last year to 
those who expressed concerns about the cuts to library funding. 
What will your response be this year if your government 
decides to go after libraries again? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 

Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m the member 
from Saskatoon University. I was waiting for the minister to get 
up, but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, can’t even get that 
right. I know, it’s hard.  

Mr. Speaker, when we had our budget last year, we made some 
tough decisions and we made sure that we are down a path to 
prosperity and a path to balance the budget. We heard from the 
citizens of the province. I had a few people show up at my 
place, and they were gracious and polite. And we, you know, 
we made decisions based on that. That’s democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m proud to defend it. 

I’m also proud to defend our record. Saskatoon, this year . . . 

The Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 

Mr. Nerlien: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my time today, I . . . 

[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
time today, I ask that the following motion be entered into the 
records: 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the 
debt of future generations. 

Mr. Speaker, for emphasis, let me be clear. The NDP, under this 
newly minted leader, have put forward an estimated $2.5 billion 
— that’s billion with a “b” — of new spending, with absolutely 
no plan to fund this spending nor any end in sight. Mr. Speaker, 
that amounts to $2,145 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province, about 10,000 per average family. 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t note for the record 
that it’s now been two full days since the NDP advocated for a 



3468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

carbon tax in this Chamber. Let me begin with some context for 
my comments that follow. 
 
First I’d ask my colleagues to really pay attention because this 
is going to get very complicated for a couple of minutes. Let’s 
look at the NDP leadership contest. I had to reach out to some 
of my colleagues to try to make some sense of this recent 
contest. The member for Saskatoon Meewasin — for our 
purposes today we’ll call him run-run-run or three-run for short 
— defeated the member from Regina Rosemont. And for our 
purposes today we will refer to him as run-run, or two-run for 
short. 
 
So stay with me on this; this really continues to get 
complicated. As explained to me, three-run beat two-run in a 
run to replace two-run, who stepped down to run against 
three-run to lead a party currently led by Norma new girl, the 
interim leader and member for Regina Douglas Park. All of the 
pundits seem to believe that had the interim leader run, she 
might well have defeated the noted candidates. So if I have this 
correct, one-run could likely have beat two-run and three-run to 
run the party that is now run by a leader who is about to run out 
of options. 
 
So being a good political student, I watched the final hour of the 
NDP leadership process, including one-run’s speech and the 
election of three-run over two-run. In hindsight, I wish I would 
have had a screenshot of the scenes of the NDP caucus 
surrounding the new leader. Let’s remember that two-run had 
the broad support of seven caucus members over three-run, who 
was supported in a leap of faith by one member. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sorry, did I use the word “leap”? I’ll come back to that in a 
few minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the screenshot at that moment would have shown 
emotions running from anger to despondency to 
disappointment. The Opposition House Leader used the word 
“grumpy” today. Perhaps looking in the collective mirror these 
days would be appropriate. Clearly that caucus knew they were 
now on an entirely new path. The word that comes to mind to 
describe the scene is tergiversate. Tergiversate means to turn 
one’s back. It was exactly at that moment, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
that a lot of what the member opposite is putting forward is 
meant in a state of levity and all of that, which is fine. But as 
hon. members in this place, we’re to refer to each with some 
decorum and respect. And I think I heard the member opposite 
refer to the member from Regina Douglas Park as the new girl. 
So if he could please observe the proper respect and decorum 
that we’re due to each other in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and 
if you could remind him of that fact, I’d be much obliged. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Just to respond. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes. 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — As the House Leader, I was listening. I 
didn’t hear that. We will check, but I will ask the member that 
. . . In the text of a broad spectrum of speeches here, things are 
sometimes said. And I will review it, but it’ll also be up to the 
member, who’ll know what he said at that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes. It’s a good reminder for all the members. 
Treat each other with a level of respect, and everyone here is 
honourable. Thank you, member from Regina Elphinstone, for 
the reminder. I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
opposition member for bringing that to my attention. And I do 
apologize for using that term. Thank you. 
 
We’ll continue. So as I was saying, as . . . being a good political 
student I did watch the last period there, and the term “leap” 
was used, which I will refer to later. Clearly the caucus knew 
. . . sorry. It was exactly at that moment that the NDP completed 
the process of turning their backs on the hard-working, 
common-sense people of Saskatchewan. More on context, the 
Saskatchewan NDP Party Constitution reads, and I quote 
section 1.3: 
 

The purpose of the Party shall be to promote through 
political action and other appropriate means the 
establishment of a co-operative commonwealth in which 
the principle regulating production and exchange will be 
the supplying of human needs and not the making of 
profits. 

 
Section 1.5 reads, and I quote: 
 

In any matter not dealt with by this Constitution, the 
Constitution of the New Democratic Party of Canada shall 
prevail. 

 
As a result, we have to keep in mind that the term “profit” is 
clearly a dirty word in NDP lexicon. Also when in doubt, 
deferring to the federal NDP, to which I will make comments 
later. 
 
I did also, being a sucker for punishment, watch the NDP 
national convention in part . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What 
can I say? I found it quite fascinating, Mr. Speaker, to watch as 
various factions within the NDP party . . . and let’s remember, 
this is the mother ship of the provincial party. It was very 
interesting to watch the various factions within the party, and I 
don’t know how to use . . . perhaps I won’t find the right term. 
Debate would hardly be the right term in this context. They 
were arguing, challenging each other, struggling to figure out 
whether it was the eco-Marxists or the socialists or the wannabe 
socialists or the Greens or who else might actually be trying to 
take over the convention as it evolved. And there was a great 
rush to the microphone every few minutes by various 
participants to perpetuate their perspective on various things 
depending on where they were coming from. 
 
One more item of context, it has to be demonstrated time and 
time again in this Chamber that the NDP math is a nebulous 
thing. In fact it can easily be stated that preposterous 
postulations of members opposite lead the NDP precipitously 



March 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3469 

close to sharp review. 
 
NDP in question period earlier today talked about the complete 
disrespect for contracts, negotiations, stakeholders, and they 
want us to make unilateral decisions affecting stakeholders, as 
the member from Cannington spoke. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we digress and I’d like to get back to the 
motion itself. The new NDP leader, and the NDP party platform 
based on the new leader’s own website, outlines about 70 
un-costed policy proposals that we can assume will form their 
position going forward. It’s likely safe to assume that some of 
the defeated candidates’ positions will be added. But for our 
purposes today, let’s just assume we are dealing with the 
leader’s promises. 
 
Now we’ve already stated that the NDP math is a bit of a 
challenge, but surely a modicum of costing might have been 
considered. But alas, not so seen. To help the new leader out, in 
the spirit of co-operation that both parties spoke to on the 
session’s opening day, we thought we would provide costing 
for his promises. And he’s certainly welcome to use these 
numbers going forward. 
 
Now then, keeping in mind that facts are often hard to find in 
NDP positions, we had to make some minor assumptions. But 
all in all, I believe we have made best effort to be accurate and, 
as we are most likely to do, we have been conservative in our 
costing of budget issues. 
 
So big picture, we have identified $2.5 billion per year of 
spending proposed. This represents about 16.9 per cent increase 
in budgeted expense from last year’s Saskatchewan budget. 
Given that governments have only three ways to manage the 
balance of revenue and expense, those being tax increases, debt, 
or service reduction, we can assume that the NDP, based on 
their endless position on spending more, will propose huge tax 
increases or debt on the province — more specifically, the good 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Interestingly though, only yesterday the opposition Finance 
critic was criticizing the government for debt in the Crowns. 
I’m certain the member will share with us which tree money 
actually grows from in the NDP world. 
 
So who exactly will pay? Well to get to that answer, we have to 
educate our friends across the way on how the economy 
actually works. They would have you believe that we should 
just tax those evil corporations as clearly they are the cause of 
all of our problems. So who are these evil corporations that they 
want to tax? Well let’s assume they will follow their noses and 
tax the potash industry, the oil and gas industry, and by 
definition corporations will have to include the hundreds of 
businesses in agriculture, in forestry, in service and hospitality 
across the economy. 
 
So who owns these businesses then? Well in many cases they 
are our neighbours, people who have invested their lives in 
growing Saskatchewan. In many cases they are owned by 
Saskatchewan shareholders, good people who actually believe 
in the value of industry and commerce. In many cases the 
shares are held by pension plans, including the pension plans of 
our valued public sector workers and, yes, even by the unions’ 

investment management arms. 
 
So bottom line is, taxes move money from one pocket to 
another, either to raise revenue for the government or to 
influence a societal behaviour. In this case, the NDP will do 
both. They will move money from entrepreneurs who build the 
economy to their social agenda and they will grow government 
to support that same agenda. Meanwhile those same corporate 
bodies will have to adjust workforce, raise prices to consumers 
or, as is being displayed as a result of current federal policy, 
those good corporate citizens will look for a more friendly 
environment in which to do business. 
 
With business go people. Does this sound like the last 16 years 
of the NDP government? Mr. Speaker, untethered capital 
always creates opportunity. The NDP are bound and determined 
to drive private capital from our province. Of course the NDP, 
like the federal Liberal government, believe that the 
high-income earners should pay more. So who are those evil 
people? 
 
Well they are our community leaders engaged in medicine, 
dentistry, law, engineering, business and finance, and 
management. In fact, the top 10 per cent earners would include 
about 2,500 SaskPower employees, and can assume a similar 
ratio in SaskTel and SaskEnergy and government, and a 
significant number of health care workers and most senior 
management and technical people. They would also include 
each and every member on that side of the aisle. 
 
They would also want to increase taxes on a good number of 
farmers, small-business owners, and again, those who build our 
Saskatchewan economy by putting their money at risk. 
 
Members opposite struggle with the concept of risk-reward for 
those who build our economy, as they see every job as a right, 
not the privilege that is earned through sacrifice, dedication, and 
hard work. We should be celebrating the people who get up 
every morning, make breakfast, get the kids off to school, head 
off to work and put in an honest day, then off to the rink or 
school play, and volunteer at the bingo, pay their bills, help the 
neighbour clean the driveway, and clean up the park without 
saying a word, because that’s what we do in Saskatchewan. On 
our side of the House a strong and vibrant economy with 
everyone fully participating to the best of their abilities is the 
scenario we strive to achieve. On their side it is a fantasyland 
with imaginary dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on some of the specific 
commitments that the Leader of the Opposition made in his 
leadership bid and I think they speak . . . And we have gone to 
the trouble of costing out all of these promises. As I said earlier 
there are about 70 of them. But I’m only going to touch on a 
few. So the leader is going to phase out the $40 million per year 
graduate retention fund and invest that money in reducing 
tuition from the highest to the lowest in Western Canada. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to StatsCan Manitoba has the 
lowest tuition in Western Canada. In order to lower tuition to 
Manitoba levels, an investment of $127 million would be 
needed, less the $90 million to GRP [graduate retention 
program] payments, or $36.7 million new money. Mr. Speaker, 
they would also develop a cash flow model for the College of 



3470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2018 

Medicine that would cause an increase of $7 million to what we 
already contribute to the College of Medicine — $7 million 
new money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in agriculture they would encourage agricultural 
practices that decrease carbon input through crop choices, fuel 
efficient farm equipment, and on-farm electricity production 
through wind, solar, and biogas. Now I would comment real 
quickly, Mr. Speaker, that I was throughout my constituency all 
through the fall and I did not see a single, not one combine, not 
one tractor, not one truck run by solar power. Not one, not a 
single one. That promise . . . Nor wind; nor wind. That promise 
— $10 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re going to retain it and protect remaining 
native grasslands on Crown land, including community 
pastures. That cost, $62.5 million per year. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going to support the expansion of shortline rail and support 
producer efforts for shipper protections to access existing rail 
services at reasonable rates — something that is already being 
done by the private sector — at a cost of $900,000. 
 
I’m going to skip ahead to a few other things. Education, 
they’re going to make a made-in-Saskatchewan, affordable 
early childhood education program — $40 million. Mr. 
Speaker, I took the liberty of doing a little bit of research on the 
entire education platform that the leader opposite put forward 
and the only reasonable comparison I could come up with was 
what Norway is actually doing. And Norway’s structure, which 
fits reasonably close to what the Leader of the Opposition was 
proposing, would cost the province of Saskatchewan $5.2 
billion — billion dollars, billion dollars — annually for 
education alone. Mr. Speaker, where they find the money for 
these things we will never ever understand. It is beyond the 
imagination. 
 
But I do want to quickly mention one final thing before I come 
back to the motion. Mr. Speaker, I want to mention the 
opposition’s position on carbon tax and more specifically, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to mention the leader’s opposition to the 
ongoing development of the oil and gas industry. And I want to 
leave you with this image in your mind, Mr. Speaker: without 
the oil and gas industry, without the oil and gas industry this 
place would not exist. Without the oil and gas industry, your 
desk would not exist; your chair would not exist. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those across the floor, without the oil and gas industry 
— and I want you to keep this image firmly planted in your 
mind — without the oil and gas industry, the emperor across the 
way would have no clothes. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would again wish to make this motion: 
 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the 
debt of future generations. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Kelvington-Wadena has 
moved the following motion: 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the 
debt of future generations. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until Monday 
. . . Oh, sorry. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, now? This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3449 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3451 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3451 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Donors Give $1 Million to Saskatchewan Hospital 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3451 
 Educator Wins Outstanding Principal Award  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3451 
 Robotics Team Invited to World Championships 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3452 
 Emerging Filmmakers Screen New Work 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3452 
 4-H Provincial Curling Tournament 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3452 
 High School Coach Has Winning Record 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3452 
 Opposition’s Platform 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3453 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Supports for Indigenous People 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3453 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3453 
 Government Response to First Nations and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan  
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3453 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 
 Gaming Framework Agreement 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3455 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3455 
 Support for Indigenous Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 
 Indigenous Land Use and Duty to Consult  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3456 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 
 Justice Programs for Indigenous Communities  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 
 Support for Truth and Reconciliation Calls to Action 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Fiscal Support for Municipalities 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3458, 3467 
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3460, 3466 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 3461, 3466 



 

  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3462 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3463, 3466 
  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 3465, 3466 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 
  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 3468 
  Brkich (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 3468 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 3468 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3470 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


