


















































March 29, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3683 
 March 29, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Members’ Decorum 
 
The Speaker: — So yesterday, right on the heels of my ruling, 
the member for Estevan made a statement that was 
inflammatory. It was not helpful. The statement is an example 
of what happens when members on both sides of this Chamber 
engage in demeaning rancour. A pattern has been developing 
and is unworthy of this Assembly and is of considerable 
concern to me. The comments and the questions I ruled out of 
order yesterday are good examples of the negative spiral that 
can occur when members start impugning each other’s character 
in this Chamber. I ask members to be cognizant of the tone, 
manner, and intention of their remarks and to measure their 
language accordingly in this Assembly. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 
a couple of extended introductions, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier’s requested leave for a couple of 
extended introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to members of this Assembly for granting leave for these few 
moments. It’s my privilege to introduce to each of you and 
through each of you to this Assembly, a great friend to 
members on this side of the House and a familiar face to all 
members of this Legislative Assembly for a number of years 
and even decades now. Joining us in the Speaker’s gallery is 
Ruth Gaura. 
 
Ruth is wrapping up a remarkable 44-year career in the public 
service including 10 years as executive secretary to the Premier. 
Mr. Speaker, Ruth is accompanied today by Rhonda Romanuk 
who has worked alongside Ruth for many of those years, and 
she will succeed her as executive secretary. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that this day has finally 
come. Ruth has been such an important part of many of our 
lives for so long, it’s difficult to imagine this place without her 
at that front desk. As Premier Wall said in his farewell speech 
last December, Ruth is like family. Premier Wall quite rightly 
thanked Ruth for running the government all of these years, and 
I second that sentiment here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ruth began her career in government in 1974, 
around the time Terry Jacks released “Seasons in the Sun.” And 

I’m sure Ruth and quite likely the Minister of Agriculture, 
fondly remember that song because it was a big hit in that year. 
 
Ruth started out in the Department of Mineral Resources. She 
went to work for the Attorney General, a gentleman by the 
name of Roy Romanow. She served in the ministry of Northern 
Saskatchewan. She was a senior assistant in the office of the 
hon. George McLeod, who held several cabinet posts in the 
government led by Premier Grant Devine of the day. And for 
some time Ruth worked in the deputy minister’s office at the 
Ministry of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years Ruth earned a reputation as a 
talented and trustworthy administrator, someone with good 
judgment and exceptional organizational skills. And so after the 
2007 election, she was appointed as Premier Wall’s executive 
secretary. And Ruth served with great distinction in that role. 
She and Premier Wall forged a strong relationship. They 
worked well together and they had a lot of fun together. There 
were one or two practical jokes from time to time and the 
Minister of Justice and others can tell you, but him most 
notably, as many of them were at his expense. And Ruth didn’t 
hesitate to play along. 
 
But I can say this, Mr. Speaker, Ruth is warm. Ruth is funny 
and Ruth is just a wonderful person to be around. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to express my personal gratitude to Ruth for 
showing me the ropes these last couple of months. She’s 
provided excellent advice and she has provided some excellent 
guidance. And perhaps her best advice was to advise me to hire 
Rhonda as her successor. 
 
Ruth and her husband Wayne are planning to do some 
travelling in their retirement. We wish them happiness. We 
wish them health and we wish them all the best on the road 
ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to ask all members of this Assembly to welcome our 
guests and wish Ruth all the best in her travels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do ask forgiveness in advance of the Assembly 
as I do have another introduction of some constituents of mine, 
but some constituents that have added greatly to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s my great pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to this Assembly some constituents from the 
great community of Spiritwood. With us today are Harold and 
Margie Fast, and they bring with them Angelica Vargas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many in this Assembly will know Harold and 
Margie or they may be familiar with their names. The Fasts are 
founders and were owners of Fast Genetics, an incredible 
Saskatchewan success story and a company with quite an 
interesting history, a history that actually begins in Africa. 
 
It was in Africa where the first vital partnership of Fast 
Genetics was formed. Harold was working in Tanzania after 
graduating from the vet college in Saskatoon, and that’s where 
he met Margie, who is from Scotland. Mr. Speaker, Harold 
convinced Margie that the winters in Saskatchewan weren’t all 
that bad and they’re not very long. So the couple returned to our 
province and for a time Harold led the swine program at VIDO 
[Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization] or at the 



3684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

veterinary infectious disease organization in Saskatoon of 
which he’s still involved and an advocate for. And then in 1982 
the Fasts went into the business on their own. Fast Genetics was 
started on the family homestead near the community of 
Spiritwood and, from very modest beginnings, the company has 
grown into one of the world’s largest providers of swine 
genetics. 
 
Through the use of cutting-edge technology, innovation, and 
very strong partnerships, Harold and Margie have built a 
company that employs more than 80 people in that community 
and across the nation and around the world, and they do 
business not only in Canada, the United States, Mexico, and 
China. Mr. Speaker, Fast Genetics has pioneered major 
advances in swine health, in biosecurity protocols, and they 
have become industry standards in our nation. 
 
But the contributions of the Fasts goes far beyond the company 
they created. Throughout the years they have sponsored many, 
many exchange students from all around the world. Harold has 
served on numerous boards and advisory committees. He was a 
member of the Asia trade advisory council, has provided 
valuable guidance to the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
Margie has spent many years teaching English as a second 
language to newcomers in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
the couple are well known in Spiritwood as well for their 
community work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members may have seen the media coverage of 
the Give Hope Wings campaign just this past year. It was a 
fundraiser for Hope Air, a national charity that arranges free 
medical flights for people across Canada. And Harold was one 
of three Saskatchewan pilots taking part in that 20,000-mile 
flight across Central and South America to raise about half a 
million dollars. And he’s informed me they’re far beyond that 
now for hope’s wings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we often talk about the Saskatchewan advantage, 
usually in the context of the enormous natural resources that we 
have in this province. But the true Saskatchewan advantage are 
the people that live here. We are blessed in this province with 
some extraordinary citizens, whom we all know who contribute 
in every area in our communities: individuals who are modest, 
who are generous, and who are hard-working. 
 
Harold, Margie, and Angelica are examples among many across 
Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, we owe these special people 
our thanks for their many years of service to their community 
and to our province. And I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to welcome our guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Requested leave for an extended introduction. 
Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
members. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I want to 
introduce some special young guests to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. Joining us today in the west gallery are 
nearly 40 grade 8 students from Ituna School and Kelvington 
High School who are taking part in a program known as A Day 
in the Legislative Assembly. The students are here today along 
with their teachers, Cynthia Yanko and Rob Lissinna, their 
chaperones, and officials from the Provincial Capital 
Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, A Day in the Legislative Assembly is an 
educational program that was created in 2012 by the Provincial 
Capital Commission in celebration of the 100th anniversary of 
the Legislative Building, and is now offered semi-annually each 
spring and fall. Over the past six years, the program has become 
a memorable learning experience for hundreds of Saskatchewan 
youth that teaches them about our democratic process, its 
history, and the roles of members of the Legislative Assembly. 
The students from Ituna and Kelvington will be touring our 
historic Legislative Building, observing their MLAs [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] in session, and participating in a 
unique panel discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you personally for agreeing to lead 
a panel discussion with the students in the Chamber later today. 
This is a very special, hands-on learning opportunity that just 
might inspire a few of these students to one day become elected 
officials as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in welcoming 
these young guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the minister to welcome the outstanding young students from 
Kelvington High School here. I look forward to meeting with 
them a little later, and I look forward to seeing some of them in 
the legislature in the future. 
 
The Premier mentioned the Saskatchewan advantage being not 
only the resources that we have but also the people, and I know 
that our young people are, truly are the Saskatchewan 
advantage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask you to welcome 
our students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join the 
Premier in welcoming Ruth and thanking her for her many 
years of service. He mentioned that she’d been running the 
government. We’ve been critical at times about how this 
government is run, but we can only imagine how much worse it 
would have been had you not been there. And now that the 
office is Ruth-less, we will be ruthless in our paying close 
attention to what goes on. But we’re certain Rhonda will do an 
excellent job in carrying on the torch. And thank you for your 
service for all these years for the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
ask the members to join me in welcoming and thanking Ruth 
for those years of service. 
 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3685 

And I’ll join the member in welcoming the young folks who are 
here from Kelvington and Ituna. I hope that you enjoy today’s 
show. We’ll try to keep the theatre to a modicum of decorum 
and always remind you that what goes on in here is not the 
whole of what happens, and a lot of the time we get along much 
better than you might see here. And we hope that this isn’t the 
last time that these students will join us, observe what’s 
happening here, and see their role in designing and building the 
future of this province. I ask you to join me in welcoming them 
to enjoy their day in the House today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join 
with the Minister of Central Services, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, and the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming the grade 8 students that are in the west gallery, 
especially the students from Ituna. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their teacher, Ms. Yanko, has been in this 
Assembly as part of the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] program, 
since then has brought a number of classes to the Assembly. 
And I think — well I know — she has told me that her 
experience through SSTI has certainly sharpened her 
enthusiasm for our Assembly. And I would certainly join with 
the Leader of the Opposition’s comments that hopefully our 
behaviour here today will be somewhat more . . . resemble what 
takes place in the classroom. 
 
And I will be meeting with them later in the day too, and I’m 
sure they’ll have some interesting questions. So I’d ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming both groups of grade 8 
students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce Cheryl and Larry Dvernichuk. 
 
I have a short story about Cheryl. We all go to events that we’re 
not really sure what’s going to happen and take place at the 
events. And I was invited to a quilting event in a high school in 
south Regina, not knowing much about quilting. I saw some 
lovely patterns and had some conversations. And there was a 
short break, and after that there was a few new quilts that were 
brought up. 
 
And it was actually VE [Victory in Europe] Day, the 75th 
anniversary. And John Sheppard was there, and he was on the 
beaches on VE Day. And he read a letter back to all of us about 
what was exactly going on in a young soldier’s mind that day. 
And that’s when we learned about Quilts of Valour, and Cheryl 
has been a tireless advocate for Quilts of Valour. 
 
And I’d had the opportunity to attend many of these ceremonies 
over the last couple of years, and they’ve been very special. 
And the military liaison from Moose Jaw Wakamow and I 

attended one at Wascana Rehabilitation Centre where we 
handed out 70 Quilts of Valour to veterans across Saskatchewan 
that were there. And these ceremonies become very important 
to us and we try to make them to as many as possible. 
 
And they do a wonderful job. The volunteers give of their time 
and their patterns and they think of these wonderful quilts. And 
they wrap them around the soldiers and you can just see the 
gratitude in their eyes. And I want to thank Cheryl for all they 
do. 
 
And I know they’re planning another quilting event here in 
Regina and I think they’re going to try and get some of us on 
the sewing machines in May. So I’ve committed to sewing and 
if anyone else would like to join us . . . And I’m going to try 
and convince the military liaison to join me for a quilting event 
here, May 11 to 12th in Regina. And we’ll try our hand and try 
not to get our hand stuck on the quilt. So I hope you join me in 
welcoming Cheryl and Larry to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Oh, sorry. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — I’m short but not that short. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
seated in your gallery, my family. My husband, Terry, is here, 
and Terry is my biggest champion. Doesn’t matter what I 
choose to do; he’s always been so supportive, and so I have to 
thank him very much. And he was my sign guy last election 
because he had retired from the university. I think he thought of 
maybe going back to work as he was slogging through snow. 
But I was so grateful for his dedication, but his support and 
love. 
 
And accompanying my husband, Terry, is our son Jon. Jon is 
married and he’s here with his family, with Allison and my 
grandson Simon and Holly, my granddaughter. And then we 
can’t forget Charlie. 
 
Jon is a yardmaster at CN [Canadian National], so his job is to 
ensure that the produce from Saskatchewan gets sent in a timely 
manner to the ports and to destinations. But you know, Jon may 
be a yardmaster at CN, but Allison absolutely keeps the trains 
running on time in their home. She makes sure that those three 
kids get to their music lessons, their swimming lessons, their 
karate lessons, and fabulous meals always prepared on time. So 
I’m just so pleased to be able to introduce my family to the 
Legislative Assembly. So everyone, please welcome my family. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in your gallery is a very good friend of 
mine, actually my former chief of staff. Jason Wall is sitting in 
your gallery and no stranger to this building, Mr. Speaker. And 
he has moved down a flight of stairs to be the senior adviser to 
the Premier now, Mr. Speaker. But sitting with Jason, Mr. 
Speaker, is Jason’s parents, Frank and Maxine Wall who I have 
come to know over the past couple of years. They are retired 
people in Swift Current, had a very successful moving business 
in Swift Current. And I’d like all members of the Assembly to 



3686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

welcome Jason and Frank and Maxine to their Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Frontier and 
Shaunavon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 
on behalf of concerned citizens calling for the restoration of 
public intermunicipal transportation for people living with 
disabilities. They recognize the isolation, the vulnerability that’s 
been caused by the scrapping of STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] and are calling for the 
re-establishment of transportation, a lifeline to many people in 
many communities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
public intermunicipal transportation services for people 
with disabilities. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to 
our children’s classrooms. Those who have signed this petition 
wish to draw our attention to a number of facts: to the fact that 
the Sask Party has cut over $500 in government funding for 
every student across the province; to the fact that the Sask Party 
hiked education property tax by $67 million last year but cut 
$54 million from our children’s classrooms; and to the fact that 
these cuts have had a devastating impact on classrooms all 
across the province, leading to loss of supports in the 
classroom, loss of buses for kindergartners, and loss of pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs for children with special needs. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
education system pay for this government’s 

mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Saskatoon and Warman. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people signing this petition from the province of 
Saskatchewan want to bring to your attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows corporations, 
unions, and individuals, even those outside the province, to 
make unlimited donations to our province’s political parties; 
and that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair 
province where all voices are equal and money can’t influence 
politics. 
 
And we know over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan Party 
has received $12.61 million in corporate donations, of that, 2.87 
million coming from companies outside of Saskatchewan. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people, and the federal government and 
provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now 
British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level 
the playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
presenting a petition from good citizens across the province of 
Saskatchewan calling for a seniors’ advocate: 
 

The petitioners, in the prayer that reads as follows, 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately appoint a seniors’ advocate to ensure the 
rights of seniors are upheld and that all seniors across the 
province have the supports they need and deserve. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Observance of Easter 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it’s Good Friday 
tomorrow, starting this year’s Easter weekend and the Jewish 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3687 

Passover, it’s a time to remind ourselves, as we sit here in this 
beautiful Chamber, that the king of our Queen was born in a 
stable, grew up a carpenter’s son, and hung out with fishermen, 
tax collectors, and sinners. He gave up his heavenly robes and 
stood before his people at the last, bloodied, beaten, and naked. 
He laid aside his heavenly crown for a woven crown of thorns, 
and the praise of angels for an angry, incited mob shouting, 
crucify him, crucify him. 
 
And why, I ask, would he do this, Mr. Speaker? Because we 
needed more than a king to rule our bodies; we needed one to 
rule our hearts and save us from our sin and our pride. I needed 
one to save me from my sin and my pride. He taught us how to 
love: greater love has no man than this, than he lays down his 
life for his friends. He taught us how to live: do unto others as 
you would have them do unto you. And he taught us how to 
lead: he would be greatest among us; let him be our servant. 
 
This world wasn’t worthy of him and the grave couldn’t hold 
him. So though Friday was the day that Jesus gave his life for 
all people, Sunday is the day that he rose from the dead and we 
celebrate his victory over sin and the grave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank God for his son, Jesus, who 
gave his life to save not only our Queen but all of us who would 
receive him as our king. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and may we 
all enjoy this Easter and Passover holiday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I rise today to mark Gender Diversity 
Awareness Week here in Saskatchewan. Running from March 
26th to April 1st, there has been several flag raisings in 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, on Monday I 
attended the raising of the transgender flag here at the 
legislature along with yourself, the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, Regina Douglas Park, and Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
We all heard powerful messages from the transgender 
community about the work that needs to be done. We were 
joined by the member from Regina Rosemont Tuesday morning 
at the Regina flag raising. While flag raisings are important 
symbolic gestures, they must be followed up with real action 
and commitments to making the world a safer place for 
transgender people. 
 
I also want to note Transgender Day of Visibility, which takes 
place on March 31st. This is a day in which people from around 
the world are asked to celebrate the accomplishments of 
transgender persons and to bring attention to the fight against 
transphobia. It is a day of celebration of outstanding work and 
the lives of transgender persons within our communities. 
 
Though visibility and recognition of accomplishments are both 
very important, it is crucial that we as a society continue 
working to making our communities safer for our transgender 
friends, family, and neighbours. I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in continuing to push for a more inclusive 
society for all gender-diverse and transgender persons. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Business Builder Awards 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I, along 
with the members from Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood and 
Saskatoon Westview, attended the North Saskatoon Business 
Association’s 21st annual Business Builder Awards presented 
by Nutrien. Over 570 business leaders and supporters attended 
making this celebration one of their largest yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night’s awards were focused on Building 
Bridges to Success. This theme was in recognition of the north 
commuter parkway bridge which will be opening in Saskatoon 
later this year. The NSBA [North Saskatoon Business 
Association] received a record number of awards applications 
this year, further demonstrating how strong the success and 
achievements were in the past year for Saskatoon businesses. 
Award winners include zu, Stantec, Vendasta, Industrial 
Machine, SARCAN, the David Aplin Group, Allnorth, 
Complete Technologies, and Biktrix Electric Bikes. 
 
A special shout-out to Alex, DonnaLyn, and all the folks at 
SREDA for taking home the Team Building Award, as they 
were highlighted for their business management and staff who 
promote and foster a team working environment. 
 
Ken Kreutzweiser from ICR Commercial Real Estate was 
awarded the Member of the Year Award. Norm Wallace, 
founder of Wallace Construction Specialities, was honoured 
with the Shirley Ryan Lifetime Achievement Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating all the nominees and award winners of the 
NSBA Business Builder Awards and thank the association for 
such an incredible event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Seniors Advocacy Centre Gala Luncheon 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 
March 8th, I had the pleasure of attending the fourth annual 
Prince Albert Seniors Advocacy Centre gala luncheon. Each 
year the Advocacy Centre organizes a gala luncheon for Prince 
Albert and area seniors, and it’s always a full house. The 
Advocacy Centre has a unique award which they give out at 
their gala. It is called the 70-Plus and Still Going Strong Award. 
You must, of course, be over 70 and still be active in the 
community in order to be recognized. The recipients are not 
told ahead of time, so it is a surprise to them when they are 
named. 
 
This year’s recipient is Eleanor George. Ms. George is very 
active with the community services centre, especially with 
senior transportation. She has sat on many boards in Prince 
Albert. As well, she volunteers at Mont St. Joseph senior home 
and volunteers at the library. Mr. Speaker, this amazing and 
very active lady is 81 years old. 
 
[10:30] 



3688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

It is very indicative of Eleanor’s dedication that, though she was 
shocked and thrilled of her award, she promptly began speaking 
about how everyone should volunteer and encouraged those in 
attendance to become active through volunteerism.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in extending 
congratulations to the amazing Eleanor George on being named 
this year’s 70-Plus and Still Going Strong Award. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Remembering Bernie Collins 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to bring tribute to 
Bernie Collins of Estevan who passed away at the age of 82 this 
week. My personal memories of Bernie go back to my junior 
high school days when Bernie was a Catholic school teacher. 
He spent over 30 years teaching. 
 
Bernie was a husband and a father to eight children. One of 
Bernie’s sons was my junior high school teacher. I played 
soccer with two of his daughters, and I also worked on boards 
and committees with many of his other children. Bernie can be 
proud of the family he raised and the community values he 
instilled in them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bernie was very involved in politics. He was 
the Liberal MP [Member of Parliament] for Souris-Moose 
Mountain constituency from 1993 to 1997. He served on 
Estevan City Council spanning over three decades, including a 
term as mayor from 1985 to 1988. Civic politics ended for him 
in 2003, but that didn’t stop him. He continued to sit on boards 
and committees. He was truly dedicated to his community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in July of 2017 Bernie had a street named 
after him in the city of Estevan, so his legacy will live on for 
many years to come. When asked to comment on this street 
naming, he was humble as ever as he said, “The time that you 
put in is important, and I was grateful to serve.” 
 
So I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating the life of 
Bernie Collins, who was a loving family man, dedicated 
teacher, and devoted to his community. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 

Lafleche is Hockeyville Finalist 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Lafleche is a small community located in my constituency of 
Wood River, where I myself played many hockey games, and 
their passion for hockey has launched them into the national 
spotlight. The town has been selected as one of the top four 
finalists of Kraft Hockeyville. If Lafleche can win this year’s 
competition, they will receive $250,000 for rink upgrades and 
will host an NHL [National Hockey League] pre-season game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rink is truly the heart of the Lafleche 
community, as over 130 athletes from towns and surrounding 
area utilize the space. This isn’t the first year Saskatchewan has 
had a team reach the Kraft Hockeyville final, but we have yet to 
take home the grand prize, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, Lafleche is truly deserving of this rink so that it 
can grow its enthusiastic hockey community and show Canada 
just how passionate they are for the sport. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly help us show Canada how 
passionate the hockey fans of Saskatchewan are and support 
Lafleche as the first community in this province to win Kraft 
Hockeyville. Voting begins tomorrow, Friday, March 30th at 10 
a.m. and closes on Saturday, March 31st, at 6:30 p.m. on the 
Kraft Hockeyville website. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Go vote. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Checking Opposition Statements 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spent the last 
couple of days doing some fact checking because on Monday 
the member for P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote made some 
interesting statements when speaking to Bill 99. 
 
She stated that Justice now has increased costs because STC 
had been used for prisoner transport and now Justice is paying 
overtime for staff to do it. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, STC has 
never been used for prisoner transport; it has, is, and was 
handled by the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and 
deputy sheriffs. 
 
She said there are delays in getting hospital linens because 
they’re now coming from Medicine Hat, Alberta. Mr. Speaker, 
laundry is done in Regina and done by Saskatchewan 
employees. 
 
She said about transporting chemo medicine on STC, and I 
quote, they had specialized individuals that could do that. Now 
they need specialized people and it will be all privatized. And 
the costs, I’m not sure what that’ll look like. End quote. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, STC was used for only the last nine 
months for medicine transport. Before that, and as far back as 
under the NDP [New Democratic Party], it was private charters, 
and Health didn’t train any specialized people to do that. Mr. 
Speaker, stellar research. And speaking of research, we saw just 
this week, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have put out a 
province-wide mailout with Saskatchewan spelled incorrectly. 
 
So also on Monday, Mr. Speaker, she suggested that we were 
planning on selling this building. I would suggest if we do 
anything in this building, we lease out the NDP caucus research 
office because it’s not being used. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Carbon Pricing 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Premier’s in 
the news today, Mr. Speaker, claiming that he was surprised by 
the pollution pricing legislation tabled by the federal 
government on Tuesday and he wasn’t aware of the details. And 
I must admit I was surprised by his surprise, because this 
legislation was released in mid-January — almost three months 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3689 

ago. 
 
The Premier hopefully should be doing his homework on this 
file, especially if he’s planning to challenge it in court. And 
when discussing these types of court cases, his predecessor 
Brad Wall said that “The people of Saskatchewan must be 
assured that any challenge based on The Constitution Act has a 
reasonable expectation of success.” 
 
Now this government has done nothing to counter the 
impression that this will be as unsuccessful as previous court 
challenges they’ve embarked upon, and that as a result we’ll 
have a plan imposed by Trudeau in Ottawa rather than a plan 
that’s designed by leaders in agriculture, leaders in industry, our 
own experts right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, I’ve asked this Premier a number of times in the 
Assembly and I’ve received no reply to oral questions, to 
written questions. But hey, let’s try again. Has this government 
done its homework? Have they got a legal opinion? What does 
that legal opinion say? Because otherwise, the people of 
Saskatchewan are forced to conclude that this Premier is 
playing expensive political games rather than showing 
leadership. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I think my 
surprise is that this carbon backstop was incorporated into a 
556-page omnibus budget bill by the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. If they were confident in their position, they would 
allow that bill to stand on its own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to follow up on Premier Wall’s statement 
with a reasonable expectation of success, Mr. Speaker, it’s this 
Premier and this government’s belief that we have more than a 
reasonable expectation of success, Mr. Speaker. And we will be 
putting the full resources, Mr. Speaker, of the constitutional 
branch within the Ministry of Justice behind this case, Mr. 
Speaker. We will be putting every resource that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has into this case, Mr. Speaker, 
to ensure that this tax is not, not charged to Saskatchewan 
industries. 
 
And since when, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader of the 
Opposition and all of those members, since when is standing up 
for Saskatchewan industry, Saskatchewan jobs, and 
Saskatchewan families a pointless crusade? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is pointless is a carbon tax that has not 
reduced emissions in any jurisdiction on earth, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we will not be waving the white flag, Mr. 
Speaker, like members opposite. And in the spirit of 
collaboration, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader of the 
Opposition and the members opposite to join the Government 
of Saskatchewan in standing up for Saskatchewan families. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Agricultural Extension Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll agree with the Premier on one 
point. The method of using omnibus bills to hide legislation, it’s 

not a good way to go about things. We need transparency. We 
need to make sure that government decisions are being made in 
a clean fashion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we learned yesterday of the closure of seven 
satellite offices of the Ministry of Agriculture in Shaunavon, 
Assiniboia, Estevan, Moosomin, Wadena, Meadow Lake, and 
Lloydminster. We didn’t learn by press release; we learned by 
discovering on the government’s web page. So when we talk 
about transparency and clarity, we really need to make sure that 
the people are made aware of changes that are made instead of 
what we’re seeing here, which is another sign of the Sask Party 
government taking rural Saskatchewan for granted and passing 
these things under cover of night. 
 
Now, these offices offer essential extension services to support 
producers, Mr. Speaker. Why were these offices closed, 
particularly in a time of increasing complexity in the 
agricultural sector, and how will this government make sure 
that producers have the supports they need to succeed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, not only will we stand up for 
all of the people in this province of Saskatchewan, it will 
always be this government that stands up for all of the people in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I think that is most notable 
with the three by-elections that just went by with an 88 per cent 
win, Mr. Speaker — the largest win ever by this party, Mr. 
Speaker, in our 20-year history. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, further to standing up and representing 
people in this province, representing our economy and our jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, we have emissions reduction targets in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We were identified as being the 
second-largest reduction, Mr. Speaker, by the auditor generals, 
and also in that report, Mr. Speaker, it was identified that our 
three major emitting industries in Saskatchewan was: one, 
electrical generation, of which we have a plan, a 40 per cent 
emissions reduction plan, Mr. Speaker. What would your plan 
be, Mr. Speaker, is the question I have for the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second emitter here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — and an employer, I might add — is our energy 
industry. Mr. Speaker, we have a 40 to 45 per cent methane 
emissions reduction plan here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Would the members opposite reject that plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our third emitting industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan — and employing industry, and the spinal cord 
of the economy in the province of Saskatchewan — is 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And I ask the members opposite, 
agriculture in this province is not only a carbon-neutral 
industry, Mr. Speaker, but an unrecognized carbon sink, and I 
ask the members who support a federal government carbon tax 
if they would come out and tax the farmers across the 
communities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, sometimes we ask questions and we 
wonder if the Premier is in the same building as we are, because 



3690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

you went nowhere near the very specific and clear question 
about the closing of those agriculture extension services, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, not to mention the fact that the decisions 
being made by this Premier are making it far more likely that 
we’ll have a plan imposed on us by Trudeau that won’t protect 
agriculture the way we know we need to. 
 
At the same time, closing offices in all of those communities, in 
Assiniboia, in Shaunavon and Wadena and so many other 
communities, these offices are essential to support farmers — 
changing environmental conditions, changing market 
conditions. Mr. Speaker, why are those offices being closed, 
Mr. Speaker? We should be investing more in this time in 
supporting producers, not leaving all of this up to the private 
sector but making sure they have unbiased information. 
 
Farmers need access to the research and marketing information 
today to thrive in tomorrow’s market. So what steps is this 
government taking to ensure that Saskatchewan’s agricultural 
producers have the supports and the information they need to 
succeed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Changing extension services to better 
meet the needs of agriculture is what we will continue to do 
when necessary, Mr. Speaker. With these recent changes there 
will be no job losses. The new model maintains the existing 10 
regional offices in their current locations around the province. 
 
The staff complement in each office will be tailored to meet the 
needs of the region and the demand upon that office. The new 
extension delivery model is designed to advance the new 
federal-provincial Canadian agricultural program, or CAP 
[Canadian Agricultural Partnership], which will replace 
Growing Forward after April 1st, 2018. Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to do this in consultation with the industries we have 
in the past. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is odd that this 
decision was made talking about consultation with the industry, 
but where was the consultation with the community? Where 
was the press release? Where was making sure that people were 
aware that this was going on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also saw some new information yesterday 
from Statistics Canada, employment figures that are quite 
concerning — a loss of 300 jobs since December, 600 jobs lost 
since the same time a year ago. Now this government likes to 
talk about the last 10 years and job numbers there, and it’s true. 
They’ve presided over some good times. But that’s cold 
comfort for the people who are out of work today, Mr. Speaker, 
cold comfort. 
 
And now we see a government that, its only approach right now 
appears to be talking about cutting jobs in the public service. 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government do its job? When will 
this government do its job and make sure that others have jobs 
to go to? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of trade and export 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Leader of the Opposition at least has a bit 
right in that we’ve seen very, very significant job growth in this 
province over the past decade. We’ve seen a decade of growth 
that has resulted in over 60,000 jobs being created. In this 
province, we have the third-lowest unemployment rate in the 
entire country, GDP [gross domestic product] growth of over 20 
per cent since 2007, which is the third-highest increase in the 
entire country. 
 
We will defend our economic record every day of the week. We 
are happy to stand in the House every day and talk about the 
decade of growth that we have seen in collaboration with the 
people of this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t surprise me that they would get the 
math wrong on this because they also, Mr. Speaker, managed to 
get the spelling wrong. They just put out a province-wide 
mailout. I’m happy to table it. The members are asking to see 
the document. I’m happy to table it. This was sent out under 
taxpayers’ dollars and, Mr. Speaker, what did they do in this 
mailout? They spelled Saskatchewan wrong, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to run the province of Saskatchewan, but they can’t spell 
it. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Economic Forecast for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . Do you have something to 
say? Okay. Mr. Speaker, the member is good to point out the 
typo. You know the old joke. Saskatchewan — easy to draw, 
hard to spell. Mistakes like those get made. 
 
But let’s talk about real mistakes. We had Mr. Wall get up and 
talk about the mistakes made in the last budget, mistakes like 
cutting libraries; mistakes like cutting funding for people who 
die while receiving social services funding, cutting their 
funerals; mistakes like getting rid of a public transit system that 
served the whole province. A missing letter, Mr. Speaker, is 
nowhere near the missing over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government likes to talk about the past. This government 
likes to talk about the past, but they won’t admit their own 
mistakes. And they should be focusing on the future, because 
the current economic forecast is so bleak. They’ve tried to 
convince us that last year’s budget, that austerity budget, that 
was the right thing to do, that they had to make those mistakes, 
Mr. Speaker. The cutting services and taking away supports for 
the most vulnerable was short-term pain for long-term 
economic gain. Doesn’t appear to be the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada is predicting Saskatchewan to 
have the lowest economic growth in the country this year. TD 
Bank is saying the second-lowest, Mr. Speaker. Stagnant 
employment, job losses, minimal wage growth, not to mention 
slapping the PST [provincial sales tax] on restaurants, on 
construction labour — all methods that hurt consumer spending, 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3691 

hurt small businesses, slow job creation, and worsen the 
economic development of this province, Mr. Speaker. When 
will the Sask Party admit that they can’t cut their way to 
prosperity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for trade and export 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And once again, talk about cherry-picking data, Mr. 
Speaker. The Royal Bank of Canada came out with their 
projection just very recently about economic growth for this 
country over the next year. And do you know what province, 
Mr. Speaker, they have leading Canada in economic growth? 
That would be Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Scotiabank recently put out an economic forecast March of 
2018, and where did Scotiabank have Saskatchewan in terms of 
projected economic growth for the coming year? Number three, 
Mr. Speaker. National Bank put out an economic projection 
going forward for the next year. Where did National Bank have 
Saskatchewan? Number two, Mr. Speaker. CIBC [Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce] also put out an economic 
projection recently. Where did CIBC have Saskatchewan in 
terms of economic growth? Number two. These are consistent, 
Mr. Speaker, seeing our economy continuing to grow, going 
forward. 
 
And I’ll tell you what we don’t need, Mr. Speaker, that would 
impede our economic growth, and that would be a carbon tax 
imposed on us by Justin Trudeau, supported by the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, who would sell out, sell out the interests 
of this province to Justin Trudeau who called our fight for the 
people of this province, our fight standing up for our economic 
interests, a pointless crusade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s a weak position from the Leader of the Opposition. 
That’s weak leadership from the Leader of the Opposition in 
contrast to our strong Premier. Our strong government will fight 
for this province every day of the week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Support for Special Needs in Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — After the devastating budget cuts to education, 
the former Education minister promised that special-need 
preschool programs would not be cut. He said, “We’ve made a 
commitment in our province that we want to be the best 
province for people with disabilities, so we will ensure that 
those programs continue.” But the minister broke his word and 
signed off on both Regina division budgets that included the 
closure of preschools for children with intensive needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about children with autism, children 
with cognitive and physical disabilities, children who are hard 
of hearing, and children who have experienced extreme trauma 
and neglect. They all lost their preschools. Why did the minister 
break his promise to these kids and to their families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, I had an overwhelming 
desire to talk about the education system, and I didn’t want to 
criticize the member opposite for misspelling Saskatchewan, 
because that’s already been done. Because to criticize the 
member opposite would, by reference, criticize the school 
system, and I don’t want to do that because we’ve got excellent 
teachers and excellent people working in our school system. So 
it’s something I will of course stay away from, although I did 
find the brochure amusing when I got home last night. And I 
don’t stay in the Regina Lakeview constituency but I was glad it 
got there anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ran in 2016 on introducing individualized 
funding for preschool children under the age of six who are 
diagnosed with ASD [autism spectrum disorder], beginning 
with $4,000 growing to $8,000 by 2019-20. This represents a 
huge first step towards a goal of 15 to $18,000 per year for a 
student under the age of six and $4,800 per year for school-aged 
children under the age of 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also received federal funding that is now 
being used for a lot of early years programs as well. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that that 
minister found his feet for that question, because he is the one 
who made and broke that promise. And he may think this is a 
laughing matter and something to be flippant about. But I tell 
you what, those kids and those families who are depending on 
those programs, they don’t think this is funny at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to parallel that to a spelling mistake that we have 
taken responsibility for is frankly, in the minister opposite’s 
word, weak. Weak and unacceptable. The Sask Party’s cuts in 
education have led to even more preschool programs being at 
risk. With the Premier offering only a fraction of the 
reinvestment needed just to make up for last year’s cuts, many 
students are not getting the supports that they need this year, 
and programs like the language learning preschool program in 
Saskatoon could be on the chopping block as well. 
 
The new Minister of Education talks a good game about the 
importance of investing in our future and providing adequate 
supports to our kids. Now it’s time to walk the walk. Will this 
budget fully fund, fully fund high-needs preschool programs 
like this in Saskatoon so that they can continue and so that no 
more children fall through the cracks? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in a few short days the 
members opposite will be able to listen to the Finance minister 
introduce a very strong, very powerful budget that deals with a 
lot of issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say this to the members opposite and to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, that the federal money is now 
flowing into our province. The money that we have provided is 
now, by way of additional money mid-year, is now flowing in 
and children are being accepted into those programs for this 



3692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

year and for next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the members opposite this: 
overall education funding has more than doubled since 2007, an 
increase of 114 per cent. Operating funding to school divisions 
is now up 32 per cent; 766 more teachers in Saskatchewan since 
2007; 40 new schools, a number of them in her constituency; 25 
major renovations. We’ve added nearly 6,000 daycare spaces, 
an increase of 62 per cent; doubled the number of pre-K 
programs up by now 104 per cent. 
 
And what’s the NDP record? They closed 176 schools, and 
they’re standing in here being sanctimonious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, since the latest minister was 
handed the hot potato, the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
and took over, as one of the former ministers put it, defending 
the “position of the government,” all the lines he’s been reading 
say that this is business as usual. Mr. Speaker, the GTH debt is 
millions and millions and millions higher than even they 
predicted just last year. Only 40 per cent of the land is sold, 
most of which has been subject to lawsuits, and even when they 
do sell land, they often have to buy it back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand why the government wants to 
distance themselves from this mess. But will the minister at 
least admit the fact that they’ve already wasted over $150 
million of taxpayers’ money at the GTH, and will he tell us how 
they plan to get any return on that money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to encourage the 
members opposite to go to the Global Transportation Hub and 
have a look at what goes on in some of the buildings out there. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been up most days since we’ve been in the 
legislature and, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat some of the 
numbers to them. Each and every week, 4,800 trucks come and 
go. Those trucks are delivering groceries, groceries that go into 
a warehouse and are delivered into the city of Regina and 
around the province. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, there are 
four hundred and . . . There are nearly a thousand full-time jobs 
going on in . . . [inaudible] . . . There was 1,500 jobs when the 
project was under construction and, Mr. Speaker, there is $450 
million of private investment has gone through. 
 
Certainly the times have slowed. Economic progress is not as 
fast as we’d certainly like it to be. But, Mr. Speaker, I would 
encourage everybody to have a look at the jobs. I would 
encourage people to have a look at what’s going on there and 
see where things go in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, no one can deliver turkeys like 
this minister does. The GTH’s financial situation could only 
look worse if they literally lit a dumpster on fire. The whole 

thing is propped up by taxpayers’ money, and while 
Saskatchewan people are being forced to pay more in taxes and 
fees and deal with the Sask Party cuts, they’re watching this 
government throw good money after bad at government pet 
projects. 
 
The minister says the GTH is struggling because the economy 
is slow. No kidding. Jobs and wages are sluggish. Other 
provinces are way ahead of us and Saskatchewan is being left 
behind. But instead of throwing hundreds of millions of dollars 
at their pet projects, why is this government not investing in 
people and creating jobs and stimulating the economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like the member 
opposite to go there and I’d like her to look the nearly thousand 
people in the eye and say, you’re not really jobs; you don’t 
really work here. Because that’s what she just said. The 
accusation that she made is that there was not a creation of jobs. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s nearly a thousand people working 
out there right now. A thousand people is a lot of people, a lot 
of jobs, a large payroll that’s taking place out there. In addition 
to that, there’s a major capital expense that’s taking place out 
there. During construction there was 1,500 people working out 
there, every day during construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for her to be demeaning and belittling the people 
that are working out there is something that’s absolutely unfair 
to a project that is an intergenerational project that will bring 
jobs and bring goods and services into our province for years 
and decades to come. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the member 
opposite is able to arrange her schedule so she’s able to go out 
there in the next few days, have a look at the jobs that are taking 
place there, and have a look and see whether she thinks it also is 
an intergenerational project. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Government-Owned Buildings 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, the Minister for Central Services announced that he 
had found out there were 660 buildings owned by the province 
of Saskatchewan. He thought that was too many, and then he 
invited offers on those buildings, Mr. Speaker. We asked him, 
you know, what was the . . . if he thought that was too many, 
what’s the right number, in question period. He wouldn’t 
answer that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We asked him written questions to provide a list of what those 
660 buildings look like, and yesterday, Mr. Speaker, they 
ordered the question, which of course means that they’re going 
to sit on it for another six months, Mr. Speaker. So I guess my 
question to the Minister for Central Services is this: what are 
they so afraid of the people of Saskatchewan finding out when 
it comes to their answers about how those members are treating 
their assets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3693 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. When we attend the SARM convention 
or SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] or 
talk to chambers of commerce or talk to groups across the 
province, they encourage our government to have as small a 
footprint as possible, to ensure that each and every taxpayer 
dollar is well spent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan owns or is involved with 660 
buildings. My invitation there, and it stands today, was to talk 
to people around the province to make sure that each and every 
one of those 660 buildings is used to its highest and best use, 
Mr. Speaker. These are buildings that belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’re supported by taxpayers’ dollars, and 
each and every member on this side of the House is concerned 
about each and every one of those taxpayer dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The member opposite always likes to talk about numbers, and 
we’ve talked about numbers before. The 176 schools that 
they’ve closed, Mr. Speaker, the 52 hospitals that they closed, 
the 1,200 long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, are a concern, Mr. 
Speaker. We will take no lessons from the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have to worry 
about lessons. They could just give us the bloody list. You 
know, I don’t understand why it’s so hard to get a straight 
answer out of these people when it comes to the fair 
administration of public assets, Mr. Speaker. It makes me 
suspicious. It makes me think they’ve got something to hide, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to one building in particular, Mr. Speaker, 
where they’ve already done a review, where the review came 
back after talking to hundreds of people and said, you know, we 
want to keep the sound stage and improve its function and make 
sure that it’s there as a pillar, foundation element of the film 
industry, you know, you’d think that would sink in with those 
members. But it apparently hasn’t. 
 
So I guess two questions for the Minister for Central Services, 
Mr. Speaker. Can he take the for-sale sign down off the front of 
the sound stage, and has he already taken meetings about what’s 
going to happen with the sound stage, Mr. Speaker? Can he 
square that for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. No decisions have been made. I’ve requested a review 
of each and every one of the 660 buildings and I feel that that’s 
a prudent way to make sure that taxpayers’ dollars are spent. 
 
You know what we’ve seen in the first few weeks in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, is the Leader of the Opposition saying that he was 
going to do politics differently, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
seen is $2.5 billion in promises, and today it appears that the list 
is growing, the expenditures are growing with no accounting at 
all to the people of Saskatchewan or to the list of those 

promises. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will want to 
know the cost of each and every one of those promises, and 
those are numbers that members opposite should be more 
concerned about, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 609 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for 
Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2018 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 609, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic 
Violence) Amendment Act, 2018 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park that Bill No. 609, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 
2018 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 191 through 193. 
 
The Speaker: — 191 to 193 tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s been a lot of vigorous debate here in the House over the 
last few days, and I think it’s always an honour to be able to rise 
in this House and speak to the Assembly. Although sometimes I 
engage a little more in off-the-mike debate, I’m really honoured 
to be able to enter into the debate here today for 75 minutes, of 
which I get a mere 15 minutes, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving 



3694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

my motion at the end of the debate. 
 
And I just want to talk a little bit today about what this 
government has done in the last year in relation to the budget, 
and some of the impacts that they have had on Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The other piece, of course, is we’re not really sure when they 
present a budget where we’re going to end up at the end of the 
line, because the list of reversals in this past year’s budget is 
long. I have 13 of them here that I want to put on the record 
today of reversals. This is a government that has been walking 
back this budget steadily for the last 12 months, Mr. Speaker. 
So we know that what we get on April 10th is only the 
beginning of another series of walk-backs if, indeed, that 
continues to be the pattern of this government. 
 
We also know they talk a lot about balancing budgets and in 
fact had introduced legislation at one point, pulled it, promised 
other legislation which we haven’t seen yet about balancing 
budgets. And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is pretty clear. 
This government has only managed to balance three of their 
budgets, give us a balanced budget for three of the ten years that 
they’ve been in power. And we know that that’s not even on the 
record for the next few years, Mr. Speaker, because their 
spending has been extraordinary. And now we’re seeing the 
impact on the peoples of Saskatchewan because of all the cuts 
and the program cuts that we have seen. 
 
But I’m going to just start with the list of walk-backs that we 
have kept track of. I mean, we know there’s more than that, but 
we’ll start with the ones on this. So first up, Mr. Speaker, was 
libraries. And what happened there, if you recall, was that there 
was supposed to be a cut of $4.8 million to libraries, and that 
was a horrible decision as it turns out, Mr. Speaker, and one that 
wasn’t thought through and one that unfortunately the people of 
Saskatchewan had to take to the streets on. 
 
And I was part of the library sit-in in . . . I was actually in 
Estevan that day, Mr. Speaker, and there was probably a good 
hundred people out in front of the library in Estevan, protesting 
the cuts to libraries. And there was people all across the 
province in an unprecedented read-in, so I was pleased to be 
able to be part of that read-in. And I actually had a book written 
by, a small story actually written by Tommy Douglas called 
“Mouseland.” And that was what I decided that I would share 
as part of my effort for reading in as thousands of people in 
Saskatchewan protested those cuts to libraries, Mr. Speaker. So 
what did the government do? They reversed it. 
 
Then we have the CBOs [community-based organization] of 
Saskatchewan. The CBOs of Saskatchewan were being faced 
with a 10 per cent cut and, Mr. Speaker, after some reflection 
and thinking carefully, the government decided to walk back 
that cut. 
 
Third cut that the government walked back was funerals. Now 
we know that this was actually singling out the people in this 
province that are the most vulnerable. The poorest people in our 
province were being denied a dignified farewell, Mr. Speaker, 
and that was a cool and heartless cut that people of 
Saskatchewan were ashamed of. The previous Social Services 
minister was able to walk back some of it, thank goodness, but 

not entirely. So only $600,000 of that funding was reinstated. 
 
Another thing they reversed or walked back on, Mr. Speaker, 
was sleep apnea machines. Originally the cut was only to 
income that folks were receiving health benefits for, but they 
changed their approach to offer machines at $275 to those with 
moderate to severe sleep apnea. And, Mr. Speaker, I was 
married to somebody with sleep apnea; I know how critically 
important those machines are, not only for the individual, but 
for the workplaces where those individuals work because if you 
are suffering from sleep apnea, that can really put you in serious 
positions at work if you’re not getting proper sleep, Mr. 
Speaker. And so this is not just something that affects people 
who need the machines but it affects their workers, their 
families, and their spouses, Mr. Speaker. So this is one of those 
walk-backs that I think was appreciated by the people who 
could afford the machines, but especially for those who could 
not afford those machines. 
 
We heard in the budget that they were going to terminate the 
hearing aid plan on July 1st of last year but, after having some 
careful, sober second thought, taking another look at these 
budget cuts, this government decided we’d better walk that one 
back too. And now we don’t know for sure what the future of 
the program is; people are in limbo. But it is continuing to run 
for an undetermined interim period until they get things figured 
out. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the pattern. They axe first. They 
sort of have a knee-jerk reaction to the fiscal mess that they’re 
in. And yet they’ve been walking back all of these original cuts, 
not to say that there still aren’t many cuts that were held in 
place. 
 
The next one, number six on my list, is the grants-in-lieu. Now 
we all know the shock value of that announcement in the budget 
last year, Mr. Speaker. City mayors were visibly shaken on 
budget day and incredibly, incredibly disturbed by the lack of 
consultation that this government failed to provide. They didn’t 
let anybody know ahead of time. You know, the budgeting 
process isn’t any easier for cities than it is for the government, 
Mr. Speaker, but basically they threw urban governments under 
the bus on that one. And that $3 million they finally restored, 3 
million of the original $36 million cut. So $3 million, after 
much protest on behalf of all of the cities and the urban 
municipalities who were impacted by this unforeseen cut to 
grants-in-lieu, they walked back 3 million of the original 
proposal of 36 million. 
 
PST on construction. Again, Mr. Speaker, a government 
desperate for money, looking to find money, they threw on it, 
PST on construction. And June 30th came the walk-back. They 
changed the policy at that point and they made consumable 
lumber and plywood tax-exempt and then increased the 
threshold for the application of PST on projects started before 
April 1st to 25 per cent from 10 per cent. So that was number 
seven on the list. 
 
Number eight on the list: they walked back some changes on 
PST to the oil and gas industry. So again, after much protest 
from stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, and industry, the government 
walked back the imposed PST on the oil and gas industry for 
drilling and other downhole activities. And the exemption for 
the service portion of these activities was walked back, that was 
restored. There was originally an exemption. This government 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3695 

took it away in the budget and then they restored it back for that 
change. 
 
Next one up — of course, we’re all familiar with this one — is 
the PST on insurance. They extended the date on that one from 
July 1st to August 1st initially, and then . . . I’m coming up to 
another announcement on that one later in my list. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan. They were going to take away 
$20 million in funding to the College of Medicine, but after 
some sober second thought and actually doing their homework 
and consulting properly, they realized that was a mistake, Mr. 
Speaker. And so they reinstated that $20 million. 
 
Bill 40 — oh yes, Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, using the World Bank 
definition of privatization, used to help the Soviet Union in the 
1990s become individual nation states. That was the definition 
of privatization that somebody dug up from somewhere, Mr. 
Speaker. It doesn’t even exist on the Internet. So that was their 
all-hallowed definition of privatization. And for some reason, it 
was put in The Interpretation Act. I still have never heard any 
kind of explanation from the government why they thought that 
was a good place to slip in a new definition of privatization. 
 
And now we have Bill 99 before us, Mr. Speaker, where they’re 
trying to repeal it. And you know, why didn’t that happen 
before the original bill was passed, Mr. Speaker? We asked and 
asked for them to make those changes. The public was upset. 
They heard clearly from the public before Bill 40 was even 
passed, but they let it go through. They dismantled and 
destroyed STC, and then they decided that they need still part of 
the windup provisions, and so they’re not even repealing it in its 
entirety. That is I think lack of foresight, lack of consultation, 
and lack of understanding of what is at stake here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Corporate income tax. At first they were going to lower 
corporate income tax rates. But guess what, Mr. Speaker, yet 
another walk-back. They decided that they were not going to 
lower those corporate income tax rates after . . . I don’t know 
what sort of consultations they did after the budget, but they 
walked that back. 
 
And the last one I have on my list here today, Mr. Speaker, is of 
course, the reversal on agricultural, life, and health insurance, 
so crop insurance, life insurance, and health insurance. The PST 
was slapped on those things for the first time ever in the last 
budget and now the government most recently — this was the 
most recent walk-back — they went ahead and removed the 
PST on those things. However, we know that PST still remains 
on home insurance and health care insurance, which is a 
significant impact on many, many small businesses, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think it’s a concern for many folks. 
 
I also wanted to talk a little bit about some more of the cuts that 
we saw in that budget, and I just have to find my list because 
it’s a two-page list. Here we are, budget cuts. So those are the 
walk-backs, but I think we have to remind ourselves of the 
other cuts that were in the budget. It’s a long list and I don’t 
think I’ll have time to read the whole thing, but I will share 
what happened. 
 
In Advanced Education there was a 5 per cent reduction to 
operational funding, for $30 million. In Agriculture they ended 

the pastures program. In Education, school division operating 
funding was cut by $22 million; overall, education was down 
$262 million in that budget; and obviously the libraries cut, 
which was reversed. 
 
[11:15] 
 
In the Economy, $13 million, $13 million reduction to labour 
market development. Mr. Speaker, with jobs disappearing in 
this province, people unemployed, people facing defaults on 
their mortgage at a rate that’s unprecedented, Mr. Speaker, this 
is not where we need cuts. They also closed the Melfort and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse labour market service offices. So $345,000 
decrease there. 
 
In Finance, a 9 million reduction due to the elimination of 
commissions paid to businesses for collecting taxes. Mr. 
Speaker, our independent businesses are collecting taxes for the 
government and they used to be paid a nominal fee. And what 
did this government do? They took that away. Nine million 
dollars now that . . . At least those businesses were doing a 
service for this government, and now they’re being forced to do 
it for free. Not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Government Relations, they reduced point nine 
per cent funding for First Nations and Métis organizations. 
There was a $36 million reduction of the grants-in-lieu . . . well 
now 33 million. Municipal revenue sharing was reduced by 
13.9 million. 
 
In Health long-term care fees are increasing for those who pay a 
portion of their income, from 50 per cent to 57 per cent; the 
hearing plan was eliminated although, as I said, that was walked 
back somewhat; eliminated podiatry services. They walked 
back the elimination of funding for CPAP [continuous positive 
airway pressure] generators. They eliminated funding for 
orthotics, and chiropractic services are no longer available to 
low-income recipients. 
 
In Highways we saw a 28.6 million reduction to the 
transportation system. We saw the Grain Car Corporation being 
wound down and privatized and sold off, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Parks, Culture and Sport, we saw the suspension of the 
community rink affordability grant. And we had the 
Transportation minister up today talking about Hockeyville in 
Lafleche, and yet those are the grants that were being cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they suspended the Main Street Saskatchewan 
program. They reducted the regional park funding of 50 per 
cent, eliminated Culture on the Go for $800,000, cuts in funding 
to the Meewasin Valley Authority by $409,000, a decrease in 
funding for the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation for 
$204,000. Mr. Speaker, those people are doing important work 
in our province. 
 
Social Services, first home plan for recent graduates suspended, 
saving $8 million. And of course a cut of $10 million to social 
assistance programs like TEA [transitional employment 
allowance], SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability], and SAP [Saskatchewan assistance program]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw increases in the education property tax. 



3696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

We saw reductions in municipal revenue sharing. We saw 
Wascana being taken over by the Provincial Capital 
Commission. And the list goes on and I’m running out of time. 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I want to move the following 
motion for the 75-minute debate: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Sask Party government 
for their 2017-18 budget that hiked taxes, cut services to 
the province’s most vulnerable, and demonstrated the Sask 
Party’s inability to manage the province’s finances; and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the Sask Party government 
for their continued mismanagement of the economy that 
has slowed job growth, hurt businesses, and has 
Saskatchewan families paying more. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I so move that motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Sask Party government 
for their 2017-18 budget that hiked taxes, cut services to 
the province’s most vulnerable, and demonstrated the Sask 
Party’s inability to manage the province’s finances; and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the Sask Party government 
for their continued mismanagement of the economy that 
has slowed job growth, hurt businesses, and has 
Saskatchewan families paying more. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
Recognize the member for Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to 
stand in my place and enter the debate today and speak to this 
motion. I think it comes as no surprise, Mr. Speaker, I won’t be 
supporting this motion as it’s written and read. 
 
You know, last April the budget of 2017 made some tough 
choices. You know, we made some tough choices that needed 
to be made. And you know, as we moved through this year, 
we’ve come to see that they were choices . . . Some of them 
weren’t the best choices but some of them hit the mark. So you 
know, the people of Saskatchewan let us know what they liked 
and certainly they let us know what they didn’t like, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m proud of that, you know. I’m proud of our 
democracy and the ability for people to come and criticize and 
talk to us about things that they don’t appreciate that their 
government does. And I’ll defend that right for anybody to do 
that every day of the week. I enjoy the conversation. 
 
And governments are no different than anybody else. 
Sometimes they get things right and sometimes they get things 
wrong, and I think it’s indicative of our government of how we 
take that criticism and move forward with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, this budget touched everyone as every budget does. 
It’s no secret that the government actually doesn’t have a job. 
The only income that it receives, it takes from people and 
business and resources. And so when you’re entrusted to spend 
that money as a scarce resource, you know, it’s a huge 
responsibility, and we take that responsibility very seriously, 

Mr. Speaker, as everybody in Saskatchewan expects us to. They 
entrusted us to do it and they expect us to do a good job of it. 
 
Saskatchewan people though, Mr. Speaker, they also 
understand that, you know, for the last 10 years things haven’t 
been really that bad. In 2007 we started off down here. I always 
like to explain, Mr. Speaker, we started off in 2007 here. And in 
2016 we were here. And last year we just took a little step 
down, took a little step back. We readjusted to the fiscal reality 
that we have right now, and you know, the people appreciate 
that. Some appreciate it more than others, but people overall do 
appreciate that. 
 
People in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, understand that you can’t 
continue to spend more money than you bring in. That is a basic 
economic principle, Mr. Speaker. You can’t spend more than 
you have. In your own house, Mr. Speaker, if you bring in 
$1,000 a month and you spend $1,500 a month, eventually that 
becomes unsustainable. That’s a basic economic principle. 
Either revenues have to rise, expenditures have to go down, or 
some sort of a balance of the two. And that’s what we tried to 
do last year in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people also understand, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
morally wrong to continue to live at a high standard of living 
that’s unsustainable and expect someone else to pay the bill 
especially, Mr. Speaker, when that someone else is our children 
and our grandchildren and their children, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
something just morally wrong, and people in Saskatchewan 
understand that. 
 
So thankfully the people in Saskatchewan have tightened their 
belts. They’ve put their heads down. They’ve put their 
shoulders to the grindstone and they’ve said, you know what, 
this is how we operate here. This is how we work in 
Saskatchewan, and we’re going to get things done. We’ve got a 
three-year plan to balance, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to carry 
down that path and accomplish our goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the budget last year we also said that we are 
going to invest in priority government programs, services, and 
infrastructure. And I think we saw that, Mr. Speaker — 6 per 
cent increase in social services; 3 per cent increase in health. 
And yet still, Mr. Speaker, they’re called cuts. I don’t know any 
other program on earth, Mr. Speaker, that gets a 6 per cent 
increase and it’s called a cut . . . 6.9 per cent, I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker. I was being conservative, as I tend to do. 
 
Our province’s credit rating remains among the highest in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, that’s because we’ve looked at our fiscal 
situation, we’ve decided to make steps to rectify it, and we’ve 
got a strong plan to return to balance. That’s why our credit 
rating is so good. 
 
There’s no doubt that we still face a fiscal challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. Any time that you take $1.2 billion off the table for 
three years running, you’re going to run into some challenges, 
Mr. Speaker. But we are meeting that challenge. 
 
So let’s talk a little bit about how life is more affordable under 
the Sask Party government. In 2007, Mr. Speaker, a combined 
income tax and PST incidence on Saskatchewan residents — so 
basically a family of four who’s making $50,000 — in 2007 the 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3697 

total tax bill for that family was over $3,000, Mr. Speaker. Last 
year, that same family of four making $50,000 paid $2,366, Mr. 
Speaker — $2,366. That’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — $634 cheaper. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — You’ve got it — $634 cheaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken 112,000 people completely off the 
tax roll in the last 10 years. So I wonder how those people, Mr. 
Speaker, would feel about how the Saskatchewan Party has 
managed the economy. A family of four that I just talked about, 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan pays no income tax on the first 
$50,000 of income. That’s the highest tax-free threshold in 
Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we go to the third quarter. Our bottom-line 
forecast actually improved from budget time. We have more to 
accomplish, but we’re meeting the fiscal challenge by 
controlling spending, shifting away from over-reliance on 
volatile resource revenue, and ensuring our province and our 
economy remain strong. 
 
So now I always like to contrast, Mr. Speaker, what this 
government has done and the economic growth that we’ve had 
in our province over the last 10 years, and I also like to compare 
it to what we can look forward to if ever the NDP are elected 
back into government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Heaven forbid. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — And we can look back on . . . Yes, heaven 
forbid. We can look back on what has happened in the past, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve gone through this over and over and over 
again, and you know, there’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
The member from Canora-Pelly will be in long-term care but 
the bed’ll be closed before he gets there. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we can look at the promises that were 
made just a couple of months ago in the NDP leadership race. 
And you know, I have this document that was tabled last week 
costing out the 2018 Leader of the Opposition’s platform. So 
this platform adds two and a half billion dollars annually to the 
budget and obviously to the debt. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who costed that? Who’s your coster? 
They were way off. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — You know, we look at . . . Well we can go 
through it. The member from Saskatoon Nutana wants to know 
how we costed it, and I can go through it here. Should we price 
it out? Maybe we’re short. Maybe we’re short a few billion 
dollars. But let’s look at here. 
 
For seniors, for seniors for example, we “Establish a dementia 
strategy to proactively address the growing incidence of this 
condition.” Sounds good, sounds good — $3.6 million, $3.6 
million. Should I . . . Yes, I can keep going. Absolutely I can 
keep going. In education, “Develop and implement a 
comprehensive early years action plan to achieve the best 
outcomes for children.” Sounds great — $8 million, $8 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

So I won’t support the motion, Mr. Speaker. I’ll stand behind 
our government’s budget from last year, and we need to 
continue down the path that we have chosen. We’re going to get 
back to balance next year, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 
ensure that our economy will keep going and keep becoming 
stronger and stronger. We’ve made investments in the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve made investments in very important 
initiatives in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue doing that. I won’t be supporting the motion, and at 
that I would like to say thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
enter into what has already been a spirited debate this morning. 
In light of the upcoming budget, I’m happy to stand with my 
colleague from Nutana and to take a bit of a trip down memory 
lane here. I know my colleagues across the aisle really like to 
reminisce a little bit about the past. So we’ll go back to last year 
and have a look at what last year’s budget was and also what 
some of the implications are that came out of that. So I’ll be 
focusing primarily on some of the tax hikes, the heartless cuts, 
and of course the impact, the real impact that this has had on 
jobs in our province. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So I know that there’s a bit of a story here, and I’m going to 
take you through what that looked like. So here’s the starting 
point. A government inherits a boom and a rainy day fund. Stop 
me if you’ve heard this one before. Government spends more 
money than they have. Government runs out of money. 
Government raises taxes. 
 
And I have an article here from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix that 
I think summarizes very nicely my main point here, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s from July 14th, 2017, and the headline is “It 
makes them look like they don’t know what they’re doing.” 
And I think this is a good headline to start off with, Mr. 
Speaker, and a starting point here. 
 
So let’s talk about some of the tax hikes that we saw in the 
2017-2018 budget. Now I wasn’t in the House yet. I was not in 
this physical space as I was elected back in September, but 
where I was, was out talking to the people of Saskatchewan, 
getting ready for a by-election in Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. 
Speaker. So in door knocking in Saskatoon Fairview, I heard a 
tremendous amount of concerns from families about these tax 
hikes and people that just could not understand how after a 
decade of boom they were being taxed. They were like, this is 
the government’s mismanagement; I cannot understand how the 
province has been doing so well yet somehow this is falling on 
my back and I have to bear the burden of this. 
 
And what were some of these burdens? An insurance tax, where 
we were suddenly putting PST on insurance, increase 6 per cent 
from the zero per cent that we had before; a restaurant tax of 6 
per cent; kids’ clothing tax of 6 per cent; PST up 1 per cent 
generally; construction tax up 6 per cent; a beer tax . . . We 
can’t even enjoy a beer without an additional 4 per cent tax, Mr. 
Speaker. And combining this with the cuts to grants-in-lieu and 
the constrained borrowing limits of municipalities meant 



3698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

property taxes going up in municipalities as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is only one taxpayer. These are real people that we are 
talking about, and life is costing them more in this province. 
 
The PST hike on restaurant meals, recently we saw . . . This is 
an industry that is hurting. This is a new 6 per cent that they did 
not previously face. And we’ve all heard about the fact that, you 
know, some restaurants were negotiating whether they were 
going to take hits on profits because they didn’t want to 
download that cost on to consumers because they simply didn’t 
think they could be competitive in the market. 
 
And so we have newspaper articles talking about how this PST 
increase has impacted our restaurant industry. So I’ve got a few 
articles here. From the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation]: 
 

Sask. restaurants and bars suffering from PST, says 
industry. StatsCan reports Saskatchewan was the only 
province to see a decline in food sales from July 2016. 

 
And this is posted in September 2017. I’ve got another one 
here. “Food and beverage sales down in Saskatchewan: Stats 
Canada,” and this is from February 21st, 2018: 
 

A recent Statistics Canada Report shows Saskatchewan is 
one of two provinces facing a decline of customers in the 
food and beverage industry. 

 
So these are some serious trends that we’re seeing here, Mr. 
Speaker. And if you don’t believe the news, and we still want 
more support, Sask Trends Monitor from January 2018, in 
reference to restaurant and bar receipts: 
 

There is no doubt that the expansion of the PST had an 
effect on sales at bars and restaurants. For the first time 
since the survey began 20 years ago, gross sales fell in 
2017. The point six decline translates into a 6.8 decline 
where inflation, including the expanded PST, is taken into 
account. 

 
So if you don’t take my word for it, Mr. Speaker, take the 
words of the good folks at Sask Trends Monitor. Consumers are 
also taking a hit by paying more for the same goods and 
services, but being taxed on it. 
 
This summer I heard people referring to this as a Tim Hortons 
tax. I may have been one of the people that referred to it in that 
way, Mr. Speaker, but now I’m starting to think of it a little bit 
more as a tax on date night. I can’t go out as much. I can’t have 
as much fun. You know, everyone likes a good date night, and 
when we’re talking about 6 per cent on PST in restaurants, 
when we’re talking about 4 per cent on beer, you know, these 
are . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . All right. 
 
We don’t want to see these additional taxes. People are being 
hurt by them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana also talked about the PST 
on new construction. And recently we saw a 7.6 per cent drop 
in investment in Saskatchewan while neighbouring provinces 
actually saw increases in investment in new construction. So 

some of those increases were 14.8 per cent in BC [British 
Columbia], 14.7 per cent in Alberta, and in Manitoba, 18.1 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And according to the TD [Toronto Dominion Bank] financial 
outlook going forward, the outlook for construction remains 
soft as homebuilding activity is expected to slump 14 per cent 
this year. So it’s not looking good in that industry either, Mr. 
Speaker. These are having real effects on real people. 
 
And on top of these tax increases, we saw cuts. We saw cuts to 
education. I’ve talked to parents. I talked to teachers about the 
cuts. People believe that investing in education is a protection 
for our future; it’s a protection for our future jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Advanced Education, my colleague from Nutana alluded to the 
fact that Advanced Ed has seen a 5 per cent cut as well. And 
this is the greatest single cut the University of Saskatchewan 
has faced. They’ve talked about not being able to meet their 
mission anymore. They’re talking about the reduction in 
provincial grants in their 2016-17 annual report. And this is 
going to lead to layoffs, program restrictions, and increases in 
tuition. While increasing the taxes on education, they actually 
cut funding for education, and this is hard for people to 
reconcile. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk about the impact this 
budget has had on jobs in this province. These cuts hurt 
everyday people. And so I want to talk about, in particular, 
some of the numbers that support this. 
 
So in February we saw 7,800 jobs lost in this province. And 
we’ve been talking about this but the members opposite don’t 
seem to be showing the amount of concern that they should be 
about the way our industry’s looking right now and how labour 
is looking. 
 
Yesterday Stats Canada released job numbers. We’ve had the 
Leader of the Opposition refer to some of these numbers. In 
particular, so we saw 300 fewer jobs, fewer people working in 
January compared to December; 600 fewer people working 
from the January prior, all while the other Western provinces 
are creating jobs, not just a few — 5,600 jobs in BC over the 
last year, 44,600 jobs in Alberta, and 77,500 jobs in BC in the 
last year. This job creation record being seen by our neighbours, 
Mr. Speaker. I wonder if they know something we don’t know. 
 
On March 21st, the minister said it’s not the government that 
drives our economy, it’s industry. Surely the government has 
some role to play in job creation, Mr. Speaker, or there would 
not be a job for that minister. So people are hurting. This budget 
deals with the folks who are hurting. And so I want to talk 
about what some of these job situations look like. Sask Trends 
Monitor from February 2018: there is still no sign of a recovery 
in the labour market, and in fact things are getting worse. After 
several months of minor ups and downs, employment dropped 
1.4 per cent in February, the worst showing in over a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a job creation strategy. We need 
investments in education and skills training, not cuts like we 
saw in the budget. If the minister needs further proof, perhaps 
he should get out on the doorsteps of Regina Northeast and talk 
to the good people about the jobs that they are losing in this 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3699 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise 
in the Assembly today to speak to the motion from the members 
opposite. And the reason I think that it’s important to speak to 
this motion, Mr. Speaker, is to get on the record some of the 
facts about our party’s performance on this side of the House 
versus the members on the other side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll start with some basic statistics, Mr. Speaker, to show 
where our province was about 10 years ago, compared to . . . 
prior to 2007, and where we’re at today. Mr. Speaker, I think 
one of the biggest indicators we have is population. You need to 
remember that when the NDP were in power from 1991 to 
2007, there were 56,000 more people who moved out of 
Saskatchewan than who moved in. And the population always 
kind of hovered around a million people, Mr. Speaker. Now 
since 2007, Mr. Speaker, when our party formed government, 
over 89,000 more people have actually moved into our province 
versus what’s moved out. Our population has grown by 167,000 
people. We’re at an all-time high of 1.163 million people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an important fact to get 
on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen this growth in my home community of 
Swift Current. Just this past year we’ve surpassed the 
population of 18,000 people. That’s the highest we’ve ever been 
at. There’s new businesses growing, going up in Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity to be at one of those grand 
openings just a week ago. There’s existing businesses that are 
expanding their operations. They’re hiring staff. They’re 
growing their footprint in Swift Current. There’s new homes 
going up in new areas of Swift Current that we haven’t seen 
before. And that growth in Swift Current and across 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I think is due in some small part to 
some of the economic policies of our government and this party 
on this side of the House. 
 
Now to speak to the motion, Mr. Speaker, yes, there were some 
difficult choices to be made in the 2017-2018 budget. No doubt 
about that. But the people of this province elected us to lead and 
to help make some of those difficult decisions. 
 
We need to remember that our government has also made some 
significant accomplishments in investments in Saskatchewan, 
some substantial income tax reductions. We’ve talked about a 
family of four in Saskatchewan that pays no income tax, Mr. 
Speaker, on the first $50,495 of income. That’s the highest 
tax-free threshold in all of Canada right now, Mr. Speaker, and 
Saskatchewan families pay some of the lowest income taxes in 
the entire nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Economic growth, Mr. Speaker. Prior to 2007, Saskatchewan 
had the worst economic growth rate in the country. Since that 
time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s GDP has increased by about 
24 per cent. That’s the largest increase of all the provinces, and 
that’s also an important indicator, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we also had the worst job creation record in the 
nation under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. We were behind every 
other province in Canada. Since our party formed government, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the second-best job creation record in 
the country, nearly double the national rate of job growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you remember the days of Saskatchewan being a 
have-not province. We were always in and out of equalization. 
A former premier actually referred to us as just a wee province, 
as they used to say. Mr. Speaker, our party on this side of the 
House, we had a vision for a province that could be so much 
more than that: a province that should be leading the nation, or 
at least near the top of that, based on our tremendous natural 
resources, based on our tremendous people, the hard-working 
people of Saskatchewan who have a vision for growth. 
 
And you know, I’ve talked about a few things, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s just a sample of some of our government’s record on this 
side of the House. And in the motion we’re debating today, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re talking about . . . The members have said that 
there have been some cuts; we’ve cut services to the most 
vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. And I would argue that that couldn’t 
possibly be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The strong economy over the past decade or so has allowed our 
government to make some fairly significant investments. Our 
surgical wait times are now lower than they have ever been, the 
shortest in all of Canada as a matter of fact, compared to when 
the NDP were in power and they were the longest surgical wait 
times in the country under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made some other major investments into 
health care. I think of the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] air ambulance service which is so important to our 
rural areas of Saskatchewan, a children’s hospital being 
constructed in Saskatoon, a new hospital in Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In my hometown of Swift Current, a brand new long-term care 
facility, 225 long-term care beds servicing the seniors of Swift 
Current and southwest Saskatchewan. It’s a P3 [public-private 
partnership] model, a very successful model that was built on 
time and on budget and actually also saved taxpayers money in 
that process. 
 
There’s been a number of new schools built in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, 40 I believe brand new or replacement schools in 
Saskatchewan. That includes in Swift Current where we have 
the joint-use École Centennial and All Saints school, space for 
1,000 kids and replacing some of the aging facilities, the aging 
schools in Swift Current that actually my kids attended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that I think that we’re most proud 
of on this side of the House is the investments that our 
government has made into programs and services for those with 
disabilities. And you’ll remember prior to 2007, Mr. Speaker, 
there was no real long-term program, income assistance 
program for those with disabilities. And I would talk and meet 
with some of those folks and their families and people that are 
involved with community-based organizations in Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker, and they would talk about how every year they’d 
have to go and reapply for social assistance. They’d have to 
sometimes go see a doctor, get a form filled out. But every year, 
they’d have to make an appointment with their social worker. 
And it was frustrating for them, Mr. Speaker, because, you 
know, they have permanent disabilities, Mr. Speaker. They’re 



3700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

always going to be in need of financial assistance. And what 
they wanted was a long-term program that would recognize 
that, an income assistance program. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So in 2007, Mr. Speaker, when we had the chance to form 
government, that’s when we created the Saskatchewan Assured 
Income for Disability program, the SAID program, which has 
been well received by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in my community and across the province. And there’s 
always tweaks to be done, Mr. Speaker, improvements to be 
made, but by and large people are very happy with that 
particular program. 
 
On that same topic, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made some pretty 
significant investments into long-term residential services for 
those who are disabled as well, Mr. Speaker. I remember, prior 
to 2007, having the opportunity in my former roles in 
government to sit down and meet with folks in Swift Current 
who needed a place to live. They needed a long-term home for 
disabled individuals. And there were only two group homes in 
Swift Current back then, Mr. Speaker. We helped out when we 
were in opposition. We coordinated a petition drive to help and 
try and lobby the NDP government of the day. And when we 
had the chance, Mr. Speaker, in 2007, we started to work on 
that waiting list. We had close to 30 people in Swift Current 
who were waiting for a long-term place to live. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we now have eight group homes in Swift Current. 
 
There’s more work to do. I met with Susie Eidem from the 
Southwest Homes community-based organization last week and 
there’s a couple of folks on the waiting list. So we’re going to 
continue to work on that but we’re up to the challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a bit about our track record in 
government. There’s always more to do, and as I said before, 
we’re up to the challenge just like the people of Saskatchewan 
are. Our party on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is going 
to support the resource sector, the oil and gas companies in 
Swift Current and area and across the province who do an 
important role and employ tens of thousands of people in our 
province both directly and indirectly. 
 
We’re going to continue to support pipelines on this side of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, which is important for our economy. 
And I know that the members opposite don’t recognize that. 
They’re opposed to pipelines, as we know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we’re prepared to 
continue to lead. And I think what the people of Saskatchewan 
aren’t prepared for is having the NDP mismanage the province 
again. Like how they increased taxes 21 times during their time 
in power with no plan to get away from tax increases. How the 
NDP closed 52 hospitals, eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds, 
closed 176 schools, or left a billion dollar pothole in our 
provincial highway system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we used to say that the NDP, they 
didn’t have a plan, and that’s been true for the most part, I 
think. But they now do have a plan actually, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
this one right there which you know . . . They haven’t costed 

this plan, Mr. Speaker, so we try to help out a little bit and put a 
price tag on this, and it’s about a $2.5 billion per year plan, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what it is. And so that’s what they want to put 
on the people of Saskatchewan. Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP bumped up their leadership convention in May to March 
because who knows what would have happened if they had 
another month to come up with more ideas, and who knows 
what the price of that plan would’ve been if we waited another 
month or two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, they have no plans to 
fight against the federally imposed carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. 
They are prepared to wave the white flag. They’re in favour of 
it. And if the feds won’t do it, they’re prepared to put one in 
place regardless. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that’s where they want 
the province of Saskatchewan, back to the old days, a have-not 
province, always in and out of equalization. I would argue, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan people don’t have time for that 
anymore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude my remarks and I will not be 
supporting the motion of the members opposite. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
interesting to get into the 75-minute debate. They’re always 
timely and robust. And I have to say this one, as we look 
forward to the budget which we hope is not quite as 
mean-spirited as the last one that caught so many people off 
guard, even though we were all aware of the financial straits 
and the mismanagement of the government and their inability to 
actually produce balanced budgets. And we know that’s a 
well-known fact, that of the last 10 budgets, seven were not 
balanced. Three were balanced. 
 
And I appreciate the member from Swift Current. It’s good to 
see him on his feet and his remarks. I appreciate that often 
they’re giving speeches and they have to say things they may 
not really understand or fully comprehend. But I just want to 
say that their remarks about some plan or something that 
they’ve costed out, I wonder if that’s the same guy who came 
up with the 112,000 people they took off the tax rolls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked for proof for the last umpteen years 
because they get up and they say 112,000 people thrown off the 
tax rolls because of tax cuts, and they’ve never been able 
actually to prove that. They say, “it’s a fact; it’s a fact, of 
course.” Well where are the facts? We’ve asked written 
questions after written questions, and the answer back is, “to be 
determined,” “we’re not sure,” or “ordered.” Where are the 
facts on that? 
 
So, you know, I think it’s the same guy who does the budgeting. 
Who is that guy who does the budgeting? They probably should 
invest more in . . . Who are these people? And so, Mr. Speaker, 
forgive me if I’m a little skeptical about when they get up. And 
I understand some get up and they are just told what to say and 
they really don’t know what they’re saying. 
 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3701 

It reminds me of Winston Churchill, if you’ve ever seen the 
movie, Darkest Hour, and you had Winston Churchill and 
Chamberlain and the next prime minister. Here we have the 
organ grinder, Brad Wall is gone, but now we have the monkey, 
you know. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have the same tune, Mr. 
Speaker, the same tune. 
 
They’re talking about a moral high ground, moral high ground 
from the member from Saskatoon University, who gets up . . . 
All of a sudden he’s found his moral compass. After all these 
years of . . . He’s saying that they have to curtail their spending, 
that they can only spend what they bring in. Seven years of 
budgets that were not balanced, and finally all of a sudden you 
find this out. How can that be? How can that be? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, and I look at the headlines that we have in 
the papers before us in July 14th, where they continue to roll 
back . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — On a point of order. I believe that he was 
talking and quoting Winston Churchill. He was comparing 
organ grinder and then he pointed over here and he said, 
“monkey.” I had a couple members tell me he said that. I would 
ask that he withdraw and apologize for that comment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I was following the member as 
best I could in terms of his intervention, but I couldn’t quite 
hear over the hollering that was coming from the other side in 
terms of what happened with the member’s remarks. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if you want to review the tape or take it 
away for further consideration or anything like that, but 
certainly I know the member to be an hon. member and I’m 
sure that he put it in good stead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll have an opportunity to review the tape. 
We’ll start with that, but let’s keep our comments respectful. I 
don’t know how many times I’m going to have to stand up here 
and go through this. It seems like it’s daily, but keep the 
comments respectful, please. Period. And I will review the tape. 
I’ll recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll save you some time. I will 
withdraw and apologize. I don’t mean any offence to anybody 
personally over there. I did move my hand over here, but I am 
quoting Winston Churchill in the movie of Darkest Hour. And I 
do want to make a point about ideology and being so hidebound 
to ideology. And so I’ll just say I withdraw and apologize that 
remark if it’s offensive to those folks over there. 
 
With that comment, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that my point 
stands, that it’s the same old Sask Party when they talk about 
their ability to balance budgets and their ability to manage our 
financial records. And we have some grave concerns about that 
ability to do that, because while we see . . . And actually the 
member from Swift Current got up and was talking about the 
court ruling. 
 
And I do have to just smile because sometimes there’s 
unintended consequences when you go to the Supreme Court, 
as we have. And I think the member from Cannington always 

appreciates their ruling now, of the fact that we have in Canada 
the right to strike. And it was the Sask Party that brought us to 
that in Canada. So I think the people in labour very much 
appreciates the fact that we have the right to strike and right to 
withdraw our labour so we can have meaningful bargaining, 
and it’s because of the kind of legal stuff that happens over 
there. And so, Mr. Speaker, I do have some issues. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what really I think people here are very much 
worried about is where you have stories that are appearing 
before us on the news, whether it’s in the print media or on the 
radio. And this one’s from CBC. It just happened on Monday, 
where the Finance minister, and I’m quoting. It says, 
“Everything is on the table.” And she doesn’t rule out another 
PST hike. Here is a group of people who have made their bread 
and butter talking about how they fight for the ordinary working 
people of this province and will do everything they can to stop 
tax increases. And here we have a government that seems to be 
bent on increasing taxes. 
 
So I think this is something that we can really expect to see in 
the weeks ahead. And it’s something, whether it’s the 
environmental handling charge that we saw on juice while 
technically not a tax, it really is because now they’re going to 
keep the excess funds. And it really is something that is quite 
expensive. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that people have a right 
to question the credibility of that group over there when it 
comes to managing our finances. 
 
And really, Mr. Speaker, you know, the members over there 
will talk about the tough times that they’re in right now, but we 
had so many years of record revenue and none of it was put 
away. None of it was put away. And the fact the member from 
Swift Current, and he would know this as what happened, and 
the former premier, Premier Wall, tried to portray the financial 
situation in Saskatchewan in 2007 as stark. It was stark; there 
was no money. And what did we leave them? What did we 
leave them? I think we left them . . . Was it $2 billion that we 
had left them? And here they squandered that, squandered the 
years of record resource revenue. 
 
And here we are now increasing taxes, and we have the 
Minister of Finance saying everything is on the table. We have 
the Minister of Central Services, and today he could not give a 
straight answer. It seems he doesn’t know his file. A simple 
question: where is the list of 660 buildings that he would like to 
evaluate, maybe move on? Where is that list? Where is that list? 
People are asking straightforward questions and they can’t be 
answered. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we have some real 
concerns. 
 
Now whether last year . . . And we do remember how these 
guys ripped up the contracts they had with the municipalities 
over their agreements with the cities over power sharing and 
revenues from that. I just want to read into the record here what 
some of the people were saying at that time. And here is a 
sample of what people were saying about the budget after it was 
released. Here’s Saskatoon mayor Charlie Clark, and I quote, 
“We had no idea this was coming. It’s a huge financial impact. 
It’s unprecedented for a city to take a one-time hit like this.” 
 
And Meewasin Valley Authority says, “A ‘very difficult day’ 
for Meewasin. ‘A $409,000 hit to our budget is a very 



3702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

substantial cut.’” And we know in the recent weeks they’ve 
raised the issue about whether or not Meewasin Valley 
Authority is actually sustainable without their funding that this 
government and that member voted for. And he will stand up 
and say that he’s proud of that budget. 
 
And here we have Vice-President Marilyn Braun Pollon from 
CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business], often 
quoted by that person. And she says it’s brutal: “It’s brutal from 
a small business perspective.” And we’ve seen that in terms of 
the job record. The jobs that have been lost in the restaurant 
sector, the hospitality sector, because of the PST hike, and they 
can’t deny that. And here we have Western Canada for 
Restaurants: “The government has decided to kill food tax 
fairness.” These are what people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
And we have the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 
president, Pat Maze, saying, I quote, “We’re already at bare 
bones. There’s no way to escape it. There will cuts in the 
classroom.” So that was then. We’ve seen a minor increase but 
not, the full cut has not been restored. 
 
And so, and then we have Councillor Bob Hawkins. He says, 
“This is a budget that comes like a thief in the night.” I couldn’t 
agree more. So I support this motion and I can go on and read 
more quotes. 
 
Moose Jaw City Manager Matt Noble says, “This is out of the 
blue. It’s a total blindside.”  
 
Like a thief in the night. I will support this motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a 
privilege to join into this 75-minute debate on the previous 
budget that our government put through. First of all, I want to 
congratulate you and say that you’re doing a very good job. 
You haven’t ruled against me yet. So I always think Speakers 
are doing a great job until they go against me, and then I have a 
second opinion. But you’re doing a great job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see there’s quite a few people in the House here right now, 
and I just want to let them know that there is some really good 
egg salad, homemade buns in the lounge. Why don’t you go 
back there and have some dill pickles? I think the speech would 
sound better, especially with the TV on mute back there, than it 
is going to sound in here. 
 
But you know, it’s interesting to stand here and listen to this 
side of the House and then listen to that side of the House, and 
the response that they have and how they’ve talked about the 
previous budget. And then what we have to say on this side, 
you’d swear you’re living in two different provinces 
completely. You know, it really is interesting. 
 
Before I go too much further though, I also do want to talk a 
little bit about the three MLAs that were just recently elected in 
by-elections: the member from Swift Current who only 
garnered 74 per cent of the vote, Mr. Speaker; the member from 

Melfort who was at 78-79 per cent of the vote, congratulations; 
and the member from Kindersley who was at 88. You could 
probably almost round that up to 90 per cent — an amazing 
number, Mr. Speaker. This all after a recent budget. 
 
So you know, I know the opposition will look at two 
by-elections. They certainly won in Saskatoon and one being 
post-budget, one being pre-budget. We’ll look at the ones that 
we won in Melfort, Swift Current, and Kindersley, and 
especially not necessarily whether it was a win or not, but the 
numbers that they were able to generate at 88-89 per cent of the 
vote is incredible. I wonder, that member from Kindersley, you 
know, if he goes home over the Easter break and he goes into a 
restaurant, and there’s like 20 people sitting around in that 
restaurant, does he walk out of there and say like, 20 people 
sitting around, I wonder who the two were that didn’t vote for 
me? Because 18 of them did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And quite frankly, I think that reflects a lot of things, but it 
reflects generally the direction that this province is going and 
the plan that we’ve put forward. Because, you know, the 
opposition will take this budget and look at it in isolation, a 
one-year budget. But this isn’t a one-year budget; this is a 
three-year plan to get back to balance. And I think that is 
significant. It was lost on the opposition completely, but I 
believe that is significant and the people of Saskatchewan see 
that. 
 
You know, you don’t have to look very far across this country 
and you see government after government that is in deficit 
positions: Ontario and Newfoundland, New Brunswick. Of 
course our federal government has deep deficit and no plans to 
balance. But also on each side of us, Alberta and Manitoba are 
running deficits. Running a deficit for a year or two or three 
because of difficult financial times may be a reality, but none of 
those other provinces, and especially the federal government, 
have a plan to get back to balance. 
 
That’s where this is different in Saskatchewan and that’s why 
people in Saskatchewan, I believe, are willing to vote 89 per 
cent for an MLA in Kindersley and 74 per cent for an MLA in 
Swift Current because there is a long-term plan, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And you know, it’s interesting. As I said, when you go from 
kind of reality out in the real world, which we’re all going to be 
out there in the next week, and then you come back in here, 
what I notice the most for myself is when I’m around the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, whether it’s in Fort 
Qu’Appelle at the ski hill — which is still open this weekend, 
Mission Ridge, great snow conditions, Mr. Speaker — but 
whether you’re in Fort Qu’Appelle or in Milestone or whatever 
community, the conversations that you have with constituents. 
And I come back in here, and conversations that we have with 
MLAs seem to be an awful lot of the same conversation. 
 
And I wonder what their world is like on the opposite side, 
where they go out and they come back, because the 
conversations that they’re having in the House when they stand 
and talk is absolutely nothing but negative. I haven’t heard one 
positive response for years and years. Now they’ll say that this 
budget is full of cuts and tax increases. And certainly there were 
some tough decisions that had to be made, whether it’s on the 
revenue side or on the expense side, Mr. Speaker, tough 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3703 

decisions that had to be made. And people out there in the real 
world realize that. I’ve talked to farmer after farmer and 
businessman and whoever . . . business person, I should say, to 
be politically correct, person around the constituency that will 
all say those are tough decisions, absolutely, and we’ll accept 
those tough decisions if you have a plan to get to balance, 
which we do. But that’s a totally different conversation than 
what we hear from the other side. 
 
And I listened to all three speakers. It was interesting. If you 
compare notes to all three speakers from Saskatoon, so they’re 
all kind of in the same area, you’d think they’d have the same 
message. But the member that moved the motion was really 
quite interesting. The member from Nutana spoke for 15 
minutes, because that’s what her opening statement would be is 
15 minutes. Eleven minutes was talking about all the decisions 
that were cuts that we’ve reviewed and changed. 
 
Now I would think they’ve complained for about almost a year 
that these cuts were no good. We’ve listened to what some 
constituents have said. We’ve revised them. We’ve changed, 
not completely backed away from all of them, but changed an 
awful lot. Eleven minutes of her speech was talking about the 
revision that we had. I would think that would be a positive. 
Except the other two then spent their 20 minutes combined 
talking about all the negatives there was. So it’s just such a 
mixed message coming from the same area of the province. 
You know, it’s really interesting. 
 
But what I would say though, from over and over again is do 
they live in this almost a cesspool of negativity because every 
time they come in here it is negative this, negative that. And the 
member from Saskatoon Centre is the worst. You never used to 
be that way. But he’s had to stand and apologize twice in the 
last day and a half, Mr. Speaker, because he’s called people, 
their motives into question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not once did I ever think when the Leader of the 
Opposition called for a pharmacare program, as a physician, 
that he had an ulterior motive, but talked about a conflict of 
interest, if you wanted to look at it that way. Mr. Speaker, that 
isn’t how we think because we’re not in a cesspool of negativity 
like those members are over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the past 10 years of budgets have always been 
negative to those people. I can see them being critical because 
of some tax increases and cuts. It’s part of a bigger program. 
But I can tell you that this province has never seen a better 10 
years than it has over the past 10 years, and it will not see a 
better 10 years in the next 10 years under this Sask Party 
government and under the new Premier from Shellbrook, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is positioned very well, better than 
any other province because we’re taking our fiscal situation, 
turning it into a positive, being balanced within two more years, 
and continuing to move on. I will not support the motion, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m proud of where this province is today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the members 

opposite were in power, they increased taxes 21 times in 16 
years. And what did they spend this money on? Well, over 300 
million taxpayers’ dollars were spent on failed business 
ventures, many of which weren’t even in the province. 
 
They include SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company], mega bingo, and Clickabid.com, just 
to name a few. Now this same old NDP wants to bring in the 
biggest single tax increase in the history of the province while 
increasing spending by 2.5 billion per year on projects, 
including leveraging our Crown corps to make Saskatchewan 
the home of cloud computing. Sound familiar? 
 
My question is to the member from Saskatoon Centre. How can 
you possibly convince Saskatchewan people that your spending 
plan is anything different than what the same old NDP tried and 
failed? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question, but it really begs the question of her, 
where did all the money go? They’re focusing on this and they 
come up with numbers, but where did all the money go? 
 
Now I remember the former Premier Wall, he would get up on 
his hind legs and he would talk about, I can tell you where all 
the money went. But then he would sputter out because it 
doesn’t add up over there. You folks over there can’t balance a 
budget. Shame on you. You know, you’re worried about the 
future. Worry about next week and whether or not we’re going 
to get a PST tax increase — that’s what the people are worried 
about. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the members to . . . 
Order. I’d ask the members to put their questions through the 
Chair and their responses through the Chair. I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More Saskatchewan 
people are moving to other provinces than 10 years ago when 
the Sask Party came into power. What does the member from 
Saskatoon University have to say about the 20,000 people 
leaving Saskatchewan to find opportunities in other provinces? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our province now 
has a population of 1.16 million people. Ten years ago it was 
less than a million people and the NDP government said we’d 
never get more than that. We should just take what we get and 
just sit down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 2017-18 budget. We had 
tough decisions to make. Our record as a government is strong. 
One of the first actions we took, Mr. Speaker, was remove 
112,000 people from the tax rolls, and that is true. 
 
The NDP record, Mr. Speaker, is raising taxes 21 times in 16 
years, Mr. Speaker — our young people leaving over and over, 
money leaving this province over and over. That’s the record of 



3704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

the NDP. I won’t take any advice from that side of the House. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The reality is 
what we see across from us today is the same old NDP as this 
past week has shown: drive-by smears, just inadequate 
questions. It’s kind of sad. And the records show that they have 
demonstrated their inability to manage this province. Their 
solution? We’ve got a new leader over there and he’s kind of 
come up with some ideas: about $2.5 billion in new spending 
every year, taxing our hard-working industries, racking up that 
orange credit card. 
 
My question is for the member from Saskatoon Fairview: to pay 
for this $2.5 billion plan, what’ll you do, raise taxes on people? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. Mr. Speaker, this is a conversation 
about people who are hurting in our province as a result of the 
decisions that were made by that government and that that 
member voted for. 
 
We need to come back to . . . We need to have a serious 
conversation about this. We need to be able to . . . These are 
unfair tax hikes. These are heartless cuts, Mr. Speaker. And we 
need to have a fair conversation about the budget last year and 
what the people of this province can expect this year, come next 
week. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is what the 
former Conservative candidate and Saskatoon ward 5 councillor 
Randy Donauer said: “This is a transfer of a tax burden from 
one level of government to another because they can.” Because 
they can. Now this is a question for the member from Saskatoon 
University who was a colleague of Randy Donauer: can they 
expect yet another tax transfer in the next budget? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
proud to call Randy Donauer, the councillor from ward 5 in 
Saskatoon, a friend. He’s a proud, vociferous . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Conservative? 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Conservative. Yes, he’s a conservative, and 
he’s proud of it. And he’s a defender of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will stand here and defend our record on 
municipal revenue sharing any day of the week, 365 days of the 
year — $46.5 million last year. I can go through every project 
that was funded for the member from Saskatoon Centre if he’d 
like the facts, Mr. Speaker — 161 per cent increase in the last 

10 years. The last year that the NDP government was in power, 
Mr. Speaker, their minister said, we’ll come up with a 
long-term plan, maybe in the next couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
They did. In 2007 they certainly did. This is a long-term plan, 
and we’ll continue supporting our cities. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame 
that when members opposite were in government, young 
Saskatchewan families were leaving the province. Schools were 
closing, job creation was at an all-time low, and there was no 
room for growth. Families knew that if they wanted to succeed, 
they had to leave the province. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Thankfully that started changing in 2007. People and business 
grew the province, and we supported that. My question is to the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview. Do you agree that our 
investments in our leading industries, education, and job 
creation has made an impact on our population growth? Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, it’s like these numbers are falling 
on deaf ears — 20,000 people have left the province, or 20,000 
people are leaving the province in the past 10 years. We’re 
talking about more people leaving . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . No. And maybe the members opposite have not acquainted 
themselves with the material, and that is fair. But the growing 
population is due to immigration into our province, not 
interprovincial immigration. Interprovincial migration has 
doubled. 
 
So we are talking about people leaving the province, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the fact that this government is hiking 
taxes, that they are unfairly cutting the services that are 
important to people of this province, and not working to create 
jobs in this province, despite the fact that we have repeatedly 
asked for a job creation strategy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the damaging PST hike on the 
construction industry has proved to be very destructive for the 
economy of this province. The TD economic forecast says, 
“Going forward, the outlook for construction remains soft, as 
homebuilding activity is expected to slump 14 per cent this 
year . . .” 
 
To the member from Swift Current: how can you sit back while 
Sask Party decisions hurt the construction industry and cost 
Saskatchewan people their jobs? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3705 

you to the member opposite for the question. No doubt about it, 
as we’ve talked earlier today, there were some difficult 
decisions that had to be made in the 2017-2018 budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that this party on 
this side of the House does have a plan to get back to balance, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, we’re one of the only provinces, if not 
the only province in the country right now, that does have a 
plan to get back to balance. 
 
And we’ve spoken to our constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’ve talked to them about what their priorities are and where 
they think that our government should be focusing in terms of 
areas of investment and taxation as well. And I know the folks 
that I’ve talked to on the doorsteps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
understand that there’s some tough decisions to be made, but 
they’re willing to pull up their socks and all kind of work 
together towards a plan here in getting the province back to 
balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we could talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the record of the 
members opposite and the number of times that they increased 
taxes during their time in power, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think 
the people of Saskatchewan want to go back to that, Mr. 
Speaker. And they don’t want to go back to that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next question. Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, 7,800 Saskatchewan jobs were 
lost this time last year. Now can the member from Saskatoon 
University stop spinning lines from 10 years ago and 
acknowledge that now, in 2018, Saskatchewan people are 
losing their jobs because of Sask Party’s mismanagement? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 
question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. Sorry. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Nerlien.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to acknowledge the arrival of new leadership in the 
Chamber. We of course on this side of the House know that 
leadership is strong and steady on this side of the House. Of 
course leadership is something that this party knows quite a bit 

about, having brought Saskatchewan from nearly two decades 
of wandering in the economic wilderness and being a have-not 
province under the NDP to now where we have a strong decade 
of growth under Sask Party leadership. That has been 
characterized by growth in population, growth in employment, 
astounding growth in exports, unprecedented growth in 
manufacturing production, and as a result of the lowest 
corporate and manufacturing tax rates in Canada, the best 
incentives and rewards for business innovation, and the 
third-lowest personal income tax rates in the nation, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are the only province without a carbon tax of 
any kind. 
 
Under a strong Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, 
we have gone from a province standing on the margins of 
economic activity to being the centre of economic activity. 
Saskatchewan has become a place where our children can 
remain and prosper, where opportunities for our high school 
and university graduates will keep them here so they will never 
be condemned to be part of the greatest export of the NDP years 
— our youth. We’ve had challenges to be sure, Mr. Speaker, 
not the least of which is the shortfall in resource revenues that 
once again show that when leadership is needed, it is the 
Saskatchewan Party that steps forward. 
 
Our party could have chosen the slippery slope that is now 
being demonstrated across the nation. We could have chosen to 
ignore the problem and allow the deficit to grow uncontrollably. 
We could have taken the stance that the present Prime Minister, 
who declared in his warm and fuzzy economic philosophy that 
budgets balance themselves or that you can grow the economy 
from outwards. This is catchy phrasing but not fiscally 
responsible, catchy phrasing from a Prime Minister who is on 
his way to increasing the Canadian debt more than anyone who 
has ever held that position before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our strong Saskatchewan Party government could 
have chosen the path of least resistance and condemned our 
children, or if we had taken the path the Prime Minister is 
headed down, our grandchildren, to cleaning up the mess that 
his policies will leave behind. But the Saskatchewan Party 
instead chose a strategy that will not leave a black hole for the 
debt of the future generations. We chose to ask the 
Saskatchewan people to roll up their sleeves and share in the 
hard work of getting this province back to balanced budget. 
 
And we’ve been able to do so because of the diversity of our 
policies . . . have built into the Saskatchewan economy. As a 
result of Saskatchewan Party policies, Mr. Speaker, we have 
been shielded from the worst shocks of the resource downturn. 
Having lowest dependence on oil and gas revenues of the top 
three oil- and gas-producing provinces in Canada has made it 
easier for us to control and reduce spending in a measured and 
reasonable way without undermining the programs, services, 
and infrastructure that the people of Saskatchewan value . . . we 
have worked hard to establish. 
 
Our province’s competitive manufacturing and processing tax, 
the lowest in Canada, has resulted in more jobs created, an 
increased tax base, and more opportunities to get Saskatchewan 
products to the world. By building a diverse economy that is 
based on the strengths of multiple sectors, our Saskatchewan 
Party government has helped build an economy that is now on 



3706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2018 

track to balancing the budget by 2020. This is strong leadership, 
Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of strong leadership that has made 
Saskatchewan’s per capita debt the lowest in Canada, in fact 
about half as much as the next lowest province. 
 
About 20 years ago under the NDP, our province was paying 
over a billion dollars annually to service our debt. It is now less 
than a third of that. We have a AAA credit rating for the first 
time in the province’s history. We have the second-lowest 
debt-to-GDP ratio in Canada, and we have among the lowest 
income tax rates in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s strong leadership has us 
on track to balance the budget. Of course there is room for 
improvement as we chart our course towards balance, but we 
are making steady progress. 
 
We have new leadership on both sides of the Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker. And when new leadership comes into the Chamber, I 
feel it’s a good idea to take a look at what they have to offer. 
Our side has a clear stance, a strong, principled approach to 
achieving balance by 2020. I’ve also looked across the aisle and 
have studied the new NDP leader’s fiscal plan and found it 
wanting. In fact, it’s not a plan at all. It’s only a lengthy list of 
uncosted promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can plainly see, all the NDP is offering is 
weak fiscal leadership. I see no innovation here. I see no 
considered economic inspiration. I see no unique solution in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan. What I do see, Mr. Speaker, is 
mostly a rolling back of our government’s approach to the 
challenges we face. What I see is this new leadership’s utter 
capitulation to the idea that deficits are something that can be 
kicked down the road, not to be considered now but in the 
future. What they’re offering has all the structure of wet 
cardboard, unable to even carry its own weight. 
 
In other words, this new leader feels that creating deficits is just 
business as usual. Why not do just what their neighbours in 
Alberta are doing? Just run up debt as fast as you can, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan will balance our budget if we continue 
on our government’s plan, not the strategy of the other 
provinces and the federal government, who are preaching 
government on a credit card. 
 
And this new, weak NDP leadership has described our fight 
against the Trudeau carbon tax as a costly and pointless 
crusade. Costly and pointless, no, Mr. Speaker. What is costly 
and pointless is the unproductive and impractical new tax that 
only serves to hurt the very industries that drive our economy, 
makes it harder for us to make our ends meet, and in the end 
does nothing to reduce global emissions. What is costly and 
pointless, Mr. Speaker, is an exclusively Canadian carbon tax 
that makes it more expensive to do business in Canada while we 
compete on a global market. 
 
If the new NDP leader thinks this won’t cost us jobs, 
investment, and new business, he is sorely mistaken. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, what a carbon tax will do is put Saskatchewan and 
Canada as a whole at a competitive disadvantage, hurting 
agricultural, mining, and energy-producing provinces like ours. 
It’s a tax, Mr. Speaker, a tax on a country that produces less 
than 2 per cent of global greenhouse emissions. 

Wouldn’t it make more sense to focus on finding ways to 
reduce CO2 emissions? Wouldn’t Saskatchewan’s 
world-leading carbon capture technology, developed right here 
in Saskatchewan, be a better way of approaching the problem? 
This is a technology, by the way, that has reduced emissions by 
over 2 million tonnes. Or the world-leading work that’s been 
done in regards to carbon sequestration in our agricultural 
sector. On Saskatchewan’s native grassland alone, we have 
stored safely in the ground three times Canada’s annual carbon 
emissions. This does not even speak to the amount of carbon 
that’s taken out of the atmosphere every year in our farming 
industry. With the advancements in zero-till technology, much 
of which was pioneered and developed right here in 
Saskatchewan, we are changing the way agriculture is done 
globally. 
 
We are already doing our part in the fight against climate 
change. Arguably we have already done more than any other 
province, yet the NDP think that we should just give up and 
follow the advice of Justin Trudeau. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has vowed to stand up for 
the interests of the people of this province. We cannot see any 
benefit, only cost, to this new tax. Mr. Speaker, some things are 
worth fighting for. And this tax, imposed by the Prime Minister, 
who campaigned on a promise to collaborate with the 
provinces, to find a way that works for everyone . . . The best 
plan he could come up with on his own was to inflict a new tax 
on Canadians, a tax that will do nothing but hurt Saskatchewan 
families, farmers, and vital economic sectors that have no effect 
on global emissions. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Winston Churchill was once asked a 
question: can people tax themselves into prosperity? He said, 
“To answer that question, you first have to ask this one: can a 
person stand in a bucket and lift himself out by the handle?” 
  
But what do we see from the new NDP leader? He’s already 
running the white flag up the pole, either too afraid to stand up 
for the interests of Saskatchewan or so out of touch and 
ideological that he actually believes that a tax on everything, 
that would take billions out of the Saskatchewan economy 
while doing nothing to reduce emissions, is actually a good 
thing for our province. This is the kind of weak leadership that 
the province of Saskatchewan can’t afford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan exports 95 per cent of what it 
produces. We compete globally for our customers. And the new 
leader of the NDP advocates that we should stack the deck 
against ourselves for no measurable benefit. Mr. Speaker, this is 
weak leadership. This is economic and fiscal lunacy. It’s an 
abdication of his responsibility. His responsibility is to defend 
the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. He is failing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Opposing the creation of a new tax that fights greenhouse 
emissions or to pay for the promises of an ambitious politician 
goes to the heart of why I call myself a fiscal conservative. Mr. 
Speaker, the latest long-term predictions about Canada’s fiscal 
future from the Canadian Finance department says that within 
15 years, our national debt could be $1 trillion — one trillion, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s trillion with a “t,” as in trouble. I’m sure 
we haven’t heard that word before in debt projections. But 



March 29, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3707 

when a government continues on the road to deficit spending 
and increased program expenditures, it’s a recipe for disaster. 
And the solutions may actually be left not in our hands, but our 
children’s hands. 
 
But this is exactly the weak leadership that the new leader 
opposite is proposing, Mr. Speaker. The NDP has been feeding 
people a constant diet of rights and freedoms, but never once 
mentions responsibility. Rights and responsibility are a 
counterbalance. You can’t have one in a functioning society 
without the other. 
 
Only one needs to look at the campaign promises of the new 
NDP leader. There is a non-stop procession of promises, new 
programs, reinstating old programs, and even the creation of a 
new Crown corporation. The one thing that’s missing from his 
campaign promises is the cost. Nowhere can you find any 
information on the cost of these promises. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have helped him with his math, and we 
have conservatively calculated that his campaign promises will 
cost $2.5 billion in new spending every year. What is even more 
frightening, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there is no plan to 
increase revenues. There is no plan, no foresight as to how 
they’re going to pay for these programs. This is precisely the 
short-term, politically expedient thinking that we as taxpayers 
should be worried about. The NDP’s weak leadership on the 
economic front is something that we’ve seen in the past and we 
continue to see from the current leader. It demonstrates, once 
again, that they believe in rights but not responsibility. 
 
[12:30] 
 
They promise everything to everyone, but forget how to pay for 
it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’ll do Rudyard Kipling 
instead. Mr. Speaker, in the end it all comes down to leadership 
and having the qualities to be a leader. And when it comes to 
dealing with the challenges that are facing the Saskatchewan 
economy, a friend of mine reminded me of a Rudyard Kipling 
poem, “If.” It says, if you can keep your head when all about 
you are losing yours and blaming you . . .  

 
I’m proud of the strong leadership the Saskatchewan Party has 
given to our province. Turning our province from a have-not to 
a have province in good times, and then formulating a 
sustainable plan that carries us through the challenging times 
has shown us the most important qualities of strong leadership 
— clear headedness, the ability to formulate a workable plan, 
and the courage to carry on and see that plan through. And most 
of all, to keep your head when all about you are losing theirs 
and blaming you. That is what strong leadership is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So that the 
families, MLAs may go home to their families for Easter and 
have an enjoyable Easter week, I do now move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the Assembly adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Monday, April 9th. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Monday, April the 9th, yes, at 1:30 
p.m. Okay. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Members’ Decorum 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3683 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3683 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3684 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3684 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3684 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3685 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3685 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3685 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3685 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Observance of Easter 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3686 
 Gender Diversity Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3687 
 Business Builder Awards 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3687 
 Seniors Advocacy Centre Gala Luncheon 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3687 
 Remembering Bernie Collins 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3688 
 Lafleche is Hockeyville Finalist 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3688 
 Checking Opposition Statements 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3688 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Federal Carbon Pricing 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3688 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3689 
 Support for Agricultural Extension Services 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3689 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3689 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3690 
 Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3690 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3690 
 Economic Forecast for Saskatchewan 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3690 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3691 
 Support for Special Needs in Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3691 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3691 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3692 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3692 
 Government-Owned Buildings 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3692 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3693 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 609 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3693 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3693 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3693, 3704 
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3696, 3703 
  Mowat ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3697, 3703 
  Hindley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3699, 3704 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3700, 3703 
  Brkich (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 3701 
  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 3701 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 3701 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3702 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3703 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3704 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3704 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


