


















































March 27, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3619 
 March 27, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I am tabling a special report from the 
Advocate for Children and Youth, pursuant to section 12 and 28 
of The Advocate for Children and Youth Act. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
To you and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce Mr. Norm Campbell. He’s in the Speaker’s gallery 
this morning. He’s the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association. He’s joined 
today by his wife, Marian. Welcome. 
 
For over 40 years Norm has been involved in the recreation 
sector at local, provincial, and national levels. He began his 
career as a rec programmer in the city of Moose Jaw, later 
working his way up to become the recreation director. In 2000 
Norm began his current role as CEO. 
 
In just a few short days Norm will be taking on a new role, and 
that’s retirement. So for nearly two decades under Norm’s 
leadership, SPRA’s [Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 
Association] served as a recognized recreation sector leader in 
our province, providing services to members in the areas of 
training, professional development, and project grants and 
funding. Under Norm’s leadership, the SPRA’s represented 
numerous community organizations across the province and has 
been a fantastic steward of the Lotteries Trust Fund, 
contributing to the enviable quality of life we enjoy here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to thank Norm for his many, 
many years of commitment to recreation in Saskatchewan. I’m 
sure you’ve helped many people directly and indirectly across 
our province over many, many years. You will be missed. So I 
ask all members here at the legislature this afternoon to thank 
Norm for his time and wish him all the best in his retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the minister opposite just to briefly thank and 
welcome Norm to his Assembly and to thank him for his life of 
service to our province. He’ll have bettered many lives and 
certainly he’ll have bettered our province. So it’s my honour to 
join with the minister and to thank Norm for his life of 
leadership within our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of the Assembly, I’m very pleased to introduce 
a school group from my constituency, 28 very brilliant students, 
28 very brilliant students from grade 5 and grade 6 from Dr. 
A.E. Perry Elementary School, accompanying with their 
teacher, Ms. Miranda Fraser, and parent chaperones, Julene 
Harmel and Amy Walsh. After this question period, we’re 
going to have a little question-and-answer . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — You’re going to buy them ice cream? 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — And the Minister from Rural Health is going to 
buy ice cream, Mr. Speaker. I ask all the members to join me 
welcoming this school group in their Legislative Assembly. 
Thanks. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Moose Jaw and Elbow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the 
damaging cuts to our kids’ classrooms across Saskatchewan. 
The petition references the fact that the Sask Party actually 
hiked education property taxes by $67 million last year at the 
same as they cut our classrooms in a serious way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they highlight that Saskatchewan people are paying more 
and that certainly students are getting less, and that includes 
every last student. It references that the Sask Party has cut at 
least $674 in government funding for every student across 
Saskatchewan. Of course that impacts class sizes. It impacts 
student supports. It impacts every last student in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works to 
support our education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
These petitions are signed by good folks from Prince Albert, 
from Eastend, from Paddockwood, and from Kinistino. I so 
submit. 



3620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
The people signing this petition want to bring to our attention 
the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, even those outside the 
province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties. 
 
And we know that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live 
in a fair province where all voices are equal and money can’t 
influence politics. And we know that over the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations, and of that, $2.87 million coming from companies 
outside of Saskatchewan. And we know Saskatchewan politics 
should belong to Saskatchewan people, and that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia — leaving 
Saskatchewan by itself — have moved to limit this influence 
and level the playing field by banning corporate and union 
donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask Party to 
overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, to end 
out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations from 
corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit on 
individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
pertains to Orkambi. 
 
Whereas Orkambi was approved by Health Canada’s use in 
cystic fibrosis patients with two copies of the F508del-CFTR 
[cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator] 
mutation, aged 12 years and older, and: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows [Mr. Speaker], 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a 
fair price for Orkambi and to make it available to the 
Saskatchewan drug plan for those who meet the conditions 
set out by Health Canada and the clinical criteria 
established by the Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by many people 
throughout the land, and on this particular page the people that 
have signed are primarily from Meadow Lake, Rapid View, 
Saskatoon. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition calling on the Sask Party 
government to appoint a seniors’ advocate. The petitioners 
point out that Saskatchewan seniors, seniors in Saskatchewan 
have not been a priority of this government. They point out that 
there’s been budget cuts and cuts to programs that’ve made life 
less affordable for seniors, including the cut to the hearing aid 
plan in the last budget, increasing the seniors’ drug plan rates, 
cutting STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], Mr. 
Speaker, hiking rates in long-term care. 
 
The petitioners point out that Saskatchewan doesn’t have 
legislated minimum quality-of-care standards in long-term care, 
and even with government’s own continued CEO reports, 
including one that was just in February, along with concerns 
from families about issues in long-term care, the Sask Party has 
failed to ensure safety, quality of life, and dignity for seniors. 
 
They point out that other provinces have seniors’ advocates that 
work very well, ensuring seniors have the supports that they 
need; and they point out that a seniors’ advocate would provide 
vital support for seniors and their families across the province. 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately appoint a seniors’ 
advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that 
all seniors across the province have the supports they need 
and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Strasbourg. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Remembering Charles Red Williams 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday Saskatchewan lost an extraordinary and influential 
individual; Charles Red Williams passed away at the age of 93. 
Born in 1925 at Richardson, Saskatchewan, Red fought for 
Canada during WWII. After the war he earned his bachelor’s 
and master’s in Animal Sciences from the University of British 
Columbia and his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] from Oregon 
State University. 
 
Red returned to Saskatchewan in 1954 where he began teaching 
students in agriculture and veterinary medicine at the University 
of Saskatchewan. At the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 
he was at the forefront of introducing crossbreeding of beef 
cattle to Western Canada and his research on the dwarf gene in 
Herefords and on bull fertility was cutting edge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Red’s list of achievements is immense, far too 
long to read off entirely here. He was a member of the Order of 
Canada, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and the 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame, but to name a few. But 
he may be best remembered for his involvement in the 
community. 
 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3621 

He produced over 300 newspaper columns; handled over 1,500 
rural- and agricultural-related speaking events where he was an 
entertaining and sometimes fiery speaker, and produced over 
4,000 radio editorials during his career. Red will be greatly 
missed but his influence will prominently remain throughout 
this province for decades to come. 
 
On behalf of this entire Assembly, I’d like to acknowledge Red 
for all he has done for Saskatchewan and for agriculture and to 
extend our thoughts and prayers to his family at this very 
difficult time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Local Band Wins Juno Award 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize a fantastic local band who just won their first Juno 
Award. On Sunday night Regina’s own Dead South won the 
Juno for Best Traditional Roots Album of the Year for Illusion 
and Doubt. They were also nominated for Breakthrough Group 
of the Year. 
 
The Dead South is a five-piece acoustic ensemble based in 
Saskatchewan. They blend elements of folk, bluegrass, 
classical, and rock which results in a unique modern and 
authentic blend of boot-stompin’ acoustic music. They have 
been hard at work since they formed in 2012, having played 
several notable shows, several festivals, and live shows across 
North America. 
 
On top of playing shows, the band really hit their stride in the 
last few years when their single, “In Hell I’ll Be in Good 
Company” blew up in 2017. The video has almost 47 million 
views on YouTube. The song is off the debut album, 2014’s 
Good Company, which the band followed up on in 2016 with 
the record, Illusion and Doubt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spent a few evenings at Dead South shows, 
and I can certainly confirm that you are in good company with 
Nate Hilts on guitar and vocals; Scott Pringle on mandolin, 
guitar, and vocals; Danny Kenyon on cello; Eliza Mary Doyle 
on banjo; and Erik Mehlsen on cello. This Saskatchewan-grown 
band never fails to put on an amazing show. I would like to 
once again congratulate The Dead South, 2018 Juno Award 
winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Saskatchewan Musicians Nominated for Juno Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well this is going to be fun 
now, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank you because this weekend, 
as you’ve already heard, the 2018 Junos were held in 
Vancouver, and Saskatchewan was well represented with five 
nominations between two artists and one group. 
 
From Piapot, Buffy Sainte-Marie’s album Medicine Songs was 
nominated in the Indigenous Music and Contemporary Roots 

Album of the Year categories. She took home a Juno for the 
Indigenous Music Album of the Year.  
 
Born in Langenburg and now a proud resident of Rocanville, 
Jess Moskaluke who is no stranger to many of us was 
nominated for a 2018 Juno in the Country Album of the Year 
for her album Past the Past.  
 
And of course, as has been noted, the Regina-based band Dead 
South was also nominated for two Junos, including 
Breakthrough Group of the Year. My backyard chilling playlist 
has two of their songs, which I really love: “Rox in the Box” 
from the “Mason Jar Sessions,” and “In Hell I’ll Be in Good 
Company,” whose video was noted by the member opposite, 
but is especially cool because it has a number of Regina-based 
landmarks like the fountain outside, Vintage Vinyl, and the 
Farmer’s Market. They started off, actually, at Queen City 
Rocks, which is on right now. 
 
Both Jess Moskaluke and The Dead South have received 
noteworthy support through Creative Saskatchewan. Over 
$400,000 have been invested in both of these artists, allowing 
them to travel all over the world and to promote their work. 
And we’re very proud of the support that Creative 
Saskatchewan has been giving them to support our artists. 
 
And on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Buffy Sainte-Marie, Jess Moskaluke, and The 
Dead South on all of their success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Radiance Cohousing Project Nears Completion 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to acknowledge a wonderful housing project that began 
construction last fall in my constituency, and will be completed 
this spring. Radiance Cohousing, a nine-townhouse project in 
King George, is one of two co-housing projects in Saskatoon 
Riversdale, of which there are only 119 completed in all of 
North America. Co-housing is a type of housing development 
that includes fully equipped private homes clustered around 
shared indoor and outdoor space, with the design itself creating 
opportunities for neighbours to interact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, co-housing is planned, designed, owned, and 
managed by the residents who will be living there. Because of 
this, the final product is the result of decisions that were made 
through a collaborative and co-creative process, and reflects 
what the residents want in their own homes and in the shared 
spaces. 
 
Radiance Cohousing is also breaking new ground in more than 
one way in Saskatchewan. Aside from the co-housing model of 
development, they are building their project to meet passive 
housing standards, which are considered to be the most rigorous 
voluntary energy-based standard in the design and construction 
industry today. Passive house buildings consume up to 90 per 
cent less heating and cooling energy than conventional 
buildings. Mr. Speaker, there’s no furnace in this particular 
project. It’s quite amazing.  
 



3622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating Radiance 
Cohousing on their innovative, forward-thinking, 
environmentally friendly project, and in thinking about ways 
that we as legislators can foster and support the development of 
the passive house industry in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

North Battleford Hosts Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month I had the 
privilege to participate in the opening ceremonies of the 2018 
Saskatchewan Winter Games, which were held in North 
Battleford. The games drew 1,900 athletes, coaches, managers, 
and officials in 17 sports from all seven Sport, Culture and 
Recreation districts in the province. As well, there were over 
5,000 spectators who cheered on our young athletes. 
 
Our city’s passion for volunteering was also prevalent, as more 
than 1,000 volunteers helped make the games a success. The 
city of North Battleford and its citizens were wonderful hosts 
for the games, living up to the theme, Celebrate Winter’s Best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2018 Saskatchewan Winter Games were 
noteworthy for their attention to diversity and inclusion. For the 
first time ever, athletes competed in a para-sport — para-nordic 
ski. And at the Sask Games as well, 32 Special Olympic 
athletes participated in the sport of bowling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is proud to 
support provincial athletic competitions like the Winter Games 
through Sask Sport, Saskatchewan Lotteries, and the Sask 
Games Council. They contribute to our local and provincial 
economies and make Saskatchewan stronger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the medal winners and everyone who 
participated in the competition. I also ask that we join in 
thanking the North Battleford host committee, the 
Saskatchewan Games Council, the city and the people of North 
Battleford, and all the amazing volunteers for a very successful 
Saskatchewan Winter Games. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Lloydminster Teacher Receives Arbos Award 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Inspiration Through 
Learning was this year’s theme for Teacher and Staff 
Appreciation Week in Saskatchewan. And as poet William 
Butler Yeats once remarked, education is not the filling of a 
pail, but the lighting of a fire.  
 
For many students a passion for education is often ignited by an 
inspiring teacher. Joan Hill of the Lloydminster Catholic School 
Division is one of these teachers. She was recognized as being 
an influential educational professional and dedicated educator. 
Joan received the 2017 Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
Arbos Award for contributions to education and the teaching 
profession, the highest honour a teacher in this province can 
earn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joan began her career with the school division in 

1981, teaching all elementary school grades up until her 
retirement in 2017. Beyond the classroom, Joan devoted much 
of her time to extracurriculars, sporting activities, beautiful 
drama productions and Christmas concerts, and getting students 
volunteering in the community. Her creative drive and passion 
were key vehicles to the success she saw in her students, and as 
a province we are very grateful to have Joan as an exceptional 
role model for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask that members please join me in 
acknowledging Joan Hill on being recognized during the 
Teacher and Staff Appreciation Week and on receiving 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation’s 2017 Arbos Award. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Mosaic and Regina Pats Donate to Hunger Program 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week Mosaic 
and the Regina Pats Hockey Club announced the results of their 
Mosaic Saves for Hunger initiative in support of REACH 
[Regina Education and Action on Child Hunger Inc.] for the 
2017-18 regular season. REACH serves as an umbrella 
association for a wide range of food programs. The programs 
are delivered through over 150 organizations and schools, 
ensuring that all people in the community can have safe, 
affordable, and nutritious food. 
 
For every save made by a Regina Pats goaltender during the 
regular season, Mosaic would donate $25 to REACH. With a 
total of 2,017 saves, Mosaic and the Regina Pats were proud to 
hand over a cheque for $50,425 to the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first year that the Pats ran this initiative. 
Regina Pats COO [chief operating officer] Stacey Cattell said, 
and I quote, “To be able to partner with two great organizations 
in Mosaic and REACH has been a great benefit for everyone 
. . . [on our team].” The players really enjoyed being part of this 
initiative, as they were given a great opportunity to give back to 
the community that they represent each and every night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to commend the Regina Pats 
Hockey Club and Mosaic for their commitment to their 
community and thank them for their generous donation to 
REACH. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — Thanks for joining us today. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had some 
surprising news here yesterday. We heard from the minister that 
it’s not the Sask Party supporters who made a fortune selling 
land back to the province. It’s not the growing debt of the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub]. It’s not the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] investigation. It’s not the millions 
lost by Regina taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Those aren’t the reasons 
that are clouding the GTH sales. No, it’s the opposition that’s 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3623 

responsible for its failure, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t been 
positive enough about that change. And the minister asked us to 
change our tune. 
 
So the question remains, will the Premier face the music? My 
question, Mr. Speaker, is will the Premier do what it takes to 
clear the air and commit to a public inquiry into the GTH and to 
strengthening the conflict of interest Act the way that his 
Deputy Premier asked us to do in September? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a good opportunity here I think to speak to the generational 
investment that has been invested at the Global Transportation 
Hub just west of the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, and 
understand the private sector investment that has followed on 
that public sector investment, Mr. Speaker, with a number of 
different private sector companies buying, purchasing lots out 
in that area, Mr. Speaker, and investing some $485 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s private sector investment in the GTH, now 860 
jobs out there. 
 
But it is important to recognize the generational nature of this 
investment, Mr. Speaker, and what it can add to the 
Saskatchewan economy in the decades ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the reasons for the idea of the Global Transportation 
Hub, Mr. Speaker, under the members opposite when they were 
in government, Mr. Speaker, is where this idea originated. 
 
It’s this government, Mr. Speaker, that has moved forward with 
the construction of the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. 
But the idea and the need for the free flow of products in and 
out of this province, Mr. Speaker, was recognized by the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, was acted on by members of 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And the need for that free 
flow of our products, our export products out, Mr. Speaker, and 
our import of products into this province, is as necessary today 
as it has ever been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize the challenges around land procurement, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the Global Transportation Hub. We 
understand that those are with the Justice department in 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t precluded further action, 
Mr. Speaker. We have not precluded further action, but we will 
await the return of those documents and that decision before we 
make any decisions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, with sales having slowed to a halt 
with less than half the land sold, and with $37 million in debt, 
there are significant concerns with this project. There’s also 
significant concerns with our conflict of interest legislation, 
concerns that were raised by the Deputy Premier, raised by the 
member from Meadow Lake.  
 
It’s good to see the Premier find his feet on this question today. 
Will he have the courage to shine some light on the questions of 
conflict of interest and the concerns that have been raised 
through the land deals related to this GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained, we have not 
precluded further action, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the land 
procurement of the property that is now the Global 
Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. And we do not in any way, 
Mr. Speaker, discount the investment that has been made in that 
project, Mr. Speaker, because of the reasoning behind it 
identified by the members opposite when they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The source point of wealth in this province, Mr. Speaker, is our 
exports. We need free and open trade agreements with nations 
all around the world as we export to over 150 countries all 
around the world, Mr. Speaker. We also need the opportunity 
for the free flow of those goods, whether it be over rail or 
pipeline to an export port, Mr. Speaker. And the Global 
Transportation Hub is part of that free flow of goods. It’s 
identified as being a generational investment to be part of 
enhancing that free flow of goods, Mr. Speaker, both into the 
province as well as out of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said before, Mr. Speaker, the land procurement details lie 
within the Ministry of Justice. We outsourced those, Mr. 
Speaker, out of the province. When those return, we do not 
preclude further action, Mr. Speaker. We have always said that, 
Mr. Speaker. We continue to say that. If there’s more questions, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll rise to my feet and I will repeat this answer 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Fiscal Situation of the City of Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll head a little 
further west to my hometown of Moose Jaw where they just 
saw their sewer rates go up by 6 per cent, the water rate go up 
by 9 per cent, and a two-year increase of over 12 per cent in 
their property taxes — a direct result, according to Mayor 
Fraser Tolmie, of cuts in the 2017 provincial budget. 
 
This shortfall is keeping them from making desperately needed 
investments in capital expenses, Mr. Speaker, with further tax 
increases expected next year because of the continuing 
consequences of this shortfall. Moose Jaw’s motto is 
Surprisingly Unexpected, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think being 
blind sided by ill-considered cuts was quite the surprise that 
they were thinking of. 
 
My question for the Premier and the two members from Moose 
Jaw: Mr. Speaker, is anyone willing to stand up for the friendly 
city and make sure that there are no more nasty surprises in this 
year’s budget? And will we continue to see costs downloaded to 
Saskatchewan’s hometowns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Government 
Relations was kind enough to hand me two sheets of 
investments that we’ve made in Moose Jaw and the surrounding 
area, Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, 
but I have met with the mayor of Moose Jaw, most recently a 
few months ago, Mr. Speaker, and talked to him with respect to 
the challenges that they have as a community but also, Mr. 
Speaker, in recognizing the investment that has came from the 



3624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

provincial government, associated or affiliated or partnered with 
the federal government and the municipality of Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that that community can be open for business 
and moving forward. And that’s most notably, Mr. Speaker, 
with some of the businesses that have moved into that particular 
area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, since the members opposite were on this side 
of the House, revenue sharing in the city of Moose Jaw is up 
some 126 per cent — 126 per cent. That’s the revenue-sharing 
formula that was asked for each and every year at SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. It was 
asked for each and every year at SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association]. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it was those members that said yes, we’ll 
always do it, but they never did quite get to it, Mr. Speaker, just 
like every other . . . many other investments in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. What we hear, Mr. Speaker, from 
the members opposite is weak leadership, Mr. Speaker. Talk 
about the projects like the hospital in Humboldt and 
infrastructure projects across this province, Mr. Speaker, never 
delivered, never built those projects, Mr. Speaker. It’s members 
on this side of the House that continue to invest in our 
communities, including the one in Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Pardons for Possession of Cannabis Convictions 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, in 2016, the year with the most 
current available statistics, 821 people in Saskatchewan were 
charged with possessing cannabis, 51 per cent higher than the 
Canadian average. All too often these charges lead to criminal 
records that create serious barriers for people looking to travel, 
go back to school, or find work. It’s not right and it’s not fair, 
especially since these convictions were handed down for an 
activity that will be legal and regulated in a few short months. 
 
This afternoon I’m sending a letter to the federal government 
calling for them to issue pardons to Canadians burdened with a 
criminal record for possession of cannabis, and I’ve given a 
copy of this letter to the Minister of Justice prior to question 
period. Will the Minister of Justice sign my letter and join me in 
calling for pardons for people with criminal records for 
possession of cannabis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member opposite for having sent over the letter earlier in the 
session today. We’ll take some time and we’ll have a look at it 
and we’ll consider what position.  
 
We should make it clear what the members opposite are asking 
for. At the time of those convictions, when they were entered, 
they were entered at a time when that was an offence. What she 
is asking us to do now is to disregard what the law was at that 
time and in effect change the marijuana legislation so it 

retroactively applies some time ago. Mr. Speaker, that is a 
significant stretch from where we are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a look at that. We’ll have some 
discussions on it. It’s not something that was consulted on when 
we went through the consultations on our legislation and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll have a fulsome response in due course. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party and this 
government has never been shy when it comes to disagreeing 
with the current federal government. They should show that 
same passion when it comes to standing up for Saskatchewan 
people who have these criminal records for simple possession. 
 
No one should be burdened with a criminal record for doing 
something that is going to be legal and regulated in just a few 
short months. How can the Minister of Justice explain his 
position that people convicted of possessing cannabis should 
continue to be punished well after cannabis is legalized? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is a 
lawyer. These are penal statutes. We don’t ask for those laws to 
be amended retroactively. We don’t have convictions set aside 
simply because a law was passed that changed. Laws are 
enforced from time to time. We expect all of the citizens in our 
nation to comply with the laws at the time they were passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be open to the federal government to 
have included in a portion of their legislation that they wanted 
to retroactively amend some portions of it, that they wanted to 
grant a wholesale pass to the people that were there. They chose 
not to do it, so now for the member opposite to look to us and 
say, Minister, you’re the Attorney General; please disregard the 
law that’s been in our country for years and years and years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a look at what the request is but, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to understand in our province that we have 
respect for the law. We have respect for the judicial process. 
We have respect for due process and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look at 
it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Donations to Party Leadership Candidates 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister for 
Central Services’ decision to put a call out on offers on 660 
government buildings raised a lot of eyebrows last week, but 
there’s more here than meets the eye.  
 
The minister’s conflict of interest disclosure form shows that 
he’s a shareholder in two different commercial real estate firms 
with holdings here in Saskatchewan, and his leadership 
campaign took tens of thousands of dollars from commercial 
real estate companies to finance his bid for the premier’s chair. 
The minister who is bent on selling off government real estate 
has deep ties to commercial real estate business. How does the 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3625 

Minister for Central Services think this is acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that question is, you know, nothing short of 
astounding, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 
questioning the ethics of someone in this Assembly is most 
disturbing to this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
that to most hon. members in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know both sides of this House went through leadership 
campaigns in the last year, Mr. Speaker, and there’s been 
donations made — more on this side than that side, I might add, 
Mr. Speaker — but there’s been donations made to all sorts of 
campaigns, Mr. Speaker, in an effort, in going through the great 
democratic process that we have in this province, where people 
are free to help and donate to their pleasure as we come through 
this very strong democratic process, both of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Centre may want to 
look a little closer to his leader, Mr. Speaker, which accepted 60 
per cent of his donations from 12 individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
Twelve individuals in the province of Saskatchewan, free to 
accept donations from outside of the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s all right. There’s a double standard in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, that continues. Mr. Speaker, they have 
a new leader, but it’s exactly the same old NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to . . . This House is 
honourable. I expect you to have your question with that frame 
in mind, please. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — For sure, Mr. Speaker. But we are the last . . . 
We are the wild west here in Canada when it comes to ethics 
here about corporate donations, union donations — all of that. 
And it may cause a little nerves on that side; they get a little 
upset. They would like to brush us off, or brush it under the 
carpet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some questions. We have questions and 
we need answers. These are serious questions about the 
motivations of the Sask Party government’s front bench. The 
disclosures show that the Minister for Central Services has a 
significant stake in commercial real estate in Saskatchewan. He 
owns parts of real estate corporations. He took tens of 
thousands of dollars in donations from real estate companies, 
and now he’s talking about putting up 660 parcels of publicly 
owned real estate on the open market. 
 
Does the Minister of Central Services think he’s in a conflict of 
interest position? Does he think our conflict of interest rules are 
strong enough? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of trade and export 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, different leader, 
same old NDP. This is something that I would have expected 
when Dwain Lingenfelter was leader. I would have expected it. 

It would have been disappointing even at that point, Mr. 
Speaker, but it wouldn’t have been a surprise.  
 
But for a leader who came in here on the very first day pledging 
to do things differently, this is beyond disappointing that where 
they go two weeks in is smear, gutter politics, unfounded 
accusations. That’s where they go. And I’m actually 
disappointed in the member asking it as well. And I would say, 
Mr. Speaker, if they want to go down this road, that those who 
live in glass houses should not be throwing stones. 
 
We know that the Leader of the Opposition, the newly elected 
Leader of the Opposition, took a very significant amount of 
money from a very small number of individuals. We’re not 
standing up questioning whether he’s asking questions and 
leading his party on the basis of the influence from those 12 
individuals that gave him money, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure he’s 
acting in an honourable fashion. We’re not calling into question 
his motivations. We believe he’s trying to do what is best for 
the province, just like members on this side of the House and 
particularly, just like the member, the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Status of Crown Corporations and 
Intent of Government Legislation 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, continually the people of this 
province have called on the Sask Party to keep their promise to 
not sell off any of our Crowns. Yet again, they have failed to 
scrap Bill 40 in its entirety and guarantee that there are no more 
Crowns on the chopping block. The then minister of Justice 
claimed it was needed to continue the process of dismantling 
STC, but they’ve left the door open to more sell-offs and 
potential wind-downs for future sales. 
 
Time and time again the Sask Party has promised to protect our 
Crowns, and time and time again they have broken that 
promise. Whether it’s Crown land or government buildings, the 
Sask Party solution is always a fire sale.  
 
Last budget we saw the surprise announcement on STC, and it’s 
that time of year again. Will the Minister Responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation commit today that Bill 99 will 
not be used to wind up, in whole or in part, any more 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we passed Bill 40 in 2017. 
It was a bill that would allow for the sale of up to 49 per cent of 
a Crown corporation. It provided a definition of privatize so the 
people across the province had some level of clarity. Mr. 
Speaker, after that we heard from people during the election. 
We discussed it with people, and we decided that it was 
something that people in our province were not comfortable 
with, so we made a decision that we would repeal that section 
of the Act. So we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that piece of legislation it makes reference to winding up of a 
business or winding up of a corporation. At the time we brought 



3626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

the bill forward we were in the middle of the process with STC. 
So we left that in place so there would be no issues with 
certainty with regard to STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite feel strongly about that, 
let them bring a private member’s bill or let them do an 
amendment and we’ll have that discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Last week after dodging questions in the 
House about the skyrocketing cost of Boundary dam, the 
minister told reporters that costs were spent on maintenance at 
the power plant and unrelated to the carbon capture facility. 
That’s not actually the case, Mr. Speaker. Significant costs were 
associated with the replacement of CO2 compressor coolers, an 
essential step in the CCS [carbon capture and storage] process. 
 
Now SaskPower claims they will continue to learn from this 
major issue and hope to see improvements sometime in the 
future. Mr. Speaker, this project has turned into a never-ending, 
taxpayer-funded experiment with costs and penalties climbing 
each year. We continue to dump taxpayers’ dollars on this 
expensive experiment with no end in sight. 
 
And so to the minister: when does he expect the original price 
tag of 1.5 billion to hit 2 billion, and how many rate hikes will 
be needed to pay for it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I had indicated when the questions did come up, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve acknowledged and SaskPower has acknowledged that 
there have been some challenges with respect to the amine 
solution at Boundary dam 3 with respect to the CCS. 
 
There was also an issue with the power plant itself which was 
offline, unrelated to CCS. Mr. Speaker, I’d also say, in terms of 
the amount of maintenance that has been spent on Boundary 
dam 3 and CCS, this is obviously . . . When we’re going from 
operations starting from zero now up to a couple of years in 
operations that maintenance would increase with any type of 
facility. 
 
This is a company that has $600 million in annual expenditures 
related to operations, related to maintenance, as an organization, 
Mr. Speaker. The good news is it has captured 2 million tonnes, 
actually reduced those tonnes from going into the atmosphere, 
which I think is the goal that we’re all striving for, and not 
doing so by placing a carbon tax on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why we will fight against the carbon tax, whether it’s by 
the Liberals in Ottawa or the NDP across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
We don’t think that that’s the right approach for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, just to get on the record, this 
project has nowhere near met its goal. It should be at 4 million 
tonnes by now and it’s only halfway there. So there’s a long 
ways to go before those goals are being met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also refused to provide a timeline on 
the decision for whether to proceed with retrofitting Boundary 
dam 4 and 5. Last year in April, the president of SaskPower 
said that December 2017 was the target for making a 
recommendation to cabinet. It’s almost April, Mr. Speaker. The 
decision should be clear by now. The minister told reporters the 
units were 50 years old and “Even before you can do carbon 
capture and sequestration, you’ve got to sink some money into 
rebuilding the units like we did at Boundary dam 3.” Sink is the 
word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At a time when this province is taking food out of the mouths of 
people with disabilities and cutting supports from kids’ 
classrooms, how could the Sask Party even consider giving the 
green light to sinking more taxpayer dollars in this costly 
technology? Has a decision been made on what to do with 
Boundary dam 4 and 5, and if not, when will Saskatchewan 
people find out how much more we’re going to have to pay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m glad the member opposite is up to date with 
respect to the amount of tonnes of carbon that would be 
sequestered by the unit. Mr. Speaker, we’re at 2 million tonnes. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly looking forward to seeing what 
those numbers are going to be like in the future years. 
 
[14:15] 
 
We’re certainly a long ways away from the 1 billion tonnes that 
that member put out in a news release, saying that that was the 
goal. Certainly that’s never been the goal, Mr. Speaker. It is 1 
million tonnes that was the goal at 100 per cent operations. The 
company has set operations though at 85 per cent to take into 
account planned and unplanned maintenance which is, I think, 
reasonable for any type of facility like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite would also 
acknowledge that the UN’s [United Nations] IPCC 
[Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] has 
acknowledged that a two-degree reduction in global 
temperatures is not achievable without carbon capture and 
utilization and storage technology, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we are demonstrating this technology on the largest scale in the 
world, Mr. Speaker. This is going to be important in a world 
that is not going away from coal any time soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something that this province is being leaders 
on, and we certainly will have decisions to make into the future 
with respect to not just 5 and 6, but also Poplar River 1 and 2, 
Shand as well, Mr. Speaker. Especially in light of the fact that 
the federal government is making this a very difficult file to 
work with, Mr. Speaker, we certainly would appreciate the 
members opposite’s co-operation on this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3627 

Cost of Power for Saskatchewan People 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People from across 
the North are struggling to make ends meet, and the Sask 
Party’s cuts and fee hikes are making life much more 
expensive. The Sask Party’s spending money hand over fist on 
their failed carbon capture plan at Boundary dam, but they 
always tell us there’s nothing left over to help the North. 
 
People in both northern constituencies come to our offices all 
the time with huge power bills that are caused by higher rates 
charged by SaskPower to northern communities. Many can’t 
afford to pay on the incomes they earn, and elders, pensioners, 
and families are forced to ask for help to pay for their power 
bills. The chamber of commerce highlighted this problem all 
the way back in 2014. Mr. Speaker, will the Sask Party’s budget 
finally include action to address the unfair power bills so many 
in the North are struggling with? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear, the 
policy in terms of the power rates in the province of 
Saskatchewan are no different than when that member was a 
cabinet minister. Power rates are the exact same regardless of 
where you live in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you what will make things worse for all people, 
including northerners, Mr. Speaker, is people’s power bills, if 
the members opposite are in power and put in place a carbon 
tax, Mr. Speaker. A $4 billion carbon tax over five years would, 
Mr. Speaker, make people’s power rates high, Mr. Speaker. It 
would make rates for any number of services and products that 
people in this province purchase, it would make it very much 
more expensive Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why, whether it’s the Liberal government in Ottawa or a 
possible NDP government in Regina, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to fight it every step of the way. We’re not going to accept a 
carbon tax in this province, Mr. Speaker, for anybody in this 
province, whether you live north, south, east, or west in our 
province. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 101, The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, and the bill be now read a 
third time. 
 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 101, The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 with 
amendment, and that the bill and its amendments are now read a 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 101 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 



3628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 102, The 
Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, 
and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 102 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 102 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 121, 
An Act to Control the Sale, Possession, Consumption, 
Distribution and Transportation of Cannabis and to Make 
Consequential Amendments to Other Acts. And it’s a piece of 
legislation that the government found itself doing this because 
of, obviously, a federal Liberal campaign promise made a few 
years ago, and that here we are now preparing for that 
legalization that might happen this summer. We’re all watching 
closely to see what would happen. It almost died this past 
Friday when the Senate . . . It didn’t look like it was going to 
make it through. I guess it would have been Thursday. It didn’t 
make . . . it looked kind of not likely, but it did happen. 
 
And so we find ourselves here debating this and thinking about, 
what does this mean for Saskatchewan people? And of course 
this, while it seems to be a new idea in many ways — the idea 
of cannabis and the fact that there has been cannabis use in this 
province — it’s not a new issue. It’s been here for decades and 
in fact, you know, we’ve been . . . And I imagine both sides 
have been lobbied about this issue. Whether it’s legalization of 
cannabis or legalization of hemp as an agricultural product, it’s 
one that we need to come to terms with. And it’s the new reality 
of the new Canada and many states in the United States. And 
how can we be proactive in dealing with this kind of drug? 
 
And so, you know, in many ways we can take our lessons from 
when alcohol and liquor became legal. And of course there are 
old stories about that, about the bootleggers. In fact I remember 
one in my neighbourhood of Caswell and some parts, the older 
parts of the city of Saskatoon and I imagine here in Regina, 
Moose Jaw, that you can tell where the bootleggers’ homes 
were because if you looked in their chimneys, you could tell 
there was a panel on the chimney in the attic where the 
stovepipe would go into the chimney. 
 
But this is a pretty serious, pretty serious thing that we find 
ourselves facing. And of course while we have a lot of 
questions, and I know people will have many questions about 
this in committee, there will be some things that we want to get 
on the record. And even today during question period, it was a 
very good question I thought by our Justice critic around the 
people with criminal records with cannabis, particularly in the 
last year where we see an increase of some . . . 800 and some 
charges, over 800 charges of possession of cannabis, simple 
possession, and what this impact could mean for individuals. 
 
And of course, and I had been talking with this and . . . I’ve 
talked to the minister about this in terms of the fact that it’s 
harder now than ever to get a pardon. The former Conservative 
government, the Harper government, increased the costs of 
pardons from some $150 to over $600 and created more hoops 
in getting that. And while this is not an issue of going soft on 
crime, it’s like being realistic about . . . and the fact that the 
people of Saskatchewan expect the lawmakers of Saskatchewan 
to be realistic, to have a sense of with-it-ness to know what’s 
going on with the rest of the country. And when our charges are 
much higher than other parts of the country, this is a problem. 
 
And so this bill creates a regulatory framework for legalized 
cannabis. Key elements of the framework include cannabis . . . 
Consuming cannabis in public spaces is prohibited. Now I 
understand that is, when we talk about consuming we also mean 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3629 

that that can be digesting as well as smoking, and whether that’s 
a thing that . . . We’ll need to understand more about that, and 
so I think this is a very, very important part of it. 
 
And possession of more than 30 grams, or more than four 
plants, is prohibited as well. People under 19 . . . So that was 
the age that came out just recently, that it will be 19 and that 
people under 19 are prohibited from possessing or consuming 
cannabis and punishable by a fine of up to $2,000. 
 
I’m not sure where that fits into the spectrum in terms of other 
fines of possession, illegal possession of alcohol. I don’t know 
if that’s quite the same. I would imagine that that would be 
higher than, but I haven’t had any experience with that, so I 
don’t know what that would be. And we can ask that question 
definitely in committee. Possession of cannabis in a vehicle is 
prohibited except when transporting from a place where it is 
obtained to the place where it will be consumed. 
 
And so it also established rules for retail stores, and of course 
we had a lot of discussion around the wholesale nature of this 
and whether or not that’s as effective as it might be in terms of 
making sure that it’s . . . And how does the product get into 
Saskatchewan? How is it registered? How do we keep track of 
all of this stuff? And if there’s not a role, or whatever the role is 
for, you know, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
that will have to be spelled out more, in more detail. So we’ll 
have questions about that. 
 
So we are concerned that it has taken too long for the 
framework to roll out, and I want to take a look at the back . . . 
Because from my part, when I talk about human rights, I think 
that there’s some real gaps in there when they looked at what 
were the key issues, and of course the key issue is around the 
human rights Act. Access is really a problem. And as we said, 
this was a promise that was made by the Liberals in 2015. And 
so while sometimes governments — and we’ve seen this 
notably of the other side — may not actually follow through on 
their promises, and we’ve seen that in several examples, but this 
shouldn’t have taken people by surprise. And in many ways the 
former minister of Justice and the current one have used that as 
a bit of a defence, that this was a surprise, that they weren’t 
thinking this was actually going to happen. But in fact the 
Liberals are living up to their campaign promise, and here we 
are. We have to make do. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We have, and I know several members on our side have talked 
about how the rules around the transportation in a vehicle seem 
onerous and difficult to enforce. And so we have some serious 
questions about how that will look like, because it’s really 
important that . . . This is interesting. We’re dealing with 
another piece of legislation, the Office of Residential Tenancies, 
where there are rules about what landlords can dictate. And so it 
leaves some people out of the loop. Because if you don’t own 
your own home, don’t have access to a garden spot, you’re 
renting, and you can’t consume it in a public place, that clearly 
this is a gap that will force again what the challenge was before 
— black market activity. Or in terms of whether you’re 
purchasing or whether you’re consuming, that in fact if the law 
becomes a bit of a farce because it’s unenforceable or people 
don’t respect it, then what have you got? Where have you 

landed on this whole issue? And so we need to make sure that 
people respect the law, that they understand the law, and it’s not 
so complex or draconian that it seems to be unfair. 
 
You know, we have come out and we’ve been pretty clear about 
supporting the minimum age of 19 and the prohibition of 
consumption in public spaces. But we want to make sure that 
there’s enforceability and that that actually can lead to other 
successes. At the end of the day, we want to see a healthier 
society. We want to see a more mature society that has a mature 
approach to drugs and this kind of activity. And so that comes 
with reasonable laws that are enforceable and people can 
understand. We don’t want to get into a situation where another 
set of laws drives activity underground or into the black market, 
or somehow we’re known as a backward province in Canada. 
And this is something that, when you see the number of charges 
that have come up in the last year, what does that indicate and 
how do we handle that? 
 
So I want to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, if I can. When I was 
just taking a quick look at Saskatchewan’s Cannabis 
Framework — and this was one that was released by the 
Government of Saskatchewan — it talks about keeping 
Saskatchewan’s roads safe, and that’s a paramount thing. We 
see that here whether it’s with drinking and driving, a huge, 
huge issue here, and so we’ve talked about the zero tolerance 
approach with drugs and driving, which is very, very important, 
and the impairing impacts of cannabis and how we have to be 
guided by best science, best practices in this area. Of course this 
is not anything brand new, because as I’ve said, the 
consumption of cannabis has been something that’s been going 
on in this province for many, many years, and so we need to 
take a look at that. 
 
Workplace safety. And as a former Labour critic, and I know 
the new critic will take this up, this is an emerging issue. 
Consumption of drugs in the workplace is something that is 
very, very important. Of course, what the impact that will have 
on drug testing will be interesting, because people will be able 
to consume marijuana after hours, and if that’s showing up in 
the testing, that’s very important. 
 
Home cultivation is important, public health. But as I said, in 
talking about taxation, possession limits, that type of thing, but 
it didn’t really deal with the issue around . . . This is what we’re 
trying to get at today, was the issue around the criminality of 
cannabis and how are we moving beyond that. And I think 
that’s something that’s very important because, you know, as 
I’ve raised the issue around from the human rights perspective, 
and that we’ve raised it today as a justice perspective, this is an 
important issue as we’re moving forward. People want to know, 
what will happen with my record? And is it just as the minister 
indicated? If it happened when it was against the law, you are 
out of luck. There will not be any changes into our attitude 
towards that. 
 
I hope that he can think further along the lines and what that 
means for people, when particularly it’s a simple possession. In 
fact, it might be time to think about how do we approach this in 
terms of where you have some people criminalized by an 
activity, and then just days later when it becomes legal, that you 
have a situation where it’s really important that we take this in a 
serious, serious manner. 



3630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Because this is part of the issue, this is really . . . In fact it’s 
really the guts of the issue, is the criminality of cannabis 
consumption. And it wasn’t that the Liberals were just trying to 
figure out a way to create work for justice departments around 
the country, but in fact it’s about the criminality of this. It’s 
something that many view as a recreational habit that is not 
harmful to anyone, particularly if it’s consumed in their private, 
and so . . . 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment on 
this bill, because I know that there’s lots that we’ll have in the 
session and in committee further on. But right now I would like 
to move adjournment of Bill No. 121, An Act to Control the 
Sale, Possession, Consumption, Distribution and 
Transportation of Cannabis and to Make Consequential 
Amendments to Other Acts. Thank you very much. I move 
adjournment. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is a 
pleasure to rise again into this debate on 122, which is the 
amendments part, the cannabis control consequential 
amendments Act, 2018. So my comments won’t be that long 
because it’s pretty well straightforward as what we had before 
in terms of the Acts that have to be amended, and that includes 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act as is amended, and 
what it goes through is pretty well straightforward and it’s a 
pretty short Act. 
 
And as well, talking about the authority to establish one or more 
processes in terms of regulations. And then as well: 
 

. . . The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 is repealed and the 
following substituted: 

 
Subsections (3) to (7) do not apply with respect to 
appeals related to prosecutions pursuant to the Criminal 
Code, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act 
(Canada) and the Cannabis Act [2000] . . . and appeals 
pursuant to the Youth Criminal Justice Act . . . 

 
And The Vital Statistics Act. So in many ways it’s pretty well 
the same, just to follow up in terms of making sure that all the 

legislation aligns and that there is no unintended consequences, 
nothing is missed out. And so the questions will be if that is 
particularly the case, and so I think that we would have 
questions when we got into the House around that piece of 
legislation. 
 
And so as I said, we are a little worried that, in fact, we’re 
leaving this a little too late. The bill may be . . . The Canadian 
law may be changed this summer. We’re hearing mixed 
messages about that, whether or not that is particularly the case, 
that whether or not the federal government is ready. And so we 
want to make sure Saskatchewan’s ready though. And I know 
that there’s lots of questions around this, whether it be from 
people who are taking cannabis as a medication, a home 
medication under the prescriptions of doctors, that that type of 
thing, that we’re all ready to make sure that the right thing is 
being done here. 
 
So Bill 122 does the consequential amendments to make sure 
that it’s all aligning. We hope that all of it is in place. And so 
with that, I would move adjournment of Bill 122, the 
consequential amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate. It’s a good bill, Mr. Speaker. It is a fine 
bill. This particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is pretty straightforward. 
This amendment is to establish the Tyrannosaurus rex as the 
official fossil emblem of the province of Saskatchewan. I have 
to say, I don’t think that there’s anything too controversial 
about that, Mr. Speaker, but when you get to committee, one 
never knows. One never knows about these things. 
 
It’s interesting to note — and the minister noted this in his 
second reading speech — that we are the first province or state 
with a T. rex as our official emblem, although I understand that 
Manitoba and Nova Scotia do have a provincial fossil. It was 
interesting actually hearing the process by which we chose a 
provincial fossil, Mr. Speaker. And I know that you were in the 
role as the minister, I think, during the time. But in November 
of 2015, and the minister points this out in his second reading 
speech: 
 

. . . the Royal Saskatchewan Museum [actually] generated 
a province-wide campaign encouraging people to help 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3631 

select the new emblem to represent . . . [our province and] 
to discover more about the province’s rich fossil history. 
Through this process, the public voted through a paper 
ballot at the museum or province-wide online for one of 
seven fossil candidates. 

 
Those seven options were, for our fossil, Mr. Speaker, were 
Mo, the long-necked Plesiosaur found near Ponteix, Mr. 
Speaker. So Mo, the long-necked Plesiosaur near Ponteix was 
in the running. This 30-foot-long marine reptile was a new 
species to science when it was discovered. We had Scotty, the 
T. rex, discovered near Eastend and one of the largest and most 
complete T. rex skeletons ever found. Kyle Mammoth, a 
12,000-year-old, giant, elephant-like woolly mammoth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That just actually brings to light some interesting discussion 
I’ve heard around cloning, Mr. Speaker, and the possibility of 
bringing back a woolly mammoth, Mr. Speaker, with 
crossbreeding or . . . I’m not a geneticist, but I know that there’s 
been some talk about how to work with elephants and use DNA 
[deoxyribonucleic acid] from fossils, Mr. Speaker, to bring back 
a species like the woolly mammoth. So maybe Kyle the 
12,000-year-old, giant, elephant-like woolly mammoth might 
have another day in the sun, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also in the running was the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite have some interesting 
comments about fossils, but I’ll leave it with that. We had in the 
running the Herschel Short-necked Plesiosaur who was found 
near Herschel, a marine reptile who was also a new species to 
science when it was discovered. 
 
We’ve got the Brontothere, a rhino-like mammal found near 
Eastend from 35 million years ago, Mr. Speaker; Big Bert, the 
most complete and best-preserved specimen of this 
92-million-year-old crocodile found near Carrot River; and 
Thescelosaurus, a plant-eating dinosaur species unique to 
Saskatchewan, found also near Eastend. Clearly Eastend is a . . . 
We have many pockets of richness around fossils in 
Saskatchewan, but Eastend is one of those places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again ultimately the T. rex made the cut, Mr. Speaker, and 
with this bill will become our provincial fossil, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s interesting, just looking at some of the emblems and flags 
that would have been noted in previous iterations of this bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Maybe many, many people knew this. I know everyone . . . You 
often hear people say curling is Saskatchewan’s provincial 
sport. I’m not a curler, Mr. Speaker, but it truly is 
Saskatchewan’s provincial or official sport. I didn’t realize this, 
but if you take a look at the Saskatchewan government’s 
emblems and flags page, curling has been played in now what is 
Saskatchewan since the 1880s. And the predecessor of CurlSask 
was established in 1904, before we were even a province. 
 
And we have to note that this province has been home to some 
of the best curlers in Canada, and world champions, and the 
first women’s world champion and the first Olympic gold 
medal in curling. To recognize the significance of curling for 

Saskatchewan and the international contributions of 
Saskatchewan curlers to the sport, our legislature adopted 
curling as the province’s official sport in 2001. I did not know 
that, Mr. Speaker. I come from a hockey family and a 
badminton family, but obviously curling is the sport of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I did not realize actually either, Mr. Speaker, that we had an 
official grass emblem, which was selected by a coalition of 
environmental, wildlife, and agricultural organizations through 
the prairie conservation action plan, seeking to sustain a native 
prairie ecosystem in a healthy state. So needle-and-thread grass 
was chosen because it’s the dominant grass of Saskatchewan’s 
mixed grassland ecoregion, and it is also common in the moist 
mixed grassland and aspen parkland ecoregions. And it was 
adopted also, Mr. Speaker, as our provincial grass emblem, also 
in 2001 when curling became the official sport. 
 
We have an official berry, Mr. Speaker, and I think if I gave 
you one guess you’d probably get it, Mr. Speaker, but our fruit 
emblem is the saskatoon berry or Juneberry. We know it’s small 
and edible and delicious in pies and tarts, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
sweet and has long been eaten by indigenous peoples in 
Canada. The name derives from the Cree noun which I can’t 
pronounce, Mr. Speaker. Please forgive my lack of good Cree. 
And obviously our city of Saskatoon, the place that I call home, 
is named after this plant. And in 2005 it was recommended that 
the saskatoon berry be named as one of the provincial emblems. 
 
I know my colleague from Rosemont knows very well the 
sharp-tailed grouse. It was selected as our province’s bird 
emblem in 1945 and it is, as my colleague from Rosemont 
would recognize, one of Saskatchewan’s most popular game 
birds. 
 
We have an official tree of the province, which is the white 
birch. The white-tailed deer is also a notable Saskatchewan 
emblem. So this bill again today is to recognize . . . Oh and who 
could talk about Saskatchewan emblems without talking about 
our western red lily, Mr. Speaker? It’s our floral emblem, again 
since 1941, and it grows in moist meadows in semi-wooded 
areas and stands out brilliantly with its flaming red blossoms 
against a natural green background. I think, Mr. Speaker, I 
hadn’t seen a western red lily in person actually, probably, or in 
real life until probably about 20 years ago. But they are quite 
beautiful in nature. 
 
But it’s quite exciting to add yet another emblem to our list, Mr. 
Speaker, adding the T. rex. I know that many students . . . 
Hopefully by adding this emblem, the T. rex, to our long list of 
culture here in Saskatchewan, that it’ll help enhance learning 
for students and for adults alike. 
 
So as I said, with Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act, 2017, I don’t believe that there’s 
anything too controversial about it. And it will eventually make 
it into committee and perhaps there will be one or two questions 
there. But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107, The Provincial 



3632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 110 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 110 — The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
stand today to add some of my remarks with regards to Bill No. 
110, The Animal Protection Act. My understanding is this bill 
will replace The Animal Protection Act of 1999 with this new 
amended Act. 
 
And a lot of the changes that are within this Act is much 
appreciated by a lot of the stakeholders within our community 
. . . our province, I mean, and that I believe the Minister of 
Agriculture has done a lot of due diligence with regards to 
consulting with stakeholders, which is really refreshing, Mr. 
Speaker. It would be nice to see a lot of the other ministers 
doing that front work before they put forward some legislation. 
 
This legislation has been asked for and needed for a long time, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ve been hearing a lot about different 
animal groups within our province that have needed more 
protection from us as residents here. And, Mr. Speaker, I have 
to admit that this particular bill is near and dear to my heart. I 
have a particular fondness for animals, and oftentimes people 
will say that I could be quite tenacious with humans, but when 
it comes to animals I have a real soft spot there. And a lot of it 
is because they rely on us to ensure that they’re safe, and their 
dedication to us is impeccable. And I’ve always had animals 
growing up, and growing up my mom oftentimes wouldn’t even 
name the animals because that’s kind of how it is, kind of farm 
life. Mom grew up on a farm and such, and so we’d have a cat 
and she’d be like, that’s cat number one; that’s cat number two. 
They’re mousers. That’s what they do. But we always make 
sure we take care of them. And with our dogs, they were there 
for my entertainment anyway. 
 
And I know I really enjoy coming home and seeing my two 
dogs, Roxy and Diesel. And Roxy is a pit bull-blue heeler and 
Diesel is a pit bull-German shepherd, and they’re big, goofy 
dogs but they’re so sweet and cuddly. And someone said, I 
can’t believe you let your dogs be on the couch and I was like, 
well how am I supposed to cuddle with them otherwise? I don’t 
want to lay on the floor. So they’re my babies and they get so 
excited when they see me coming home. And after a week of 
being in Regina, they’re really excited to see me. 
 
So I think most people in the province here, Mr. Speaker, do 
appreciate animals in our lives and they do take care of them 
and treat them as their furry family members. And I’m going to 
have a grandbaby furry animal soon. My daughter just 
purchased a Pomeranian puppy yesterday that she’ll be getting 

in four weeks, and so we’re excited to add this furry grandbaby 
to the family. And I’m looking forward to spending some time 
with a little puppy again. We haven’t had that for a long time 
with our big dogs that we have now. 
 
So like I said, Mr. Speaker, I believe that most people in this 
province take good care of animals but there are some animals 
that need our attention, our protection, and animal welfare 
resources in this province have been really immensely under 
pressure and not completely supported. And many humane 
societies, which with the changes in this Act will be changed 
into animal protection agencies, but I know the humane 
societies in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and P.A. [Prince 
Albert] — and I know of some other ones that are really 
volunteer based — but those four in the major cities, they 
provide animal protection services in the communities, 
primarily through donations. So these agencies and the people 
who work in these agencies don’t do it because they’ll be able 
to have a secret home in the Bahamas or anything like that. 
They do it because of their love for animals and them wanting 
to make sure that these animals go to safe homes and are 
protected. So I would like to see more resources being provided 
to these agencies so that we can ensure that animal protection is 
a priority in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was doing some research here, 
Saskatchewan is the lowest ranked province for animal 
protection laws. So it’s very important that we change that and 
strengthen our legislation. So this is definitely the step in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker, but there’s still going to be more to 
do. 
 
There was a report that was presented. It’s the 2016 Canadian 
Animal Protection Laws Rankings from the Animal Legal 
Defense Fund. And it talked about all the provinces and some 
of the strengths and weaknesses of the provinces, the existing 
strengths that they have, and improvements that needed to 
happen. And actually our neighbours to the east, Manitoba, is 
ranked as number one, Mr. Speaker, which I found very 
interesting because I find that a lot of the issues that we may 
have in Saskatchewan are pretty in sync with potentially the 
issues in Manitoba as well. And so I think it’s good to look at 
comparison of what they’re doing well and the areas that we 
need to strengthen. 
 
When I looked at some of the potential improvements for 
Saskatchewan, what they list here, I do have to say that quite a 
few of the recommendations they have are actually going to be 
implemented in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, which is 
wonderful news, nice to see. But there are some areas too that 
still need to have some improvement. 
 
Some of the areas that I looked at was an area for immunity for 
anyone that reports. I think it’s really important that we look 
into that because some people will want to, say, report their 
neighbour — even family member — that they’re not taking 
care of their pet as well as they should, but don’t want to report 
in fear that that will get disclosed and ruin the relationship that 
they have with that individual. And I think about, you know, 
smaller communities where everybody knows each other, but 
you know that person who might not be taking care of their 
animal as well as you think they should, but you don’t want to 
be outed as being that individual that does that. So I think that’s 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3633 

an important aspect. 
 
Prohibiting animal fighting, I know that’s becoming more and 
more of an issue. And of course being a mom of two pit bulls, I 
think about that often and how some people will have these 
animals and breed them just for fighting, which is very scary. 
And these animals are . . . that’s not their pure intention. And 
they do that for entertainment or money-making opportunities. 
 
And so I think . . . They were saying that’s one of the major 
strengths in the Manitoba legislation was that they addressed 
those issues and the psychological factors of how that plays for 
animals. So I think that’s something that should be looked into 
adding to this piece of legislation as well, is that fact. 
 
And increased penalties for repeat offenders, Mr. Speaker, they 
are saying that that’s something that could be improved within 
our legislation. And I notice in this piece of legislation they 
talked about, second-time offenders would get the same penalty 
pretty much as what a first-time offender would. I guess it’s 
based on the discretion also, how much they could be fined. But 
I think it’s an important factor to have that. If you’re a repeat 
offender, the consequences should be getting progressively 
worse because we don’t want to encourage that. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And to make sure that people have education on what it is to be 
a good animal caregiver. I know especially since my daughter’s 
been looking for an animal, we were looking at different 
adoption agencies too, and looking for a rescued animal. We 
feel that that’s important. And when you contact these agencies 
they do a really good job with screening individuals and 
ensuring that they’re going to have good homes and talking to 
them about what their plan is, the future plan for animals. 
Because you hear about people who might give a puppy for a 
gift, and they don’t think of the long-term consequences of the 
care for this animal when you take on a furry family member. 
That’s years you’re dedicating to this animal, and so having to 
be mindful of that. 
 
And so I think they do a really good job with educating 
individuals with regards to that, talking about the breed of the 
animal, the personality, what you can expect from them, and 
prepare for that. So they play a huge role with ensuring that 
individuals are informed before they have one. But we know 
that not everybody gets their animals through these animal 
protection agencies and they might get animals in other means. 
And so they might not have that education for themselves at 
that point. So I think maybe we could look at providing a little 
bit more support with regards to that. So like I said before, 
some of the changes here is going to be housekeeping in nature 
as well, and changing some of the language, “humane societies” 
to “animal protection agencies.” 
 
And also some of the change here was to provide animal 
protection officers with more authority and some of the same 
abilities as peace officers. So I think that’s wonderful as well, 
Mr. Speaker, because that gives them protection pursuant to the 
Criminal Code and gives them a little bit more authority to be 
able to enact some of their duties. 
 
It seems like they’re going to expand the legislation so that the 

animal protection officers will have more ability to go in and do 
search warrants and also, but just casually go in and look at 
facilities and ensure that they’re being operated in an 
appropriate fashion. So during regular business hours they 
could go into any business, that they can inspect vehicles, “ . . . 
place or premises where animals are kept for sale, adoption, 
slaughter, hire or exhibition.” 
 
So they could walk in and just check to see if animals are being 
taking care of the way they should be. And I think having that 
when you know someone could just come in at any time and 
check out your facilities, you oftentimes are more mindful of 
how you’re caring for the animals as well. And so I think that’s 
good. That will hold them accountable for the care of the 
animals. 
 
So it also expands the definition for an animal in distress. So I 
think that it’ll include conditions that would cause the animal 
extreme anxiety or impair the animal’s well-being over time. So 
they could use that reference in determining whether they think 
the animal needs extra supports. I know they did also some 
work here of expanding abandonment of animals, you know, 
and so they’re saying that if someone doesn’t come and search 
for their animal within so many days that then the animal 
protection officers could decide to allow that animal to maybe 
be with someone else and such. 
 
And I know a lot of these animal protection agencies have 
probably been going on for a bit longer but I’ve been hearing 
more about it, having foster parents for these animals. And so 
they take in some of the animals instead of having them being 
living in the animal shelters, which is a good place for them 
when they need support for emergencies, but having the animal 
living in the home or living with these families provides them 
that environment where they’re not so institutionalized and the 
families can work with them. So if they, say, have some 
behavioural concerns, the families can help work with that like 
training them or maybe some of these animals are a little 
skittish. 
 
I know when we got Diesel, I don’t know if he was abused but 
he is very skittish about people he doesn’t know. And even 
when we first adopted him he would hide oftentimes from us 
and then it took him a while to trust us and gain that . . . know 
that he was supported. And then when we’d have company over 
he’d be really skittish and now he’s realizing if we’re letting 
people in, that that’s okay, and we tell him it’s okay and he 
manages with that. So some of these animals need that extra 
support, so I think that’s a wonderful opportunity to have them 
fostered and then they can work on some of those issues so that 
when they are adopted out the families know that the animals 
have had that work done with them. 
 
It also includes limits of transporting animals who would suffer 
unduly during the transportation. And so I’m not quite sure 
exactly what that’s in reference to, but I know that the Minister 
of Agriculture did some consultation with some agencies that 
work with horses like and . . . I’m just trying to find it here . . . I 
can’t find that note here but I know they were individuals who 
work with more livestock, so horses and so maybe that’s 
including that as well. I know when we’re talking about 
including agriculture animals within this legislation, too, the 
animal protection officers are going to need those resources to 



3634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

be able to manage that as well, and how that works. 
 
I know Saskatchewan Animal Protection Services handles all 
the other calls in the province, and so I’m sure they’re probably 
more versed with regards to that because the urban centres of 
the animal protection agencies probably don’t have those calls 
very often. So that’s also a concern because I know I heard 
about an issue where there was some horses that weren’t being 
treated properly, and so they had to go in and handle that. 
 
So a big change within this legislation, too, Mr. Speaker, is that 
veterinarians would have a duty to report when they have 
reasonable grounds to believe someone isn’t caring for an 
animal or is causing them distress. Previously, Mr. Speaker, 
veterinarians would just have a moral duty to report if they felt 
that an animal was in distress, but they didn’t have a legal 
obligation to report. So that really would put them in a tough 
spot sometimes, whereas at least making this a legal obligation, 
as soon as they feel that an animal might be living somewhere 
where they’re not being cared for or they’re in distress, then 
they have that obligation. They have to report. And I know that 
they’re pretty happy that this has been put in the legislation so 
that they can tell people that they have that legal obligation to 
do that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s about all of the information 
that I wanted to put on the record with regards to this. 
 
I know one thing I wanted to say was, I know there’s a lot of 
veterinarians that they donate a lot of their time going to the 
northern communities and working with animals there because 
they know the resources there are minimal. And it’s wonderful 
that they provide their services and do this. I’ve known of some 
people myself that have done it and they said they love doing 
that because it’s giving to the province and those animals are so 
sweet. So they go there, they provide them the medical needs 
that are needed there and also make sure that they’re spayed and 
neutered. 
 
And that reminds me of an amazing animal activist that I used 
to watch on TV regularly. And I’ll quote him, Mr. Bob Barker: 
“Have your pets spayed or neutered.” And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
we all need to know that, and I think that message is oftentimes 
given to people. And like I said, I think these animal protection 
agencies do a really good job advocating for that and working 
towards that, and I know like there’s other people who go 
around and they’re ensuring that people realize that they need to 
do this. If you’re going to be a good pet parent you need to 
make sure that your pet is spayed or neutered. And Bob Barker 
used to always say that that was one of the best gifts for him is 
when people would go up to him and say, I know that it’s so 
important for you to have your pet spayed or neutered so I made 
sure I did that, you know, and he would be really happy when 
he would hear that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues 
that are going to have a lot more they’ll want to add with 
regards to remarks with this bill. And I know my colleague will 
consult with the stakeholders with regards to their concerns and 
issues, and address those within committee. And so with that, 
I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, The Animal 
Protection Act. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, the animal 
protection amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and to debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal 
Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, 2017. And of course potash is a 
pretty big topic here in Saskatchewan. It’s something that we’ve 
come to really appreciate when it comes to one of the major 
resources of this province and the impact it’s had on our 
economy since the ’60s, the ’50s, as we’ve come to appreciate 
what we should be realizing in terms of the value of this 
product. And of course we appreciate all the players who, over 
the course of the time, have really stepped up to strike that 
appropriate balance of fairness for the province, the 
municipalities, and also making sure that the corporations were 
getting their fair income as well. 
 
But we have a special gift here in Saskatchewan of potash and 
it’s one that we should not take lightly. It’s one that has seen us 
benefit in so many, so many different ways. And we know with 
this government in the past few years, when we did have a real 
boom in terms of potash, both in terms of production but 
particularly around the cost per tonne, that in fact this province 
really benefited from that worldwide market and the changes 
that were happening at that point. 
 
So this Act changes the membership for the Municipal Potash 
Tax Sharing Administration Board. It expands the membership 
from three to five and includes representatives from SUMA and 
the potash industry. The Act redefines the “actual municipal 
mill rate” and sets a standard formula for being used in all 
municipalities. And they state that “a formula is added to make 
clear how the mill rate is to be calculated for potash tax sharing 
and to avoid improper calculations in the future.” And of course 
we wonder, has this been a problem in the past? Has there been 
issues identified that called for this to be done? And so we’ll be 
wanting to ask some more questions about that in the 
committee. 
 
And some of the, you know, minor housekeeping issues around 
changing some of the provisions, where they used a reference to 
miles is now kilometres. And it outlines the standard date set 
for when the board will announce the mill rate for the year and 
inform individual potash mines and producers’ association. And 
it clarifies that tax tools are prohibited but that incentives are 
not. Municipalities can continue to apply discounts to tax on 
potash mine assessments. 
 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3635 

[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might just take a minute and just reflect on what 
the minister at the time . . . Because this bill was introduced last 
November, and we know since that time there’s been some 
ministerial changes. And so the minister at the time talked 
about, when he raised this back on November 28th, that he 
wanted to give a little background. And he talked about how 
this bill was introduced for the first time in 1968: 
 

. . . and established a tax-sharing system for municipal 
taxes on potash mines. The intent was to create a system 
where municipalities closest to the mines, and not only the 
municipality where the mine is located, are able to benefit 
from municipal tax collected from the potash mines. 

 
So that was something that seemed to be fair so that the region 
can be benefiting from the potash mine, not just the 
municipality in which it was located. It seems like a reasonable 
time and good forward thinking in 1968. And so to make sure 
that the taxes were collected and distributed fairly, they 
established a tax sharing administration board and it’s the one 
who’s responsible for receiving the taxes collected from potash 
mines and then making sure it goes around to the RMs [rural 
municipality] within a 20-mile radius from the mine. So I 
assume that’s the word that will be changed. It won’t be a 
20-mile radius anymore. It probably will be so many kilometres 
and so probably 25 or 30 kilometres, a different meaning. Now 
it will be interesting because RMs are built around a grid 
system that uses miles and kilometres might . . . I don’t know if 
that will impact introducing any new players into this; I’m not 
sure. 
 
So it’s into some revision, obviously in 1978, but it’s remained 
relatively unchanged with the exception of some housekeeping 
that was done in 2005. And so the minister of the day said, well 
this looks like something we need to really take a look at. 
Maybe it’s an understatement and maybe it is, maybe it’s not. 
It’s one of those bills that in some way become a bit of a 
housekeeping thing when you update and how drastic a change 
would it be, I’m not sure. But he says it’s to: 
 

. . . modernize the Act and ensure that provisions of the 
Act align with current potash mining practices and 
operations of the board into the future. To address the 
outdated language and requirements of the Act, the 
ministry . . . began an internal review [you know, it’s 
actually quite interesting] of the Act and identified . . . 
[some suggestions that were made]. 

 
And so they had got some feedback and they worked with 
SARM, SUMA. And it’s interesting because when I look at 
this, this is one of the longer ministerial speeches that are 
usually given. They’re not usually longer than two or three 
minutes, and the minister here looked like he was talking for 
some 10 to 15 minutes. And so I know we’ll have to go into 
some things. 
 
But I am curious though because, you know, you have the 
impact of the mine above ground and you can see what that is, 
but of course now with the modern operations that they have, 
some of the mines can be quite extensive underground. And 
does that take into account here whose RM are they under, you 

know, because that could potentially have some impact. Are 
they taking that into account, and are those RMs that they’re 
under exceeding a 20-mile radius? I don’t know. That’d be a 
question to ask the officials: how far, how extensive are some 
of these mines? Because that clearly would be of interest, I 
would assume, to some RMs. 
 
Because while there’s obviously extremely careful, careful 
mapping that’s done underground — there obviously has to be 
for a variety of reasons; the most important would be safety — 
because clearly you don’t want to end up going into some sort 
of cavern or some sort of underground water aquifer, but these 
things are very, very well mapped out. And of course the potash 
producers, they’re not just doing this randomly. They’re clearly 
finding different seams of potash and they want to keep 
producing from those seams. 
 
But I do think that . . . And if you’ve seen one of these 
machines, Mr. Speaker — I don’t know how many people have 
actually seen the potash mining machines that they have — 
they’re really quite the tool. And of course they’re very, very 
precise and they’re very technical, in terms of this is not a 
chisel-and-hammer operation. But the machine is very 
high-tech. It is one that’s with . . . Their production really 
strives to get the most production. 
 
And of course we see that with the mines that we have, they’re 
very, very highly efficient in getting the product out of the 
ground and into the manufacturing process and refining process. 
Because there just can’t be, you know, there’s not a lot of room 
for error, particularly when we have markets overseas and you 
have a lot of costs in making sure you have the best product 
possible. 
 
So this bill itself seems to be relatively straightforward, and we 
probably won’t have too much more to say on this bill because 
it is straightforward. But I do want to take a minute and just say 
how important potash is to our province, to our economy, and 
it’s one of the important pieces of our economy that’s driving us 
forward. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 111, An 
Act to amend The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, I’d like 
to move adjournment of that bill. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



3636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
add my remarks with regards to Bill 112, the miscellaneous 
vehicle and driving statutes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that there has been some 
amendments with this legislation because of the fact that the 
cannabis legislation is coming forward. So that was a promise 
that the federal government made when they got elected; it was 
that they were going to implement this new cannabis 
legislation. And now provinces are working at adjusting their 
legislation to reflect that. The last I heard was that legalization 
was supposed to occur July 1st. And then I’ve heard rumblings 
that it’s going to be postponed a little bit from that, but I’m not 
sure if that’s completely accurate or not. I haven’t been 
completely following that, and I’m sure when it’s time, 
someone will inform me that it’s legalized. 
 
But because of the legalization of cannabis, we’ve had to go 
back into a lot of our legislation and adjust it. Once cannabis is 
legal, then we have to ensure that there’s platforms in place so 
that people aren’t possibly using it and it could impact other 
individuals, sort of like with alcohol. When alcohol became 
legal, we had to make legislation so that it would work within 
our parameters of our society. So part of that is making 
amendments to this bill which would include when you’re 
driving, and so there’s been a lot of discussion with regards to 
how this is going to be enforced and how this is going to look 
coming forward. 
 
And so like I said, this bill adds the new federal drug offences 
under the Criminal Code to various sections of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act as well as The Traffic Safety Act. And it 
also defines what “drug” is to The Traffic Safety Act. And this 
bill adds a new section to The Traffic Safety Act that outlines a 
zero tolerance for drugs. And it sets out the licence suspensions, 
vehicle impoundments, and administrative fees for drivers 
found to have driven while having consumed drugs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what brings me to some of my 
discussion I want to have, is the zero tolerance. So we’ve been 
having some questions about what that will look like. We know 
even with alcohol if a person is stopped and they’ve had one 
drink and the police officer tests them, they wouldn’t be proven 
to have had enough to be intoxicated, and so chances are then 
they would be free to go. They wouldn’t have any charges. 
 
If zero tolerance means absolutely nothing in your system, we 
know with cannabis that it’s a fat-soluble drug and it stays in 
your system for, it could be 20 to 30 days. And so how do we 
determine whether the individual had used yesterday or a week 
ago or two weeks ago? If zero means zero, then anyone who’s 
used within 20 to 30 days could never drive a vehicle, which 
doesn’t seem to be very logistic. 
 
So I was looking at the media release that was sent out by the 
government on November 28th, and it says: 
 

Implementing a zero tolerance approach means that drivers 
should not get behind the wheel with any level of 
impairing drugs in their system that is detectable by a 
federally-approved screening device. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s another issue that I’ve heard is a 
problem is that, what is the federally-approved screening 
device? What is going to be utilized to enforce this? And so part 
of this media release here too it said: 
 

These devices will test saliva for the presence of THC (the 
impairing component of cannabis) as well as some other 
drugs. If a driver tests positive, or fails a standardized field 
sobriety test, police can demand a blood sample or a drug 
recognition evaluation. 

 
And so again, Mr. Speaker, from what I understand is that 
there’s been a lot of questions on what exactly is going to be 
that testing instrument. And so when we say the testing, I know 
some workplaces, for example, if there is an accident in their 
workplace, they instantly test all the employees who were at 
that work site with drug testing. And they use a machine that 
tests for 12 nanograms as the baseline, and because they 
indicate that 12 nanograms is a baseline to say that you used, 
like, within 24 hours ago. So basically what I’m saying is if you 
used marijuana in the last 24 hours, you will have a reading of 
12 nanograms or over. So that indicated to them if you’ve used 
within what they believe is the appropriate time frame, which is 
24 hours. 
 
And my understanding is that there’s been talk that maybe the 
police want to use a 4-nanogram as their baseline, which I don’t 
know exactly what that would mean of how long ago you used, 
but my understanding is they don’t know if there’s a machine 
that will actually test for that. 
 
So there’s been a lot of rumours and confusion in how they’re 
going to manage that. So again, if they’ve tested your saliva and 
it indicates that you have some THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] 
levels within your system, and then they order to have a blood 
sample done, at what level, like, could you have used two 
weeks ago and then still be determined as . . . Because when 
they say zero tolerance though, I mean, in my mind, nothing in 
your system, absolutely nothing in your system. 
 
So again, if you used two weeks ago and then the police officer 
pulled you over, what I’m concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is our 
court system going to be just bogged down with a lot of these 
cases that people will say that the testing device is not 
appropriate, and that the legal system will use that as a way to 
get people to not be charged for these offences. But then again, 
our court systems are already bogged down, and we don’t need 
to have more put on the plate. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So I’m not happy that the federal government is going, in my 
mind, so quickly with regards to this legislation, and putting us 
in a tough position as a province to have to make these changes 
to this legislation in a very quick manner. But my biggest 
concern is that if we’re going to make some legislation, we 
better make sure that we’ve done our research and we make 
good legislation that’s going to work well for the province, and 
that when we have police officers who are going to these calls, 
that they have the appropriate tools to be able to enforce 
whatever laws or regulations that we are asking them to 
enforce. 
 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3637 

And so another question I have, Mr. Speaker, is if we’re going 
for a zero tolerance of having cannabis use with regards to 
driving, why can’t we do that for alcohol? Like alcohol has 
proven to be a dangerous substance in our province and has 
caused so much trauma within our communities. If we’re going 
to take a strong stance, why don’t we say zero tolerance for 
alcohol for driving, and if you have anything in your system 
then you can go have these tough consequences. 
 
I think like if that’s the stance we’re wanting to take, then we 
take it for it all, and we put out a big publicity that we’re not 
going to tolerate any of that, Mr. Speaker. But no, I think that 
wouldn’t be very favourable with a lot of the members, you 
know, so that’s probably not a direction that they want to go. So 
I don’t think that’s fair to say zero tolerance when you’re going 
to say, but you can have a few drinks of alcohol because yes, 
that’s okay. I don’t think that’s appropriate. 
 
So it says here, drug offences will be dealt with in the same way 
as alcohol-related offences are dealt with, except for the 
exemption that they want zero for drugs and they’re allowing 
them to drink some alcohol, except that the ignition interlock 
cannot be used to deal with the consumption of drugs. So that 
one, that’s going to be an issue. 
 
Currently it is illegal to drive while impaired. And again, define 
impaired, whether that is for alcohol or from drugs, and that 
remains the same with this bill. So again, we need to really look 
at what impaired is with regards to the drugs. Is it you smoked a 
joint two weeks ago and now you’re still impaired? What is that 
definition? 
 
We will continue to have questions with regards to this for the 
minister as this continues to roll out, and I know that the critic 
with regards to this, she’ll do her due diligence and consult with 
stakeholders and meet with the appropriate people so that she’ll 
have a lot of questions. And she’ll be asking a lot of questions 
on how you’re going to implement and enforce this legislation 
and ensure everyone’s safety so that . . . And we’ve got to make 
sure that everyone is safe, and that’s the main point. 
 
I think one of the positives about this is that I know there is a lot 
of people who are driving that are under the influence of 
cannabis right now. And so with this legislation and with the 
fact that we’re having this discussion, maybe we could get some 
of those people off the roads, and that would be a good thing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we will definitely be following this issue closely. And I 
know my other colleagues will have a lot more that they’ll want 
to add with regards to discussion with this bill. But with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve concluded my remarks with this bill, 
and I’ll leave it in the hands of my colleagues and the critic 
when she has a chance to discuss this at committee. So I am 
going to adjourn debate for Bill No. 112, the miscellaneous 
vehicle and driving statutes. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and get into the debate on Bill No. 113, An Act 
to amend The Planning and Development Act, 2007. This kind 
of legislation is very, very important. It’s really in so many 
ways — I don’t know what I would call it — the heart and soul. 
But I just get really pumped up when I see this kind of stuff 
because it’s what the tools that our communities need to have to 
make our communities the best places they can possibly be. 
And whether that’s a region or a city, a small community, I 
think people have put a lot of work into planning and thinking 
about the development they would like to see. And we’ve come 
such a long, long way in terms of good work here. 
 
And I would particularly . . . I always look to see if they talk 
about the provincial interest, and that is one that I always look 
forward to seeing because there are . . . And I don’t have the 
sheet in front of me, but I always refer to the, I think there are 
seven provincial interests, and where the indigenous issues, the 
water issues, the environmental issues, the resources issues — 
what the provincial interest is. And I think particularly, and I 
talk a lot about this in Saskatoon, where we talked about the 
river that runs through our city, the South Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ve had a lot of debate about that around urban parks 
and whether or not there’s a provincial interest in our 
communities, and particularly around what has been termed . . . 
And it’s been termed an urban park provincially, even though 
we all know what an urban park is. It’s different than a city park 
or a village park or a community park. Urban parks have a 
provincial interest in them, that’s namely that there’s a river 
running through them. And we see that in Prince Albert. We see 
that in The Battlefords. We see that in Weyburn. We see that in 
Regina and Moose Jaw. So it’s very, very important. And 
numerous other communities that have creeks or rivers running 
through them. And it’s not something to minimize. It’s a huge, 
huge responsibility and so I think that this is important. 
 
And I appreciate that people are hanging on . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I think it’s a creek, isn’t it? Well I don’t know. 
We may have to take a geography lesson. I know that I’ve seen 
some mighty rivers in Saskatchewan that aren’t more than a 
creek. But at any rate, I digress. I’ve been thrown off my game 
here a bit, so I have to focus a little bit more tightly here. 
 
And so at any rate, what I was saying though, and I think that 
this is an important bill before us and it’s one that I do think 
that we should take some time and think about what this means 
and think about the role the province has ensuring that there’s 
adequate, good, solid planning happening in our communities 



3638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

for, as I said, a whole host of reasons, whether that’s economic 
development or whether that’s environmental protection or 
water protection, indigenous issues, both in terms of any sacred 
grounds or issues like that, or potential for betterment. 
 
I think again about the Wanuskewin in Saskatoon where we see 
the potential for bison being returned into a parkland that may 
. . . In 100 years, the area around it might be all urban 
development. And here you have a park that is a significantly 
sized park that, at this point, we say it’s kind of on the edge of 
town. But it’s not because, as the member from Martensville 
would know, that actually urban developments are happening 
right up to the edge of Saskatoon on the north side. 
 
At any rate, it’s how these cities grow, and it’s very important 
to have good local, provincial planning. And so I think this is a 
. . . As I said, this bill here, I want to take a minute and talk 
about some of the key points on it and then I want to talk a little 
bit about what the minister of the day brought this forward last 
December. 
 
But right now he talks about some of the amendments “. . . 
ensure the conflict of interest provisions apply to members of 
any District Development Appeals Boards and members of any 
Regional Planning Authorities.” And that is so critically 
important. And we saw that happening here in Regina and 
surrounding area where there appeared to be some conflict of 
interest issues, and we need to make sure that we get those all 
sorted out and that in fact people are acting in an appropriate 
manner. And sometimes people don’t really understand whether 
they are or not. They feel like their own personal judgment can 
rise above that benchmark, but it can be very, very, very 
difficult. And so I want to say that this is an important piece 
before us because I know that what happens when there are 
conflicts at the community level on boards, and whether or not 
. . . whatever the issue, it can really slow down planning and 
can have a huge impact on neighbours, and it can be something 
that we really need to be mindful of. 
 
And so they talk about “Ten cities in Saskatchewan have been 
granted approving authority status.” That’s important. An 
amendment allows the minister to modify the terms of an order 
granting authority status to achieve a provincial interest. And an 
order that a minister issues under this new section must be 
published in the Gazette. 
 
Now examples of this might be here, and we saw the 
controversy a few years ago, and it’s now been more or less 
settled, I think — I may be wrong on this — but when some 
land was taken to develop a new P3 [public-private partnership] 
school and how that was handled. And not all were on the same 
page about how that went, and clearly that needs to be dealt 
with. And so it allows the minister to modify those terms, and I 
feel that’s really something that needs to be noted, be noted for 
sure. 
 
And currently the ability to apply policies for site plan control is 
limited to commercial and industrial land but expands now to 
institutional and mixed-use development. And that one makes 
some sense there because sometimes an institution can be quite 
large, and I would assume this is the kind of thing that we’d be 
talking about — universities or large colleges. And mixed-use 
development which involves commercial property, we’re seeing 

more and more of that, where it seems people want to live 
closer to their work. And this is something that this may be 
speaking to. 
 
And we talk about municipal bylaws. Planning bylaws are now 
submitted to the director of community planning instead of the 
Minister of Government Relations. Now we’re not sure whether 
that’s a good thing or a bad thing because that sort of 
institutionalizes the role of the director of community planning 
as opposed to the Minister of Government Relations. Not that 
we’re thinking you need to get rid of the director of community 
planning, but it might be something that, further down the road, 
that we have a different terminology and it’s not appropriate. 
Likewise it could be Government Relations, but I think that 
we’d have to ask questions about that and again, whether or not 
the minister then isn’t aware of these bylaws. And what is the 
intent of this? We’re not sure. 
 
And so we do have some questions about that and so I think that 
we’ll have some questions for sure. And the minister still has 
the ability to require municipalities to amend their official 
community plan or OCP, as it’s often referred to, to achieve 
consistency with provincial interests. And again I just want to 
highlight how important the provincial interests are in making 
sure that we have some solid benchmarks here in Saskatchewan 
and that we have some consistency from community to 
community. And so this is very, very important. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And a new section requires “. . . municipalities to develop their 
school site policies collaboratively with the Minister of 
Education, any local school divisions, and any municipality(s) 
that the Ministry of Education determines is necessary . . .” So I 
think, Mr. Speaker, this is kind of ironic as this government is 
the one that did with local school boards or even special 
meetings when people have an issue, and so I just think this is 
interesting. 
 
You know, we used to have so much more control at the local 
level over education, and we see that moving further and further 
away. And so I hope this is . . . I appreciate the word 
“collaboratively” but I’m not sure if this government is used to 
that language. It might sound a little too forward to them, when 
actually we’ve seen the minister come down to some pretty 
heavy-handed things. 
 
And so we know that their many changes will impact 
municipalities. I hope they’ve consulted with them. And we’ve 
been having those discussions with municipalities like this. I 
trust my colleague has been out there and doing that kind of 
work, as she appreciates that and she has been very much 
appreciated in the conversations she’s had with the people on 
this topic. 
 
And so when the minister got up on December 4th and talked 
about this, he talked about a new “. . . framework for 
municipalities to manage and facilitate development of their 
communities.” Good stuff. And how this will improve 
incrementally our land use planning framework and saving 
taxpayers money. Well I think it’s even more than that. It’s 
about having great communities, great communities both to 
work in, to have your families, and to have your kids play. All 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3639 

of this is so, so important. 
 
Now he talked about strengthening existing legislation that will 
help municipalities plan regionally and support opportunities 
for servicing, and clarifying planning process — that type of 
thing, educational purposes and all of that. And that’s really, 
really important. 
 
So I would want to focus on some of his things. He talked about 
the groups that he was able to consult with, so that’s important. 
He talked about how actually this took us some time. He talked 
about how this started back in 2014-15 and even went into 
’16-17 and had 25 engagement sessions, so there you go. 
 
But he wanted to talk about how regional partnerships can make 
it easier and be more cost effective, and I think that’s a very, 
very good thing because if they can work together, that’s a good 
thing. And additional flexibility to make sure they, if they want 
to plan regionally they can do that kind of thing and make sure 
they manage areas of common interest. And that’s very, very 
important. 
 
And it talks about, “The existing legislation allows regional 
planning authorities to include a city and adjacent . . . 
municipalities.” They wanted to make sure they had some 
additional flexibility, so this is good. We think about that both 
around the cities of Regina and Saskatoon because it’s so clear 
that with the population growth that we’ve seen that we need to 
be thinking in decades. We need to be thinking out there. We 
need to be thinking about . . . I know in Saskatoon we’re talking 
about transit systems; we’re talking highways systems. All of 
that is very, very important and even the minister further talks 
about that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know we’ll have questions in 
committee, but at this point I’m going to move adjournment of 
Bill 113, An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 
2007. I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 114 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act, Mr. 
Speaker. This particular bill outlines the regulations for 
ride-sharing companies, or otherwise known as transportation 
network companies. It provides a framework for the operation 
in Saskatchewan, setting requirements for companies and 

drivers. So these are companies, just for example, like Uber and 
Lyft. The bill will be administered by SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], as the minister has pointed out in his 
second reading speech. 
 
So some of the things that this bill does in terms of laying out 
that framework. So transportation network companies or 
ride-sharing companies will require a licence issued by the 
municipality and then the municipality will make bylaws 
around licensing standards, fees, records required, those kinds 
of things. Drivers must have a driver’s licence. Trips between 
municipalities will apply . . . The bylaws of the municipality 
where the trip originated will apply. Vehicles that are used in 
ride sharing must be registered as required by The Traffic Safety 
Act. 
 
The ride-sharing company or the transportation network 
company must prove that they have insurance. Information — it 
has to be provided to the insurance — which would be the name 
and the place of the business, the name and the address of 
drivers, the list of vehicles providing service, the geographic 
area for service, the proof of licence to operate. The bill lays out 
that the government has the power to suspend or cancel a 
registration permit to a transportation network company if they 
fail to comply with the Act or regulations. 
 
And as well, this bill lays out that the government has the 
regulating powers on defining vehicles, prescribing classes of 
driver’s licences which will be in the regulations, prescribing a 
special feature indicating that a vehicle may be used for 
vehicle-for-hire services, prescribing insurance premiums that’ll 
come in the regulations, and procedures for suspending or 
cancelling a licence. 
 
Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, it’s again important to look to the 
minister’s second reading speech to see where he’s coming 
from. I think questions that get asked whenever any bill comes 
before us is: who asked for the bill, what’s the purpose of the 
bill or the stated purpose of the bill, what kind of consultation 
has been done. All those things will happen when we get to 
committee. 
 
And ultimately again this bill points out that it will be 
municipalities that will license and create bylaws for this 
industry, but really it’s up to the province to ensure the safety of 
communities, consumers, and drivers. So when we get to 
committee, there’ll be lots of questions. I know our critic will 
look for some clarification from the minister and we’ll continue 
to talk to all the stakeholders involved. 
 
There’s been regulations developed over decades around the 
taxi industry to protect both the public and the drivers, and I 
think that that’s one of my concerns or things that I think about. 
It’s important to protect the public who may be using a 
ride-sharing service to ensure the safety of individuals. But I 
think it’s also important to look to the employees. 
 
I know I’ve heard stories in other jurisdictions around those 
who work for ride-sharing companies who think initially that 
it’s going to be great employment and it ends up being 
precarious employment or people trying to piece together work 
and ending up working long days for little money, or investing 
in a vehicle, trying to meet the requirements and not being able 



3640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

to pay it. 
 
So I think that there is important discussion to be had around 
protecting those who are going to be using these services but 
also around making sure that those who become contractors or 
become drivers for these companies are protected and are not 
vulnerable workers as well. 
 
I know in the minister’s second reading speech he talks about 
impaired driving being a problem in Saskatchewan and he says 
that this is one tool in the toolbox or hopes that this will be one 
tool in the toolbox for combatting impaired driving. I’m ever 
hopeful. 
 
I had the privilege of sitting on the traffic safety advisory 
committee in 2013 where we talked about how to lower 
impaired driving death rates. And the government initially 
implemented some of those recommendations but not the 
minority report. It took them until 2016, the end of 2016, to 
finally get to the place where they saw, I think, saw the light 
around what other jurisdictions like Alberta and BC [British 
Columbia] were doing around impaired driving to change the 
culture, creating a place where if you’re in the warning zone — 
.04 to .08 — you could have your licence . . . not your licence 
suspended but your vehicle impounded for three days. 
 
And it’s interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, just looking to . . . I’m 
just going to use another medium here for discussion here. 
Looking to headlines in 2016, at the end of 2016, when the 
government had just passed the legislation or the beefed-up 
legislation around impaired driving, our drunk driving deaths 
were up in Saskatchewan, which has been a sad story of 
Saskatchewan for many years. And we don’t yet, I don’t believe 
— I haven’t been able to find them yet — we don’t have the 
impaired driving death rate for 2017 yet. I suspect that’ll be out 
in the next few months, if not sooner than that, to see where 
we’re at. 
 
But I’m happy to report a news story on January 18th, 2018. Its 
headline was “Fewer Saskatchewan impaired drivers charged in 
December than previous three years.” So a year after 
implementing the impoundment, the three-day vehicle 
impoundment in the warning range, which had been proven 
very effective in BC. Within a year they decreased their 
impaired driving death rate by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t have those rates yet here for Saskatchewan or we 
don’t know what our 2017 impaired driving death rate was. But 
we do know that the police were saying “. . . December 2017 
saw the lowest number of impaired driving offences when 
compared to the previous three years — even with increased 
enforcement.” 
 
So I think obviously ride sharing perhaps is potential . . . I’ve 
read conflicting literature around ride sharing and decreasing 
impaired driving. I’d like to see some harder research on that, 
maybe some peer-reviewed research as well. I know one thing 
that this government could also do around impaired driving is, 
especially with the soon-to-be legalization of cannabis . . . The 
one thing we heard in 2013 was around drug recognition 
experts or DREs. They’re especially trained police officers who 
can . . . Not having a physical test that you can do for drivers, 
like a saliva test or in the case of alcohol, a Breathalyzer, drug 

recognition experts are trained to identify impaired drivers or 
those impaired with other substances beyond alcohol. 
 
And I know back in 2013 we had a terribly low rate. I can’t 
recall. It’s back in the deep recesses of my brain, Mr. Speaker, 
the number of drug recognition experts we had in 2013. But I 
do know in committee that we heard that it wasn’t enough. And 
with the legalization of cannabis and with alcohol still, I think 
that a place . . . If the minister and this government is serious 
about reducing that impaired driving death rate, that really 
looking at the number of drug recognition experts that we need 
and hiring those or ensuring that police officers have the 
training would go a long way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think there’s been comments around the legalization of 
cannabis that we don’t yet know what we need, but I’d like to 
point him back to those committee meetings and hearing that in 
2013 we had a very low rate of drug recognition experts and 
needed to beef it up at that point, and we’ll continue to need to 
do so, going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 114, as I pointed out, our critic 
when we get to committee will have some questions, just some 
clarification, and will want to know a little bit more about . . . 
The critic will have had many conversations with stakeholders, 
but we’ll want to know a little bit more from the minister as 
well. 
 
But with that, for the moment, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the mother of Roxy and Diesel 
and the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to see 
that you were listening to my rambling for the last bill that I 
was speaking to. It’s an honour again to get up and speak to Bill 
No. 115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. And I 
don’t how I could relate this to my furry animals at home, but I 
guess I’ll have to talk about something else and something 
that’s much more interesting, which is the future of legalizing 
marijuana within our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has decided to have 
legalized marijuana within the country so that’s made the 
provinces have to reorganize some of their legislation to 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3641 

accommodate for that, which has made the fact that we’ve had 
to change some of our legislation, like I said before, to 
accommodate for the legalization of marijuana. So the changes 
to The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, a lot of it pertains 
to exactly that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this bill accomplishes four main things, Mr. Speaker. So it 
gives landlords the new powers to make rules with regards to 
prohibiting the possession, use, selling, or distribution of 
cannabis, or the growing and possession of cannabis plants, Mr. 
Speaker. So we know that this is going to become somewhat of 
a difficult issue for landlords with the legalization of cannabis, 
and so this legislation will allow them to have a lot of authority 
with regards to how they want to manage their rental property. 
 
I guess with looking at this through a critical lens, Mr. Speaker, 
I guess what I would wonder is how is this going to impact 
individuals who are going to be using medicinal marijuana 
because of medical issues that they have. And if they need to 
rent places, this could really limit the ability for them to rent a 
location if the landlord does decide to prohibit all of these — 
the possession or use of cannabis within their homes. 
 
So I agree with the fact that we need to allow landlords and 
owners of their establishments to be able to make these rules, 
but I hope that they’re mindful of the fact that some individuals 
are using cannabis for medical purposes as well because of 
some medical conditions that they have. And I would have liked 
to see, like, if there was some conditions here that if that was 
the case that maybe there would be different legislation, but I 
guess that’s something that could be discussed within 
committee when the critic has an opportunity to speak with the 
minister, if that was something that was discussed at the table. 
 
Another thing that this bill does, it gives the Office of 
Residential Tenancies, ORT for short, hearing officers new 
powers to refuse to allow an application from a tenant who is in 
contravention of an ORT order. And another aspect of this bill, 
it forces tenants to continue to pay their rent for the duration of 
the appeal process when appealing the ORT’s decision to grant 
the landlords possession of a rental unit for rent arrears. So I 
think part of the changes with this legislation as well is that a 
landlord would be able to utilize the damage deposit that was 
placed when the tenant moved into the facility, and use that for 
purposes of paying rent that might be in arrears as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And it also allows landlords to dispose of property 
worth less than $1,500 without an order from the ORT when a 
tenant ends or a property is abandoned. 
 
And so I’ve heard of these situations, Mr. Speaker, where 
tenants just up and leave. And oftentimes they leave all of their 
stuff within the housing location because of whatever reason 
why they needed to leave. And then that puts the landlords in a 
tough situation because previously they would have had to 
make an application to the Office of Residential Tenancies in 
order to dispose of the items, or they would have to store those 
items. And then, like if they wanted to rehouse people within 
the rental location, they would have to find a place to put all of 
this property. So in case a tenant came and wanted it or until 
they got direction from the Office of Residential Tenancies 
which, my understanding is that the ORT would try to get back 
to landlords as quick as possible so that this would be resolved 
quickly. 

So what the changes to this legislation is, is that if the property 
is deemed to be less than $1,500, then the landlord could do 
what they want with it. But they cannot be held back with 
regards to the property that was left back. 
 
But I often wonder why people just up and leave like that? 
What is going on in their lives that they feel that they have to 
leave all their property behind? And I know of some people 
who said, like they might even leave like family portraits and 
stuff like that behind. And what’s going on in their world that 
they need to up and leave?  
 
And it makes me think of potential victims of domestic 
violence. And I know oftentimes victims of domestic violence 
will leave quickly in those kinds of circumstances because 
that’s the safest and easiest way for them to get out of those bad 
situations. So I would hate to see that people who are in those 
situations, that they will not have their property left afterwards 
and completely lose everything. So again I hope that’s 
something that could be discussed. And I know we have some 
legislation on helping people who are fleeing domestic violence 
situations. So hopefully that will come up for discussion in the 
future events, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s really important that we strike the right balance 
between the rights of the tenant and the powers of the landlord 
because I think that could be a real tightrope to be on. We want 
to ensure that landlords have rights with their property, but also 
tenants should have rights as well and know that their landlords 
can’t just abuse the situation that they’re in. And it is a very 
powerful situation that you’re in when you are the landlord. I 
think putting some restrictions on cannabis and rental units 
make sense, but we need to make sure this legislation strikes the 
right balance as well. 
 
I know we’ll do the consultation that needs to be done and, as 
the official opposition always does, offer amendments where it 
makes sense. So I know the critic will do a good job with 
consulting with stakeholders. It’s fine for government to look at 
closing loopholes that may be abused by some people in 
extreme cases, but we’ll be asking committee what impacts 
these changes will have on the most vulnerable. So we have to 
also take that into account. 
 
And when it comes to disposing of property that belongs to a 
tenant, we should make sure that landlords are reaching out to 
the tenants should take into consideration that someone who has 
abandoned their unit may be difficult to get a hold of. So take 
that into account. And I know, you know, oftentimes you have 
to put yourself in that person’s shoes and think, like how would 
I want to be treated if I was in their circumstance. 
 
So I sure hope that landlords will do their due diligence with 
having a good relationship with their tenants and ensuring that 
if they do need to dispose of their property that they’ve been 
able to reach out and talked to them and made those 
connections. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that my colleagues will have a lot 
more that they’ll want to add to the discussion with regards to 
this piece of legislation. And at this point I’ve exhausted all of 
the remarks that I have. And so I am going to move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 



3642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. Before I get 
into it, I guess this is making some changes, Mr. Speaker. And 
to join in the debate on this bill, the bill makes some changes to 
the procedures of dealing when it comes to foreclosure. The 
changes they make is to non-farm mortgages, that these changes 
will affect closures, mortgage closures on non-farm mortgages. 
 
But having said that, before we go into it, I know we have had a 
few questions in question period. The Leader of the Official 
Opposition has referred to foreclosure rates in Saskatchewan. 
Right now, I believe it’s three times the average, you know, the 
national average, three times the national average for 
foreclosures in Saskatchewan. So if we are seeing that, and 
sometimes I just wonder, I think it’s the worst in all of Canada: 
foreclosures in Saskatchewan. 
 
So families are being hit hard. Now I think it’s important to 
make it very clear why, why Saskatchewan families? And some 
of them . . . And here’s some of the causes: if your utility rates 
are going up steadily; if your cost of living, if PST [provincial 
sales tax] is impacting your family, whether it goes from five, 
which the last budget we see it went to 6 per cent, on many 
things that used to be exempt. This government, you know, 
made a decision to try to grab a another billion dollars from 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, going after them. 
 
So I think all these pressures are being put on people. And if 
you look at the economy, when you look at jobs and the people 
that are losing jobs, but you look at government, you have 
good-paying jobs, government jobs. And government has been 
going after and deciding where it’s going to pick and choose, 
you know, civil servants, and finding that list. And again, 
asking the good people of this province to do their part, but then 
charge them more in every way you can possibly charge 
Saskatchewan residents. So you’re putting more burden on the 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And we talked about in question period today, you know, as the 
leader talked about the community of Moose Jaw and referring 
to some of the, I guess, the effects that the government’s cuts 
have affected municipalities like Moose Jaw. And you know, 
the leader talked about that today in question period, about how 
yes, you know, you may say, oh we’re not raising taxes, but in 

every other way you’re making residents pay more because 
you’re cutting the grants or you’re cutting the programs that 
used to fund municipalities. Whether it’s rural, North, urban, it 
doesn’t matter. They’re all feeling it. And they’re having to 
raise the money because people want the same services that 
they were getting before. And government seems to think, you 
know, they can charge more, charge our residents more and 
give them less services. It just doesn’t make sense. Things don’t 
work that way, but this government seems to think it’s all right. 
 
But having said that, on this bill, Bill 103 talks about doing 
foreclosures. And it talks about a different process of doing it, 
and I believe it requires a pre-action process for foreclosures. 
So there is a process that needs to be done before you can go 
ahead and go to the courts to ask them. So they are making 
some changes in this bill. 
 
They are also repealing. The notice of the hearing will remain 
the same, but there is two areas of this bill that they’re actually 
repealing. The Home Owners’ Protection Act no longer 
relevant, so they’re doing that. The other one, The Agreements 
of Sale Cancellation Act, they’re actually putting that bill, from 
my understanding, they’re going to be putting that bill into the 
new bill that they’re making. So they’re going to get rid of it. 
They’re going to adapt it and bring it over. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now I know we sometimes ask why this is coming and why 
certain bills come forward. And I know that some of the 
recommendations, you know, being considered were 
recommendations by the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan. Now they have made some recommendations, 
sounds like a report, and maybe there’s a reason why and a 
good rationale to why this is happening. But having said that, 
you know, I want to talk a little bit about that. 
 
But again we see the rise of three times the national average in 
Saskatchewan, and the burden that’s being put on many 
families. And we look at the jobs, and I think that at the end of 
the day the government has done a terrible job when it comes to 
the economy and support and that. They all sit there and try to 
pat themselves on the back. Every time somebody announced 
that they were doing an improvement in an area, they wanted to 
take all the credit. 
 
But they sure don’t want to take credit when the economy is 
going down. It has nothing to do with it. They want to blame. 
Oh, it’s the NDP, the old days of the NDP. It has nothing to do 
with them. They have been in power for 10 years. They have 
had opportunities of record revenue, and I think we were talking 
about, I think, seven deficit budgets, if I have that information 
correct, that they have run. 
 
And I know the good people of this province are waiting until 
April the 10th to see what’s coming and what the changes will 
be. Hopefully they won’t be bringing a budget that we’ve seen 
them reverse after the pressure from many different 
organizations. We see the reversal in the libraries; the most 
vulnerable, we think of our citizens who were asked to pay 
more when it came to funeral costs and stuff like that. So we’ve 
seen a government have to reverse, go after the most vulnerable 
and reverse.  



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3643 

But again, talking about this bill and the changes it’s going to 
make when it comes to, you know, foreclosures and the burden 
that it has put on many, I think the government of the day has to 
wear this. The Sask Party government needs to be aware that 
some of the challenges you’ve put on many families, you know, 
have caused a lot of costs to families. And whether government 
gets those dollars into the government coffers and they spend 
them, or municipalities get less to do the service that people 
want, then it has to go back. 
 
At the end of the day, they forget there is one taxpayer — that’s 
the good people of this province. One taxpayer, and they all 
seem to be going after them. And again they brag about, oh no 
taxes . . . [inaudible] . . . Look at every place you go, you see. 
And then you talk about fees, like I mean my colleagues have 
been talking about that in the last little while, the different fees 
that have been charged and are going to be charged. You know, 
they’re going up, every time you look at it they want to do 
something. They want to give you more fees for less services. 
How does that make sense? 
 
And you’re going to go door knock and sell that to the good 
people of the province? You want to sell that? So you know, at 
the end of the day I think the people of this province are starting 
to get wise and they’re going to hold this government 
accountable. We’ve been saying that. 
 
So having said that, on Bill 103 we’ve made a number of 
points. I wanted to make a number of points as to why. And 
maybe I’m no expert when it comes to foreclosures like the 
bank. There’s different reasons. We know the economy. We see 
what’s going on. 
 
But again we have the worst mortgage foreclosures in all of 
Canada from my understanding, if the information that’s being 
shared with us is correct. So this government has no, this 
government has no ability, but to pat them on the back for it, 
because they should be ashamed of themselves for the burden 
they’re putting on many Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, we talk about a few changes 
and where they’re going. But it’s sure many Saskatchewan 
families are feeling this impact and the burden that this 
government has been putting on many working men and women 
and families of this good province who have done their share, 
who deserve a little more service and a little more respect from 
their government. But again they will hold this government to 
account, and we will see exactly what happens. 
 
And I know they can heckle and they can make all the noise 
they want. This is what I’m hearing back home, whether it’s 
seniors trying to make ends meet, the cost of living to provide 
for their families . . . And every time we see a government 
coming out with new fees, with taxes that they say, that’s not 
taxes, but it’s a different way. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, you know, I wanted to give a 
little brief comments about this Bill 103. But having said that, I 
wanted to maybe give a little bit of reason why it’s costing 
more and causing maybe more, you know, foreclosures with all 
the added costs that families are being burdened by that 
government. 
 

So with that I have no further comments. I know my colleagues 
will have lots to say in committee and we’ll maybe get some 
answers, for a change, from the government. But we’ll see. At 
that point, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 103. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) 
Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 104 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon as it relates 
to Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. 
Certainly this is an incredibly important piece of legislation to 
the people of Saskatchewan, protecting the people of our 
province from discrimination, protecting their fundamental 
rights. 
 
And we enter into discussion here this week during TransSask 
week within our province, a week of activities and advocacy 
advancing the rights and dignity and support and security and 
ability to thrive for the transgendered community within 
Saskatchewan, in fact. This morning of course you were there, 
Mr. Speaker, as well, as we raised the genderqueer flag over at 
city hall. And of course yesterday we raised the flag here at the 
legislature as well. 
 
It’s important for us to get any changes to our Human Rights 
Code and our human rights legislation right. And these changes 
here today with respect to this bill, I understand, are more of an 
updating around ensuring that it’s bilingual as well. And 
certainly that’s important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we engage in scrutiny of this bill and constructive 
engagement, we’ll be engaged with members of the human 
rights community across Saskatchewan to ensure that this bill is 
as suggested by the minister, simply a stating of it in French, 
Mr. Speaker. But certainly human rights legislation in 
Saskatchewan is something that is vital and something that 
we’re incredibly proud of, something that I’m incredibly proud 
of as a New Democrat, Mr. Speaker, to know that we as a 
province pioneered the legislation across Canada with the first 
human rights bill within Canada in 1947, which really turned 
out to be landmark legislation from a human rights perspective. 
 
At that point in time, Mr. Speaker, before that was brought in it 
was sort of, you know, judges were of the perspective that they 
felt that there was wrongdoing, but that if something wasn’t 
illegal it was obviously difficult for them to act. So that 



3644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

legislation that was brought forward by the Tommy Douglas 
CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party] government in 1947 was incredibly 
important to who we are as a province, Mr. Speaker, allowing 
us to ensure the dignity and protection of all individuals. And 
that legislation has been updated through time, and that’s going 
to be important that we continue to update this legislation 
through time. 
 
The law, when it was brought about, ensured that it affirmed the 
fundamental freedoms that Canadians now take for granted, Mr. 
Speaker. And that human rights legislation that was brought 
forward by Premier Tommy Douglas and the CCF-NDP 
government of 1947 served as a model for provinces across 
Canada and for other jurisdictions as well. 
 
Of course at the time it prohibited discrimination on account of 
race, creed, religion, colour, or ethnic or national origin. We’ve 
updated that legislation over the recent history to include, of 
course, sexual orientation and gender identity. I think some of 
the unfinished business on this front is updating it to properly 
reflect gender expression as well, Mr. Speaker. And I know I 
hear from many that are acting within our province and that are 
leading voices for human rights within our province, many of 
them so courageous, so many courageous voices. I know that 
that updating to ensure gender expression is important, and 
more properly recognizing who people are across our province 
and affirming the respect for all people within our province. 
 
I know that David . . . I can’t say a member’s name, Mr. 
Speaker. The member for Saskatoon Centre has been a tireless 
force frankly his entire adult life to advance human rights in our 
province. He did so as a citizen, as an educator. He certainly 
has, as well, as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
within this Assembly. And he serves all of us well and certainly 
serves our opposition and the people of the province well as our 
critic leading the discussion around human rights within our 
province. And I know this is important to him. 
 
That legislation in 1947 of course prohibited discrimination 
with respect to accommodation, employment, occupation, and 
education. You know, I think it’s important that we’re engaged 
on this discussion still, Mr. Speaker, around matters of 
employment for example. And I think there’s an important 
discussion to be had around the appropriateness in utilization of 
criminal records for example, Mr. Speaker, to prohibit 
employment within Saskatchewan and whether or not we have 
the balance right right now within Saskatchewan, or whether or 
not the criminal record itself is something impeding many, 
many Saskatchewan people from moving forward in life and 
being engaged within our economy in a way that they so 
deserve, Mr. Speaker. So sort of putting on notice that the 
discussion of human rights isn’t done. 
 
We have a code in place, but there’s important areas to continue 
to look for advancements that are important to the people of our 
province. The legislation, when it was brought forward as 
landmark legislation in 1947, also prohibited the publications 
that are likely to deprive someone of his or her legal rights on 
account of “. . . race, creed, religion, colour or ethnic or national 
origin.” And of course we’ve updated that for sexual 
orientation. We’ve updated that for gender identity. We need to 
look to improve it with gender expression being included there 

as well, Mr. Speaker. This bill itself doesn’t make those 
changes. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have played a leadership role for a long 
period of time when it comes to human rights. It’s important 
that we look to continuing to provide that role within Canada, 
within the world, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this is so 
important. It’s important for us to broaden our discussion I 
think, and look at our human rights legislation and how we’re 
dealing with human rights with what the TRC [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] has taught us, Mr. Speaker, and 
applying that lens and the importance of reconciliation and 
ensuring that we examine whether or not there’s opportunities 
to strengthen our human rights legislation, supported by the 
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s important as well that we look at other aspects of human 
rights. And when we’re looking at matters of poverty and of 
housing, Mr. Speaker, basic needs and basic dignity for people, 
you know, there’s an opportunity to enshrine basic standards for 
Saskatchewan people within human rights legislation. And 
whether or not this code is the best tool to do so, Mr. Speaker, 
or whether independent legislation to do so is the best way to go 
forward, I think that would be a very important piece of 
legislation to enshrine basic protections to all the people of our 
province. So areas that our discussion needs to move forward. 
 
You know, as you were there today with me, Mr. Speaker, and 
the member for Saskatoon Centre were as well, we had a, you 
know, a powerful message being shared about the 
discrimination that many face still within Saskatchewan. It 
reminds me that our work on this front is far from done. And as 
you hear today, hear the powerful voice of Stephanie Cox of 
TransSask sharing courageous personal stories, Mr. Speaker, 
reminds me of the importance of our work in this Assembly and 
us taking a stand and us enshrining rights and then us of course 
standing as allies within the community as well and walking as 
partners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
What we recognize for just one example is that those that are in 
the transgendered community, Mr. Speaker, are facing levels of 
poverty at a much higher level than the rest of the population. 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that levels of understanding and 
awareness are low, Mr. Speaker. As such, levels of not being 
accepted, of being discriminated against are high, and we need 
to look at so many different areas on this front. We need to 
certainly look at our health system and our health services, Mr. 
Speaker, and the level of understanding within that system. 
 
We need to look at our classrooms, our community, and our 
workplaces, Mr. Speaker, and of course make sure that we’re a 
place in all of those places and all of our institutions — this one 
as well, Mr. Speaker — that doesn’t just allow and protect basic 
rights and ensure safety, but allows a level of understanding and 
affirmation of all people within our province, Mr. Speaker, and 
conditions in a response that will ensure that all can thrive 
within Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, I’ve been inspired for a long time by so many within 
the human rights community, Mr. Speaker, who are willing to 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3645 

courageously tell their own stories, Mr. Speaker — at a time 
where many have been so hurt, discriminated against, and 
marginalized — for the greater good of all, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, it reminds me of that famous quote, Mr. Speaker, that the 
greatest injustice of a time of transition isn’t, you know, “. . . 
the strident clamour of the bad people, but the appalling silence 
of the good people.” And I’ve been heartened by the incredibly 
good people all across our province that have stood up, spoken 
up, and told their story. But I think there’s so much more that 
all of us can do on this front to be an ally and to stand as 
partners. 
 
You know, I think in our modern context, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re looking at rights across Saskatchewan, you know, there 
are so many that are leaders. And I do look to our, you know, to 
our trans community. I do look to the queer community, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan. And I’ve seen so many leaders there. 
 
I think of people like Laura Budd, Mr. Speaker, who grew up, 
you know, lives out near Kelliher and challenged a system that 
didn’t allow the change of . . . allow her to change her 
identification Mr. Speaker, without having proof of surgery. 
And with the support of the Human Rights Commission, she 
challenged that and she brought forward meaningful change for 
all within our province. I think of so many others across our 
province and organizations that are working to ensure rights and 
dignity and extend supports and care to so many across our 
province. And that’s in part the lens that I look at this 
legislation with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the changes that have been brought forward by the 
government to make the Human Rights Code bilingual are 
important, and certainly something that we support. This 
landmark legislation brought forward by Tommy Douglas and 
the CCF-NDP, with the support of Saskatchewan people in 
1947, is something that we should all be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
But importantly when we look to human rights legislation and 
our current Human Rights Code, we should be looking for 
every opportunity to strengthen that legislation and to respond 
to the powerful voices and actors within our human rights 
community across Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, and it’s been a short period of time on some of these 
fronts where I’ve observed a level of allyship and partnership 
with Saskatchewan people that wasn’t there to the same level a 
number of years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think simply of Pride weeks within Saskatchewan. It wasn’t 
long ago that Pride parades and Pride activities were sparsely 
attended and a brave few, in fact, Mr. Speaker, went out to 
stand up for human rights. It wasn’t that long ago that right here 
in Regina, that those that did participate had bags that they 
actually placed over their faces, Mr. Speaker, as they organized 
and had assembly, Mr. Speaker, to protect themselves from the 
discrimination and hate and repercussions within the 
community. 
 
And I contrast that to where we’ve got to on this front, where I 
think this last year in Saskatchewan alone we had Pride 
activities, Pride weeks that were organized in over 14 
communities across Saskatchewan. Loud and proud marches in 
places like Regina, in Saskatoon, and new marches and 
assembly and organization in places like Swift Current and up 

in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. I was proud to be a part of many of 
those activities. 
 
I know that the member for Saskatoon Centre, the critic for 
human rights within this Assembly, was a lead actor and 
supporter within many of those activities. So I also want to give 
a shout out just to all those people that toil and work to protect 
human rights in Saskatchewan and to promote human rights in 
Saskatchewan — all those that were behind those Pride 
activities of last year, and what I suspect will only grow this 
year. And what I say to you is that that work is important, you 
know. 
 
I was up in La Ronge for the first Pride march last year, Mr. 
Speaker, and there was a good turnout, right down Main Street. 
It was a beautiful spot. In fact I remember walking along, and 
there was a boat going right along the shoreline with the Pride 
parade flag being flown within that boat. And I sure thought it 
was a powerful and moving day. I think it was Councillor 
Jordan McPhail that was . . . I believe it was his boat, anyways, 
that was being utilized, Mr. Speaker. I know he was one of the 
key actors in organizing that parade. 
 
But I found it a moving event and an important one, and I 
suspect that these events as I’ve heard from many young people 
and all people across Saskatchewan, they’re not just important 
to those that show up and those that march and those that walk. 
In many ways I think these activities are very important to 
someone that might be very isolated, someone who might be 
maybe a few blocks back from Main Street there that day in La 
Ronge, Mr. Speaker, but might be not feeling very affirmed in 
who they are and not feeling very loved, Mr. Speaker, at times 
including by their own family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have a long ways to go on this front. We have a lot more 
to do. I’m impressed by all the partners that are tapping in to 
advance human rights across our province. And I think of the 
pioneers across Saskatchewan who have been there for a long 
period of time. And of course, as I say, I think it’s important for 
us to, as we evaluate human rights legislation, come at it from a 
perspective of reconciliation and all that we’ve learned from the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and looking for every 
avenue to strengthen and protect human rights. 
 
I think that we should look for opportunities to ensure basic 
rights are protected around the basic needs of people around 
housing, around food, Mr. Speaker, around poverty. And I think 
that it’s important to enshrine basic rights like these in 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that it becomes law of the 
land. 
 
It’s similar to the discussion that we’ve had in the past over 
gender sexuality alliances in schools, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
we have a lot of leadership by educators and by community 
groups across Saskatchewan, by school boards across 
Saskatchewan on this front, Mr. Speaker, and many GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] that have been formed, and this 
is so important, Mr. Speaker. But I think we’re still lacking in 
doing what we should be doing as an Assembly, Mr. Speaker: 
standing on our feet and legislating the right to form a GSA 
within the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, ensuring 
that we send that powerful message to all within our province 
that it is their right, Mr. Speaker. 



3646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

And so when we look at this legislation we should, you know, 
certainly remember its powerful history in advancing human 
rights all across Canada — that genesis of 1947 and Premier 
Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. We should look to all those 
within our province that have stood strong for human rights, 
advanced the discussion, and advanced this legislation, 
including sexual orientation of course, and gender identity. And 
importantly we need to move on to the discussion of gender 
expression and proper protections there, and making sure that 
we have all the tools to support human rights in our province. 
 
With that being said, I simply want to thank all those across 
Saskatchewan that work to ensure human rights are protected 
each and every day, for all those that are promoting greater 
understanding and promoting human rights and . . . Sorry, I’m 
just getting heckled by the . . . I didn’t hear the member. That 
we should work in every way we can to continue to improve 
human rights legislation in our province, and supports to 
students, people all through our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. At this time I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 105 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure once again to rise in the legislature at this time to 
speak to Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. This piece of legislation 
simply accompanies the piece of legislation, Bill 104, that I was 
speaking to, Mr. Speaker, for the last period of time, so I won’t 
go on at length with respect to this piece of legislation. What I 
will say is that we’ll be engaged through the committee process 
on this front. We’d encourage anyone throughout the human 
rights community across Saskatchewan to be engaged certainly 
with government and opposition, all of us through this period of 
time. 
 
As I’ve said, ensuring that the Human Rights Code is bilingual 
is important; that it’s available in French is important. But 
there’s so much more that we need to be focused on as well 
when we’re advancing human rights within our province. But at 
this point in time, I’ll simply adjourn debate for Bill No. 105, 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 106 — The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and enter into the debate of Bill No. 106, An Act 
to amend The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act. 
This is a very important piece of legislation before us. It’s one 
that we just . . . When we hear of missing persons, it’s 
something that brings shock and fear to all of us in terms of 
what could be happening and what can we do, what can we do. 
And we see communities go through this. We just recently saw 
the city of Montreal go through a period of shock where a child 
was missing. Today, even in the Children’s Advocate report, 
where a child just went missing for a few seconds and how this 
is so, so important. 
 
And so all of this is important work that we do and we have 
before us. And while this bill really focuses on making a few 
housekeeping amendments, it adds a new section about 
allowing police services to have search orders and access to 
records when conducting an investigation into a missing person. 
And also an emergency demand for records could come from 
chiefs of police or commanding officers in cases where they 
believe a person is at risk of imminent harm and, for example, a 
case of Amber Alert when a child goes missing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, “missing person” is really a phrase that’s 
really come into our lexicon and it’s one that, as I said, 
particularly within the indigenous community with missing and 
murdered indigenous women and girls — and also for males 
and boys and men — this is one that the indigenous community 
struggles with and continues to struggle with through their 
federal processes. And many of us I know on this side and 
perhaps a few on that side have been out to the walks and 
remembrances and the different activities to keep the issue front 
and centre, front and centre of the government so that they can 
keep current and the best practices to make sure no one goes 
missing and, if by chance they do, that there is a range of tools 
that the police can use to act quickly and respond efficiently and 
effectively so that the issue of a missing person can be dealt 
with, and also the whole issue of presumption of death. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So I want to just take a minute and reflect on what the minister 
had said because I think it’s always important to do that, 
particularly when people are just hearing about this for the first 
time. And this is something that happens, where the good thing 
about adjourned debates is the opportunity to have time for 
people to hear about legislation that is before us, and they may 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3647 

not have heard about that. 
 
Anyways this bill came up a few months ago, November 22nd, 
2017. And the Minister of Justice at the time talked about 
expanding the ability of the law enforcement agencies to access 
information and to obtain search orders in a missing person 
investigation, and how important this was. He did talk about 
how Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction to incorporate 
access-to-records provisions into its missing persons legislation: 
 

The current provision permits both family members and 
law enforcement agencies to apply to the court for an order 
permitting access to information with respect to the 
missing person such as financial information, telephone 
and communication records, health information, and 
identification information, including a photograph. 

 
And other provinces have followed suit by doing this similar 
thing. 
 
And he talks about the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has 
also adopted uniform legislation which forms the basis of this 
bill and has been adopted into five different jurisdictions. And 
this is very, very important because we want to have a 
consistent approach right across the nation when it comes to 
dealing with missing people, so that you know what the law or 
the rules or processes or protocols in one province most likely 
will be the same in its neighbouring province. So five 
jurisdictions have stepped up to the plate and I would hope that 
others would go join them as well. So I think this is really 
important stuff that we have before us. 
 
Additional types of information that may be accessed with a 
court order now include electronic information, including 
cellphone records, text messages, global positioning system 
tracking records, employment information, records from 
schools, attendance records, travel accommodation records. 
And so all sorts of things that might help in the search. And so 
this is important to have full and complete tools, a tool kit that 
can really help find a missing person, and particularly if that 
person’s a minor or a vulnerable person is involved. And so this 
is important for us. 
 
We think that while the minister did talk about the length of 
time, it doesn’t talk about the length of time that it took in terms 
of the consultations. But we’ll be seeing this before committee 
and there’ll be questions about this, the impact in terms of how 
this could have been seen to help missing people in 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately time is always of the essence 
when it comes to missing people and because, as I alluded to 
earlier, we just have seen before us the Children’s Advocate 
report where a child was just missing for a few brief seconds 
and we had a tragic accident that happened, and here we are, 
dealing with the fallout from that because of the procedures that 
might have been or should have been in place. 
 
But having said that, I know that we’ll want to get through a 
few other pieces of legislation today and so I’m going to move 
that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 106, The Missing 
Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. I do 
so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons 
and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here today around Bill No. 76, 
The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. I’ve always thought our 
provincial parks are an incredible asset within our province, to 
all the people of our province. I’ve grown up with a lifelong 
connection to our parks, Mr. Speaker, and the very legislation 
talking about provincial parks gives me a sort of a good feeling, 
Mr. Speaker, thinking about so many great times through 
childhood, Mr. Speaker, and now experiences that I get to share 
with our little guy and our family, Mr. Speaker, in provincial 
parks across our province. 
 
It’s important that any changes we make to provincial parks 
legislation are in the interests of our provincial parks and the 
people of the province, making sure those parks are protected 
and utilized and living up to the spirit of what they were 
intended to provide to the people of our province. I know that 
there’s also some boundaries being established in this 
legislation around the great new Porcupine Hills Provincial 
Park, Mr. Speaker, a new park that’s being established. And I 
think it’s important that as we work through this that we work 
with all voices within the local area, the region, importantly the 
indigenous voices and leadership in the area as well, to make 
sure that these boundaries are appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe, and I don’t know this file inside and out, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe there’s some concern on this front. So clearly before 
this piece of legislation gets pushed forward, we need to make 
sure that the traditional land users of the area, that those in 
treaty, which is all of us, Mr. Speaker, and that the local First 
Nations are engaged as well as the local community. 
 
That Porcupine Plain country, I don’t know if you’ve been up 
there, Mr. Speaker, but it’s beautiful country, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
hunted up through that area and it’s beautiful country, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m certainly very interested in where this, the 
location of this park, and look forward to making sure that it’s 
established in a way that will ensure it’s a lasting legacy to all 
the people of the province. So importantly, we need to make 
sure that the consultations have occurred the way that they need 
to, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that those boundaries are 
appropriate. 
 
I think the members . . . I guess it would be the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, I believe, that the park would fit within. I 
think the member from Carrot River maybe fishes up there once 
in a while, Mr. Speaker. We know he struggles on that front, 



3648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to help him out one day. I think we’re 
going to get together at some point and fish. 
 
As I saw this piece of legislation before us, Mr. Speaker, I 
ended up having all sorts of fond conversations with the 
member from Regina Elphinstone, who shares a love of the 
provincial parks. And we traded stories as we were sitting in 
our chairs. We were talking about our favourite childhood 
experiences. He was recounting to me his love of Echo Valley 
Provincial Park and his sharing as a child. I think the family 
would locate there for a good month and Doug McCall would 
drive back and forth to work. Sounds like a pretty good 
existence to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly our family as well has been all across this 
province, from the South to the North and points in between, 
utilizing our provincial parks. And they’re so important to 
ensure that people across our province are able to connect to our 
incredible natural assets, our natural environment, Mr. Speaker, 
to ensure as well that there’s protection of habitat and 
protection of lands and promotion of historical stories and our 
heritage, Mr. Speaker, and that there’s healthy recreation all 
across our province that allows people to get out and connect in 
those natural environments. 
 
I know that it’s this time of year when the melt is on, Mr. 
Speaker, that families across Saskatchewan are looking to their 
camper gear or that are going out to check their RV 
[recreational vehicle] or going to sort through their equipment, 
Mr. Speaker, that will allow them to be ready to get out there to 
those provincial parks across Saskatchewan. And certainly we 
should do all we can to continue to make sure that our parks, 
our provincial public parks across Saskatchewan are offering 
the kind of quality of recreation that they have for generations, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was looking through the Act and looking at all areas that have 
been designated over the years and I was astounded actually 
with the number of those places that I’ve been to, Mr. Speaker. 
I think I was sharing to the member for Regina Elphinstone 
that, boy, I’d love to be — you know, there’s no place I’d rather 
be than here, Mr. Speaker; don’t get me wrong — but if there 
was a place, I think it would maybe be Devil Lake provincial 
campground, Mr. Speaker. Right just north of Otter Rapids, 
connecting on the Churchill River, a beautiful base camp, Mr. 
Speaker, to enter in to the Churchill River. Once you cross 
Devil Lake of course you’re into a bit of a portage and then up 
through that beautiful system through Barker Lake and Sluice 
Falls, and incredible walleye, great sunsets, Mr. Speaker, the 
best campfire coffee a person can find. So if there was a place 
I’d rather be than this place right here, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
would be it. 
 
We need to make sure our parks are affordable as well. And you 
know, the fact is the Sask Party have hiked the cost to access 
those parks and to camp all across our province, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s a hardship for families. You know, I can think of our 
family, back when we were young, loading up into an old beater 
of a station wagon, Mr. Speaker, stuffed full of gear to get out 
to our provincial parks, where there wasn’t a whole lot of extra 
cash around the household at the time, Mr. Speaker. And those 
provincial parks allowed a quality of life and experience that 
was second to none. 

I remember being young, packing that . . . being I think the lead 
packer on the vehicle, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to have to sort of 
teach that to my son now, Mr. Speaker, so I can get out of the 
work that I think my dad once did, Mr. Speaker. But it’s so 
important that we ensure the affordability of those high-quality 
experiences, and doubling the camping fees just simply isn’t on, 
Mr. Speaker. So we need to recognize how important that 
high-quality recreation is, how important those parks are. 
 
And I believe as well that it allows many that maybe don’t live 
in a . . . you know, maybe live in cities and don’t have a 
connection as well to some of those natural environments. I 
believe it’s an important piece to establish that connection, 
certainly to get out there and camp and fish and enjoy the water, 
Mr. Speaker, but also to build a respect for nature and our 
natural environment, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we all do what 
we can to be stewards of our land and our natural environment. 
And I believe our parks play an important role on that teaching. 
 
I know as a teacher before, Mr. Speaker, I used to utilize our 
provincial parks and heritage sites to extend some of that 
teaching. I see within the legislation that the Last Mountain 
House Provincial Park is one of those places, and that’s a place 
that I used to take students out to, Mr. Speaker, you know a 
historic trading post right there on the Qu’Appelle Valley and 
the beautiful grasslands of the valley, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
important to have the opportunity to take students and others 
into natural environments to teach, Mr. Speaker, and our 
provincial parks play an important role within that. 
 
Looking at the list here, too, I see St. Victor Petroglyphs 
Provincial Park, Mr. Speaker. That’s down in the Southwest, 
down by Willow Bunch. Last time I came across those I was 
out for a hunt, Mr. Speaker, and had the chance to see the park 
for the first time and the petroglyphs, and they’re astounding, 
Mr. Speaker, and beautiful. 
 
And I also see I’m running out of time with the clock here, Mr. 
Speaker. I would certainly have more to say. I’ve got a deep 
love for our parks. We need to protect them and make sure 
they’re accessible, but at this point in time I would adjourn 
debate for Bill No. 76. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, to accommodate the 
committee sitting tonight, I do now move that this House 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 



March 27, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3649 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3619 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3619 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3619 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3619 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3619 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3619 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3620 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3620 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3620 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Charles Red Williams 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3620 
 Local Band Wins Juno Award 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3621 
 Saskatchewan Musicians Nominated for Juno Awards  
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3621 
 Radiance Cohousing Project Nears Completion 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3621 
 North Battleford Hosts Saskatchewan Winter Games 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3622 
 Lloydminster Teacher Receives Arbos Award 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3622 
 Mosaic and Regina Pats Donate to Hunger Program 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3622 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3622 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3623 
 Fiscal Situation of the City of Moose Jaw 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3623 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3623 
 Pardons for Possession of Cannabis Convictions 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3624 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3624 
 Donations to Party Leadership Candidates 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3624 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3625 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3625 
 Status of Crown Corporations and Intent of Government Legislation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3625 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3625 
 Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3626 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3626 
 Cost of Power for Saskatchewan People 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3627 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3627 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3627 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3627 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3627 
 Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3628 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3628 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3630 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3630 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3632 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3634 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3636 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3637 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3640 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3642 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3643 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3646 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3646 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3647 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


