


















































March 13, 2018 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2018, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3399 
 March 13, 2018 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being the hour of 7 p.m., we can 
resume proceedings. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 107 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate you on your election to Speaker 
as so many of my colleagues have done today. You know, we 
were really gunning for our colleague from Saskatoon 
Riversdale as well, but I do want to congratulate you and wish 
you all the best with the position. And, you know, it is a very 
important role in this Assembly so I think you’re taking it on 
with that level of enthusiasm, so I commend you for that thus 
far. 
 
I do want to enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 107, The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017. This 
bill makes the T. rex our official fossil emblem in 
Saskatchewan. When the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
was giving his second reading speech on this bill, he discussed 
the fact that, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has a number of provincial emblems that 
celebrate its rich heritage, including the provincial bird, 
which is the sharp-tailed grouse; provincial animal, it’s the 
white-tailed deer; provincial tree, the paper birch. The 
provincial sport is curling [which I am well acquainted 
with but not excelling in, with some exception]. The 
provincial flower is the western red lily, and provincial 
mineral [of course] is potash. 

 
So the purpose of the amendment to the Act, Mr. Speaker, is to 
establish the Tyrannosaurus rex as the official fossil emblem of 
the province of Saskatchewan. As the minister identifies, our 
fossils in Saskatchewan are of tremendous value to scientists, 
and designating a provincial fossil will help bring attention and 
recognition to these aspects of our province’s natural heritage. 
 
He also cites the public engagement process that was used by 
the ministry in determining the T. rex, which could be seen as a 
controversial choice, given the options in Saskatchewan. And 
so he talks about the fact that: 
 

In November of 2015 the Royal Saskatchewan Museum 

generated a province-wide campaign encouraging people 
to help select the new emblem to represent Saskatchewan, 
as well as to discover more about the province’s rich fossil 
history. 

 
So he says, through this process, the public voted through a 
paper ballot at the museum or there was a province-wide online 
vote for one of seven fossil candidates. I did not participate in 
the vote. I don’t know if any of our other colleagues 
participated in the vote for the fossil, Mr. Speaker. Maybe you 
participated in the vote yourself. I see some nods. But the seven 
options for voting for what our Saskatchewan fossil . . . Not, 
like my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana is alluding to, the fact 
that some of us in this institution are fossils. Not related to that. 
But the seven options were . . . and you’ll have to excuse my 
pronunciation of the language of dinosaurs. It’s not exactly my 
specialty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The long-necked plesiosaur Mo, found near Ponteix — you 
cannot make this up; it’s written in here — Scotty the T. rex 
that was discovered near Eastend, which is also one of the most 
complete T. rex skeletons that has even been found; Kyle 
Mammoth; Herschel, the short-necked plesiosaur found near 
Herschel; the brontothere, a rhino-like mammal found near 
Eastend; and Big Bert, which was a crocodile found near Carrot 
River; and then there was the thescelosaur, a plant-eating 
dinosaur that was found near Eastend. 
 
So ultimately out of these seven choices, the T. rex was selected 
on May 17, 2016. The results were revealed at the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum. And while Manitoba and Nova Scotia 
have a provincial fossil and a number of states in the US 
[United States] have a state fossil, Saskatchewan will be the 
first province or state that has the T. rex as its official emblem. 
So that is the sole change that is being suggested in this bill. 
 
I have not had the pleasure of seeing Scotty the T. rex or 
touring the Royal Saskatchewan Museum at either of the 
locations actually, but being a Saskatoon dweller I’ve spent a 
lot of time at the Museum of Natural Sciences on the University 
of Saskatchewan campus, and I know that kids across the 
province are going to be so excited to have the T. rex as one of 
our provincial emblems. 
 
I think about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. I think about 
kids when I see them, you know, just in awe at the Museum of 
Natural Sciences on the University of Saskatchewan campus 
and just how excited they get about the idea of being able to see 
a dinosaur, and I know that enshrining this into our provincial 
history is going to be quite exciting for them and it will be an 
exciting thing for them to learn about. 
 
I have a young nephew who has had a fascination with 
dinosaurs for a couple of years now — even, actually, probably 
about four years now — and I remember him at a dinner once 
just getting up on the table and roaring really loudly because he 
was just excited at the might of dinosaurs. So I think it’s 
something that is very capturing for young kids, and that’s 
when we learn about most of these provincial emblems and start 
to internalize them. So I know that that’s going to be a big 
piece. I can already see all the kids lighting up as they think 
about dinosaurs. 



3400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

And it’s cool that we can think of Saskatchewan as the home of 
a T. rex and start to really put some of this knowledge into 
place. If I had voted I think I might have voted for Big Bert the 
crocodile from 92 million years ago because I think it speaks to 
the way our planet changes and, you know, how we think of 
this as not being the land of crocodiles necessarily. 
 
But I understand the appeal of Scotty the T. rex and why Scotty 
received such massive support. I should say that even though 
the minister didn’t mention this in his second reading speech, 
school groups also had an opportunity to participate. 
Classrooms could submit videos and this sort of thing to be able 
to help make the decision. I also understand that the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum also received the Gil Carduner 
Marketing Award at the 2016 Sask Tourism awards so that is 
definitely something that’s showing their leadership in this area. 
 
So some details about Scotty, because we’re all going to need to 
know this as we are educating the next generation: Scotty is a 
65-million-year-old fossil that was discovered in 1991 in 
southwestern Saskatchewan. And we’re adding Scotty to the list 
of provincial emblems, which is including a couple that are my 
favourite: so the western red lily as our flower, and this is 
depicted in our party’s official logo, actually, so the red, the lily 
has always been a favourite. The saskatoon berry, of course; we 
all love our saskatoon berry pie and take great pride whenever 
we see saskatoon berry on the menu somewhere. And the wheat 
sheaf, which some governments are better at depicting than 
others, which has come to symbolize our government programs 
and organizations. I know this is a particular passion of my 
colleague for Saskatoon Centre, wearing his wheat sheaf pin 
today. And the wheat sheaf of course is meant to express the 
growth of the province and the vitality of its people. 
 
So the T. rex alongside these other provincial emblems will be a 
new piece of our history in Saskatchewan — a new old piece of 
our history in Saskatchewan — that I think we can all come to 
take as meaning that we are a part of this place. And, you know, 
it’ll certainly become part of the story about Saskatchewan that 
our younger generations are being told. So with that, I’m sure 
many of my colleagues will have much more to say about this 
. . . I’m sure much of my colleagues will have much more to say 
about this, Mr. Speaker, but I will at this point move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act of 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 107, The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 108 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 108 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise tonight and enter into the debate of Bill No. 
108, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
You know, we get these from time to time when they want to 
amend and straighten the language out around different issues 
and, of course, we saw their last brave attempt last spring when 
they thought they’d introduce Bill 40 and straighten out the 
definition of privatize and we saw where that went. 
 
And so here we have another attempt, but it’s a little bit more 
straightforward and not as controversial as that one. But when 
these folks get into the language business, you really have to 
watch yourself, Mr. Speaker, because you don’t know what 
you’re going to end up when they start deciding that they’re the 
ones who know best for defining words and what words really 
mean. 
 
You know, I have to . . . I just want to say in a shout-out to my 
colleague from Athabasca because he gave a very good second 
reading speech on this and talked a little bit about the difference 
with “shall” and “may” and how it was important, and if there 
ever were a wordsmith, I think my friend from . . . the MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Athabasca really is 
one and he really knows his way around the English language. 
So it was very interesting reading his points of view on this Act, 
this Act to amend the statute law. 
 
I also had a chance to review the minister’s remarks and while 
that was . . . that was worthwhile as well. I mean, he gave us a 
bit of a lesson in Latin and ex parte, and that was a fine thing to 
do indeed. And he thought he’d do his bit to help make 
language simpler and more straightforward for those who can’t 
afford the high-priced lawyers that might be hanging around the 
courtrooms, to make life easier. So ex parte — I think I’m 
pronouncing it right from what I’ve heard on the TV shows — 
that is one contribution. 
 
But you know, one thing I do have a question. This afternoon I 
talked a little bit about Enterprise Saskatchewan, but we can 
never get over . . . And the member from Athabasca asked, why 
did we change from departments to ministries? And here we are 
10 years later, you know, straightening out the Act. They finally 
figured out that it wasn’t in the legislation. So why is that? Why 
is that 10 years — 10 long, long years, Mr. Speaker — figuring 
out the difference between ministries and departments? I’m sure 
the Minister of Environment every once in a while gets referred 
to as SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management], probably hears that term every once in a while 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. I don’t think I 
quite fit into that category like the member from Carrot River 
who . . . It was a pleasure to hear his reference in that last 
speech. 
 
But having said that, you know, it’s funny how language stays 
with us, and we’re not quite sure what was the logic between 
changing between ministry and department. You know, and of 
course the member before, the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview really actually raised a very good point. And I 
remember, I remember, and I do wear this badge with honour, 
this wheat badge, the wheat sheaf, coming from a family . . . 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3401 

Our farm has been in our family for over 100 years now, and 
that was our main business, was wheat. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And how these folks, when they came along and decided to 
change from department to ministry, also thought it might be a 
good time to get rid of the wheat sheaf, I can’t ever imagine 
why that would have been. Why would they ever get rid of that 
symbol, the wheat sheaf? Now that’s before the Minister of 
Highways arrived on the scene. I don’t know if he would have 
done that. He would have probably stuck up for that. He would 
have said, hey, the wheat sheaf is something pretty, pretty 
important. Or you know, I think of Nebraska. I think of 
Nebraska, the corn. And I mean, they’ve diversified. We’ve 
diversified but, boy, you can’t get around Nebraska very much 
without talking about corn and knowing your way around a 
corn field. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I digress a little bit, but not much I don’t 
think, from the bill before us, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
and how we are curious about when these folks . . . Really this 
is a sign, Mr. Speaker, of a tired, weary, old government, when 
halfway through, halfway through their mandate this is the kind 
of legislation we have before us: two or three pieces about 
cleaning up their language, their trail through legislation. So 
while this isn’t very exciting, it is a sign that’s it’s getting tired 
and weary and they can’t think of much. They’re asking Justice 
to say, so what do we need to do? And they look back at the 
shelves of stuff that they . . . You know it’s housekeeping but 
housekeeping halfway through the . . . You know, the election 
was just in 2016, just two short years ago. Not even two years 
ago and this is the kind of thing we’re doing before us. 
 
Now we might say it is interesting and we can reflect on this, 
you know, updating the references of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench so that it’s uniform through all pieces of legislation. And 
something like that is very, very important, and of course 
updating references of Her Majesty to the Crown. And I think 
we’ve been through this before. We’ve been down this road 
before because we are worried about the Queen’s health and 
what the future may hold for her and whether or not it’s 
appropriate to refer to the Queen or the King in anticipation of 
what might happen. The Queen, while she is in great health and 
Prince Philip looks good too, we just know that they are aging 
and we do have to be prepared for that. 
 
But that’s the kind of legislation that we find ourselves debating 
on a Tuesday night when we should be talking about the bigger 
issues before us, in terms of climate change, in terms of 
legislation to promote energy conservation, that kind of thing. 
And here we are, here we are talking about references to Her 
Majesty. And I hope she does live long and well and prosper, 
but we have to be prepared for what might be down the road. 
 
But as I said, you know, it is an interesting trail that we have 
before us, of a tired, weary old government, that this is the kind 
of exciting visionary legislation that we have before us and the 
kind of issues that we deal with. 
 
It’s actually quite a long piece of legislation and I don’t know 
whether . . . It is interesting because it looks like it’s in 
alphabetical order starting with the adult guardian 

co-decision-making Act, and that’s where you find the Court of 
Queen’s Bench reference corrected, and it goes through the 
whole list. So clearly somebody spent some time doing this, and 
that’s good on them for doing that. I’m not sure that it is going 
to really solve a lot of issues. And we could go through this at 
quite a length, but I know we’ve got a lot of legislation before 
us, Mr. Speaker, tonight. So with that, again as I said, it is 
interesting that after 10 long years, here we are correcting the 
references to ministries from departments. It is an interesting 
sign that we have before us. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 108, An Act to Amend the Statute Law. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 108, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 109 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 109 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 
modifiant le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I too 
would like to add my congratulations to your election as 
Speaker here in the Assembly. I certainly look forward to your 
sitting in the Chair and wish you all the best actually. And we’ll 
do our best to make sure we make your life easy, so . . . Well 
we’ll see how that goes. 
 
The bill I’m speaking to tonight is another statute law 
amendment Act. This is number two in the suite of The Statute 
Law Amendment Act bills that are before us here in this session. 
And I’m just going to first of all start with some of the 
comments made by the minister when he introduced the bill 
here back in November. 
 
As he indicated, the bill is making a number of housekeeping 
changes to different pieces of bilingual legislation in order to 
update and modernize their provisions. So he’s talking about, 
again, things like the outdated term ex parte as a Latin term 
being removed and different housekeeping changes in the bill; 
replacing outdated cross-references to legislation and updating 
the phrase for extraprovincial corporations that is used in the 
French version of The Non-profit Corporations Act. So they’re 
entirely housekeeping in nature, and I’ll just take a few minutes 
here right now, Mr. Speaker, to go through some of the changes 
that are being proposed. 
 
So the first section we’re looking at is in the amendments to 
The Administration of Estates Act. And this is different things, 
like subsection 9(1) is amended by striking out ex parte and 
substituting “without notice.” And that ex parte reference is 



3402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

also referred to in subsection 24(3), subsection 26(2), and also 
clause 32(2)(b) and clause 32(3), subsection 36(1), and 
subsection 45(2). So that’s from The Administration of Estates 
Act. 
 
Then we have The Adoption Act also being amended, The 
Adoption Act, 1998, where ex parte is referred to in section 
5(2.2). The same changes, I believe, are being made . . . no, the 
definition of child is being changed in The Children’s Law Act, 
1997, and here it’s in the English version they’re going to 
change the definition of child to a person. A child means 
someone who is under 18 and never married. So I don’t have a 
copy of the original bill in front of me here, Mr. Speaker, but it 
looks like this change is . . . I don’t know if it was under 18 or 
never married, which is now being changed under this 
definition. Also a couple of ex parte references there for The 
Children’s Law Act. 
 
We also have a change in The Constitutional Questions Act, 
2012, again referring to ex parte now as “application without 
notice.” And if I recall correctly, I think ex parte is when you 
can make an application to a court without the other person 
having to be there or getting an order from a judge despite the 
fact that the other person isn’t present in the court. So you can 
get these applications without notice in certain Acts, and 
apparently this is now, or it has always resided in The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012, but it’s changing the Latin 
language to English. 
 
And I think that’s a common technique that is used by 
legislative drafters where, I remember back in law school 
learning about plain language and how, you know, we say, 
“cease and desist,” things like that, which is like the French 
version of the word and the Latin version of the word, but it 
really is the same meaning.  
 
So I think when you think about wills, how they used to say, I 
devise, bequeath, and bequest this to my heirs, those three 
words actually really have the same meaning; it’s just from 
three different languages. So quite often what we see our 
legislators doing and the people in our Department of Justice, is 
they are constantly combing through our legislation, 
particularly when there is a bit of time in the legislative 
schedule and just finding some of these things that we take for 
granted and often don’t even realize that they’re there, but there 
really is overkill.  
 
So in terms of being clear, it’s always best I think to use one 
word instead of filling it up with meaningless or similar 
language, except maybe for second reading speeches, as is 
pointed out by my colleague, where we tend to avoid pithiness 
at all costs and try to stretch things out a little bit sometimes. 
And in the spirit of that, I will continue. 
 
The Co-operatives Act, 1996 is also being amended here in The 
Statute Law Amendment Act. And what we have here is the 
repeal of section 81(1), and now it’s talking about a substitution 
where the “. . . member, the registrar or any interested person 
may apply to the court, without notice or on any notice that the 
court may require, for an order directing that an investigation be 
made of the co-operative or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates.” 
And then ex parte is also being removed in a couple spots in 
The Co-operatives Act. 

In The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, we have 
another section: subsection 7(4) is being repealed and 
substituted. And I think this is one in reference to enforceability 
of judgments. So that’s right there in the Act. 
 
Then changes are being made again on the ex parte language in 
The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. And The 
Family Maintenance Act, 1997 was also amended for a few 
things; for example, striking out the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment, which is an old name of the 
Ministry of Social Services, and now they’re substituting 
“ministry responsible for administration of The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Act.” So as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 
pointed out, on the first version of this bill, the reference to 
department, it still exists in some of our legislation and 
apparently our Justice officials are still combing through 
legislation to use the newer language that this government has 
chosen. 
 
And again, you kind of wonder why. I remember when they 
changed the name of the STI [Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute] to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology], and changing SIAST . . . is now polytechnic. 
So it’s just, I think, language that’s faddish perhaps, or the 
ministry wanting to make itself known for something. So 
anyways, this is what we see from time to time when 
governments want to leave their mark, I guess, kind of like dogs 
with their trees sometimes. 
 
But the removal of ex parte is being taken also, or happening in 
The Family Maintenance Act several times. And again the 
Minister of Community Resources and development is also 
being struck out in The Family Maintenance Act. 
 
Also The Family Property Act is being amended in this bill, and 
here it’s another application without notice. So again an ex 
parte application, but the language is being switched to using 
the words “application without notice.” 
 
The Jury Act is also being amended in similar ways. And then 
again, another reference to the “Department of Justice” is being 
changed to the “Ministry of Justice,” so all that work that our 
colleagues in the Ministry of Justice are hard at work finding 
these small oversights. 
 
There’s also The Justices of the Peace Act is being repealed, 
section 14 that is, of The Justices of the Peace Act is being 
repealed and I’m not sure what the context is there. We’ll have 
to look at that when this goes before committee. But section 14 
is now referring to certain provisions of the Criminal Code. 
 
Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 is amended as well and that 
is . . . We have different definitions, repealing the definition of 
“Canada corporation” and substituting a new definition of 
“Canada Corporation.” They repealed the definition of 
“commission.” And they’re repealing the existing definition of 
“extraprovincial corporation” and substituting a new one. So 
this is something I think the minister referred to in his 
comments. And then there’s some reference to a number of 
changes in the French version as well. 
 
Things like, looks like there’s a phrase “personne morale 
extraprovinciale” is being substituted with “société 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3403 

extraprovinciale.” So it looks like a language change there. 
Some changes to federal laws as well and then good old “ex 
parte proceedings” or “ex parte applications” are being changed 
to “application without notice” and “proceedings without 
notice.” 
 
[19:30] 
 
There’s a whole host of further changes, Mr. Speaker, that are 
referred to in this bill and again many of them are the ex parte 
changes. So at this point I think I’ve touched on quite a few of 
them, and I know that other people will want to speak to this 
bill as well. So I would like to at this point adjourn the debate 
on Bill No. 109, An Act to amend the Statute Law (No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The Statute Law Amendment 
Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 110 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 110 — The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again this evening to enter into adjourned debates on Bill 
110, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2017. So 
according to Animal Legal Defense Funds’ 2016 Canadian 
Animal Protection Laws Rankings, Saskatchewan was actually 
ranked in the bottom tier. So we are ranked 11th, which 
includes the provinces and the territories. So we’re the lowest of 
all provinces in Canada. 
 
Whenever I see some sort of study, I immediately ask about the 
methodology, coming from a sociology background. And so 
how this was determined is that all provinces and territories 
were numerically ranked based on cumulative scores on their 60 
questions over 12 categories. And this was based on proclaimed 
legislation, not anything that was in the works. And this is all 
while our neighbours directly to the east in Manitoba were 
ranked first. 
 
Now many of us don’t need this study to know that our animal 
protection legislation could use some work. I can clearly 
remember a very tragic situation in Saskatoon where 14 dogs 
died as a result of a malfunctioning thermostat. This happened 
about a year ago where the dogs died of heat stroke and 
dehydration after being left unattended overnight. This incident 
brought public attention to the fact that there are no legal 
requirements for kennels, trainers, and groomers, only 
recommended codes of practice. 
 
So proposed changes in this Act will now allow animal 
protection officers to enter kennels without a warrant during 

regular business hours. They will also consider animals kept in 
unsanitary conditions as distressed — so that’s changing the 
definition of “distressed” — and will give veterinarians no 
choice but to report suspected cases of animal abuse. 
 
We also saw in the news on March 10th, just a few days ago, 
that there was a Saskatoon-area woman worried about horses 
that were starving. So she believed that they had not been fed. 
About two-thirds of the horses in question were removed 
following her initial complaint to animal protection services, 
but the woman took to social media this week to express her 
frustration that the remaining group of about 10 horses or so 
were still there. 
 
So we see these situations come up. They often come up in the 
news and we feel for the owners of these animals, you know. 
We feel for the situation. But we know that there is work to be 
done in this area. 
 
So changes that are being made in this particular piece of 
legislation, I understand that the entire Act is being repealed 
and a new one is being brought in place. So it replaces The 
Animal Protection Act of 1999. Several pieces from the old Act 
are being maintained, like the section on protection of service 
animals. It expands the definition for an animal in distress to 
include conditions that would cause the animal extreme anxiety 
or impair an animal’s well-being over time. And it expands 
animal care duties and what is expected of individuals who are 
responsible for animals; changes the language from “humane 
societies” to “animal protection agencies”; includes limits on 
transporting animals who would suffer unduly during that 
transportation. 
 
It includes a section for humane slaughter and euthanasia. It 
changes the fact that veterinarians would have a duty to report 
when they have reasonable grounds to believe someone isn’t 
caring for an animal. And it outlines the ways that animal 
protection officers can relieve an animal in distress, like 
entering premises, vehicles, etc., and the rules that apply to 
animal protection agencies across the province. 
 
There is still, despite these changes, going to be immense 
pressure and exists immense pressure right now on the animal 
welfare resources that are in the province. So there’s still 
concern that there is quite a bit of pressure on these agencies 
and that changing the legislation won’t change that. So it’s still 
an area where there’s more work to be done outside of this 
legislation. 
 
The press release that the government put out on November 
27th talked about some of the accolades that this legislation has 
received for some of the changes that it’s proposing, so I want 
to talk about that a little bit. 
 
So there’s approval from the Sask Vet Med Association, SVMA 
[Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association]. So President 
Dr. Lesley Sawa said: 
 

Updating The Animal Protection Act will go a long way in 
helping ensure the health and welfare of animals across the 
province. The SVMA requested provisions for mandatory 
veterinary reporting of animal neglect and abuse and we 
are pleased to see that included. 



3404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

So they’re talking about the fact that this was actually requested 
by the organization. 
 
It’s also been endorsed by Animal Protection Services 
Saskatchewan. And the executive director, Kaley Pugh, said: 
“The humane treatment of animals in Saskatchewan is our 
priority and the suggested legislative updates support our 
mission to provide effective animal welfare education and 
enforcement.” 
 
We’ve also seen some accolades in the news talking about how 
some of these changes are necessary in the legislation. So we 
have a news article, I have a news article here from paNOW on 
November 28th and the headline is “Veterinarians welcome 
changes to Sask. animal protection laws.” So they talk about 
how these changes are being welcomed by veterinarians as well 
as the Saskatchewan Horse Federation. And I’ll just quote from 
the article here: 
 

Dr. Anne Allen, a practising veterinarian with the 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association, said she 
was delighted to read about the updates to the act in 
regards to reporting suspected animal abuse or neglect. 
 
“Though it is our moral obligation, it has not been our 
legal obligation,” Allen said. “Many provinces have 
mandatory reporting required of veterinarians in the same 
way it’s required of other professions.” 

 
The article goes on to talk about the fact that cases of abuse or 
neglect are rare or uncommon, but it’s good to see the province 
taking note of the issue. 
 

Audrey Price, executive director of the Saskatchewan 
Horse Federation, echoed Allen’s appreciation for the 
updated act. 

 
She said: 
 

The provincial government did ask for our input when they 
were considering the proposed changes. 

 
The article goes on to say the Agriculture minister said: 
 

. . . he was glad to hear the praise from the . . . 
organizations. He noted the Saskatchewan government 
took plenty of time to consult with as many stakeholders as 
possible to ensure the updated laws work for everyone. 

 
And I’ll just note, Mr. Speaker, it is very nice to see that the 
Sask Party can provide adequate and meaningful consultation 
when they want to. And I encourage the Agriculture minister 
for doing that, and I would say that some of the other ministers 
have something to learn from him. 
 
I’ve got another article here from CKOM News that’s dated 
November 28th, “Sask. government shores up Animal 
Protection Act.” And what that article is talking about is the 
executive director of the Saskatoon SPCA [Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] also being pleased with the 
changes — Patricia Cameron is her name — and she states: 
 

“Expanding the locations that could be inspected without a 

warrant to include things like kennels and grooming 
services . . . will be all in the better interests of animals,” 
she said, adding the change will take away the “significant 
complexity” of getting an inspection order. [Which is a 
complaint that we’ve heard in the past.] 
 
. . . But despite these amendments, Cameron said there’s 
immense pressure on animal welfare resources in the 
province, not just Saskatoon. 
 
“When you include agricultural animals, literally millions 
of animals, and the area is under-resourced, there are not 
enough officers,” she said. 
 
For Saskatoon, there are three animal protection officers — 
two full-time and one casual. 
 
Cameron said the organization receives well over 1,000 
concerns a year, with a smaller number being serious cases 
of neglect or abuse. 
 
“It’s difficult to get to all of the calls as concerns come in 
and that’s true of all our agencies, we’re all small.” 
 
Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert humane 
societies provide animal protection services in their 
communities — funding for which is provided through 
donations. Cameron said the Saskatchewan Animal 
Protection Services handles all other calls in the province. 

 
So outside of Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and P.A. [Prince 
Albert]. 
 
So there’s some important work being done in these proposed 
changes, Mr. Speaker. It’s heartening to see many of our 
provincial bodies that are behind it, but there is still work to be 
done in terms of the service agencies feeling a little bit too 
taxed in the work that they have to do right now. So we’re not 
entirely in the clear yet, but it is promising to see these changes, 
especially in light of some of the animal tragedies we have 
observed. 
 
I know my colleagues will have more to say on this particular 
piece of legislation, but with that I would like to move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill 110, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, The Animal 
Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3405 

Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
like to congratulate you on your role, on your election, and the 
duty you’ll fulfill to this Assembly. I’m proud to have a fellow 
Campion grad in the Speaker’s Chair. I know that you’ll treat 
me as fairly as everyone else despite the fact that we come from 
the same club, but thank you very much for your service, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m pleased to enter into discussion here this afternoon, this 
evening, on Bill No. 111, the municipal tax sharing amendment 
Act. Certainly it’s critical that we get this piece of legislation 
right. And it’s critical that the consultation that government has 
undertaken on this front has been listened to because we’re 
dealing with certainly very important stakeholders in the 
province. We’re dealing with a potash industry that is vital to 
our province by way of the investment that it makes, the jobs 
that are created and sustained, and certainly the royalties paid to 
government, back to municipalities, and all the spinoffs of this 
very important industry. 
 
It’s important as well that we have the consultation where it 
needs to be with our hometowns and with our rural 
municipalities, so with SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] and with SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], and making sure that 
that’s reflected in the changes that have been brought forward. 
 
Certainly I understand the need for some of the updates that 
have been brought forward, and I’ve read the minister’s 
justification. I’ve done some consultation with stakeholders. I 
look forward to much more, and I know our critic within our 
caucus will certainly be engaged on this front as we enter into 
committee. 
 
[19:45] 
 
It’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker that our faith in this government’s 
ability to listen in a sincere way with stakeholders is greatly 
diminished, and greatly diminished with these very 
stakeholders. We’re talking about our municipalities, 
municipalities that quite frankly were blindsided by this 
government over the course of the last year, a government that 
surprised municipalities, our hometowns on budget day last 
year in a way that I know those hometowns will never forget, 
and I know that taxpayers are all too well aware of right now, as 
they see the hikes that they’re absorbing and being passed along 
to them as a result of the broken agreement, the ripped-up 
contracts with respect to grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Looking at this Act, certainly it was originally established in 
1968 as the industry developed and grew within the province 
and as communities developed and grew within Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And the whole premise of the board or of the 
municipal potash tax structure is to have an equitable and fair 
distribution of taxes within a radius, I believe, it’s 20 kilometres 
or 20 miles; I know part of this Act updates the measurements 
as well to the metric system. So a 20-mile radius is what this is, 
recognizing that municipalities within the vicinity certainly 
need to make sure that things like roads are maintained and that 

there’s certainly the wear and tear that occurs in those regions 
that needs to be supported, but also that the villages and towns 
within the area have the support that they need, recognizing that 
they deliver services. So they’re there to make sure that we have 
the serviced lots and the water and the waste water, make sure 
that we have the rinks in place and the recreation infrastructure 
that will support those working in this important industry to 
have the quality of life that they deserve and appreciate as well. 
 
So this is an important structure. I think there’s a fair question, 
as we engage in consultation with our municipal partners, with 
SARM and with SUMA, to make sure that they’ve been 
listened to through this process, that this Act in fact meets their 
needs. I know there’s some question for sure with respect to the 
urban sector on this front because we have communities that . . . 
I know there’s an update in this bill to allow the revenue 
sharing with resort villages, for example, and that certainly 
makes sense. 
 
But there’s no accommodation and no change to support cities, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think of communities like Humboldt and I 
think of cities like Yorkton that certainly play an important role 
in supporting the potash sector and so many of those workers 
and their families and the services that they depend on as well 
within the community, the parks infrastructure through to the 
rinks. So it’s important that we have this balance right and that 
we have distribution of dollars going to our rural municipalities 
who are playing a very, very important role within this, but also 
making sure that we’ve properly understood the impacts within 
the urban sector. 
 
So I would like to learn more, Mr. Speaker, as to why cities like 
Humboldt and Yorkton were left out of this because certainly, 
you know, I know a city like Humboldt has undertaken 
significant planning for, for example, the BHP potash project 
that’s been advanced over a period of time. It’s taken a lot of 
planning, a lot of resources, and what they’re looking for is to 
. . . And what they’ve done has really worked as a region. 
They’ve worked very closely with the neighbouring RMs [rural 
municipality] and with the neighbouring towns and villages as 
well to make sure that, as that project advances, that they as a 
region are able to meet the needs of workers and of the sector. 
 
And this is important as well to the industry because I know the 
stability for the industry is very important. And a key part of 
that is making sure that a labour force is able to have its needs 
satisfied, and front and centre within that is where you live and 
the services that you count on as a family and depend on. So it’s 
critical to make sure that, for the potash industry, that we have 
those neighbouring municipalities properly supporting the 
workers who will work within those mines. 
 
So there’s a question on that front in making sure that the 
distribution of dollars is appropriate to the municipalities, urban 
and rural, whether or not the dollars are sufficient within that. 
But certainly it seems . . . I’m interested in following up to find 
out why these two cities that are directly impacted were left out, 
or why cities were, on that front. These are smaller cities, but 
cities that are growing and really fulfill and offer so much, so 
many of the services that people within the community — 
within the region, I should say — count on. 
 
Some of the other changes that were brought forward expands 



3406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

the membership of the actual board. And I think that that 
change has brought forward a representative now of SUMA as 
well, and that certainly is only reasonable. Certainly it’s critical 
that our rural municipalities have strong representation and a 
voice within this board. But it’s important as well that the 
hometowns have a voice within this structure. I believe there’s 
changes that have extended the period of appointment for those 
board members, I think from one year to two year, and I think 
that that seems very reasonable to ensure sort of the efficiency 
and effectiveness of those boards. 
 
And there’s a few other impacts that have been brought 
forward. It speaks of a standardization of the mill rate across all 
regions. And I look forward to exploring that a little bit more as 
well, I know our critic will, and likely to . . . understand where 
things may not have been standard before, what the reason for 
that, you know, what the reasons were. So this could be 
something that makes sense and that’s fair, but there may have 
been unique needs or unique realities that were experienced in 
certain regions and there were certain arrangements that were 
committed to. These are questions that certainly I’ll have for, or 
we’ll have for municipalities as we move forward. 
 
It does state that there’s going to be some flexibility built in for 
municipalities. And I think that’s important; I never like seeing 
a provincial government trample on the rights and autonomy of 
another level of government. And we’ve seen that too often 
with this Sask Party government and with municipalities. And 
so it’s important to make sure that there’s flexibility built into 
this process, Mr. Speaker, for municipalities who have distinct 
needs and have powers, Mr. Speaker, as well. And these are 
certainly things that we’ll be exploring in committee. 
 
I believe the minister’s referenced that the standardization was 
around a concern of improper calculations in the past of the 
royalties that were being paid. And I don’t know what sort of 
errors were occurring, and I don’t know how those were dealt 
with, but those are important matters certainly for the industry 
and certainly for municipalities that would be impacted as well. 
 
And you know, again, just to the point that we really need to 
recognize that this is a partnership. And I know that that’s how 
the industry would see this. They very much have a strong 
relationship with those neighbouring RMs and with the 
neighbouring hometowns that really also play a very important 
role in supporting the mines and supporting the investment and 
supporting the labour force that’s required within mines. And 
you know, communities like Esterhazy and Rocanville and so 
many more have really done such tremendous work over so 
many years to support this incredibly important sector to our 
province. 
 
So it’s important that, when embarking on changes to 
legislation around royalty structures and relationships with 
stakeholders like that of a very important industry — the potash 
industry in Saskatchewan — and with our hometowns and with 
our rural municipalities, that this government gets it right. And I 
know that many across the province have lost tremendous faith 
and trust in this government. Far too often they feel that the 
answers are within and that they know best. And far too often 
they’re willing to trample on the rights of other levels of 
government, rip up agreements with municipalities, take rights 
away from our democratically elected local school boards, and 

that just doesn’t serve us well, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t pay the 
respect to those other levels of government, and it doesn’t 
empower them to do the very important work that they do 
within our province. And to consolidate all that power and place 
it within the Premier’s office is just not the way that I think this 
province is best served, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a few other changes within this bill that seem to be 
largely housekeeping in nature. I could go through a few of 
them here. One of them that certainly is important is that there’s 
now the inclusion of resort villages. And I understand that that 
wasn’t the case before, so that’s important. But again I think the 
question is, is the distribution of funds correct to the affected 
municipalities and why aren’t smaller but growing and vital 
cities to these industries, like Humboldt and Yorkton, excluded. 
 
And there’s also some changes here as well to allow, I guess, a 
transition into this structure for new mines. And certainly new 
mines are important and it’s important to have clarity for the 
industry and for those mines, but also clarity for the 
municipalities that are planning and anticipating. And certainly 
that would be encouraged as well by the possibility of those 
mines and seeing them come to fruition, but they need to be 
able to plan accordingly. 
 
So I think this is another area that’s important to make sure that 
both industry, the potash sector itself, those companies, to make 
sure that they’ve been properly consulted on this front because 
certainly we want a stable investment climate. We want one 
that’s respectful to the municipalities, the neighbouring 
municipalities, so we also need to make sure we’ve got that 
consultation with hometowns and with our rural municipalities 
in a way that’s been listened to and then reflected in the changes 
within this Act. 
 
There is quite a few other little changes within this bill, but I 
think that that’s the heart of it. I think that the important work 
now, and we’ll be looking to hometowns across the province to 
connect with us and we’ll be doing that with them, we’ll be 
doing that with rural municipalities across the province. That 
consultation is important. It’s critical that we get this right and 
it’s critical that we have the potash industry, this very important 
potash industry in our province that creates very important 
investment, that creates jobs across our province, and that 
provides revenues back to the province of Saskatchewan proper, 
to these neighbouring municipalities, and also the revenues that 
flow from the economic spinoffs of these projects. 
 
I would just want to also identify that it seems a bit strange that 
we have changes to the municipal potash structure being 
brought forward but no resolution to the restricted drilling area 
in around Rocanville, for example. Mr. Speaker, this is a matter 
that the former premier, the one that just went out the door, was 
very clear about in advance of being elected to say that he was 
going to resolve. The former minister of Energy and Resources 
and the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] that has also just 
gone out the door was very clear that he would fix this as well. 
But what they’ve left is a community and a whole bunch of 
mineral right holders high and dry for the past decade, Mr. 
Speaker, with no resolution, no activity, and no solution in 
sight. 
 
[20:00] 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3407 

And the reality, when I speak with many within that RM and 
many within that area — and I’ve held meetings right out in 
Rocanville, Mr. Speaker, on this front — the reality is that 
many of those mineral right holders are actually passing away, 
dying, Mr. Speaker, waiting to . . . while waiting and working 
to find a resolution. 
 
So I think that this is an important area for the local MLA to 
roll up his sleeves, to take the time and meet with his 
constituents and those impacted and then to work with 
government, because when the Sask Party was working to 
become a government it was very clear by Bill Boyd and Brad 
Wall that they were going to fix this. This was what they put in 
plain language to the people impacted in this region. And it’s 
past time. And now it’s taken possibly another premier to go 
out there and resolve this and a new MLA for the region as 
well. So I would impress upon an MLA, the new MLA, to take 
the time with those constituents that have been reaching out to 
him and that have been working for a long time to have this 
matter resolved, and to work to find a fair resolution for those 
with their mineral rights within the potash restricted drilling 
area in the region that I’ve identified. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the input of all 
across the province and all within the sector. We have the 
SARM convention here this week, and certainly we’ll be out 
there. And they’re very important stakeholders in this industry, 
very important partners in this agreement right here, so we’ll 
look forward to their continued involvement on this front. We’ll 
look forward to the continued involvement of SUMA 
representing the hometowns across our province, and we’ll 
continue to work with and listen to that very important potash 
sector within our province that’s so important to us as a 
province today, but so important to our future. 
 
So with that being said, we’ll be doing more consultation. 
Thank you. And I move to adjourn — I’m new around here — 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont is . . . 
Apparently it’s his first day, but he . . . Yes, it’s okay. He’s 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to rise 
tonight and enter into this Bill No. 112, An Act making 
amendments to certain Acts that deal with Vehicles and 

Driving. And of course the short title, as was read, was 
miscellaneous vehicle and driving statutes (cannabis legislation) 
amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now, of course, we are watching this time before us, the 
summer of 2018, and what will take place with the legalization 
of cannabis here in Canada and all of those implications, and 
what that really, really means for the people of Canada. We see 
this happening across the States with various jurisdictions 
having now legalized cannabis and what the impacts are. 
 
And of course we all, and I think can all say uniformly that we 
think any kind of impaired driving is not a good thing. In fact 
it’s a tragic . . . with tragic implications, and we know 
particularly in Saskatchewan, in this province, that we have 
some of the highest rates of driving while impaired. And the 
implications for that, driving while impaired or driving while 
distracted, we need to take this very seriously in terms of 
making sure our streets are safe and that people understand that 
it’s a privilege to be driving and they have responsibilities when 
they are driving. 
 
And so having said that, you know, this bill intends to add the 
new federal drug offences that were part of the Criminal Code 
changes, and they’re going to introduce them and put them into 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act as well as The Traffic 
Safety Act. 
 
And so this is a good thing and makes a lot of sense. But we 
will have lots of questions about this because people right 
across this province are wondering what are the implications of 
this, you know. And particularly I think it’s right across the 
board with, I was about to say older generations but I think 
everyone wonders what the implications of this . . . I mean no 
one should be driving after having partaken in any drugs, 
whether they be alcohol or other kinds of drugs that have an 
influence on your response time and judgment and that type of 
thing. So this makes a lot of sense. 
 
The questions that we may have — and I do have some 
questions as we go through this, though — is what are the best 
practices? What have we learned from other jurisdictions? And 
what can we do to make sure that we don’t find ourselves tied 
up in the courts just mired in legalese? Are we using best 
practices? And we want to make sure that we are really dealing 
with the issues at hand. We don’t want to see any kind of 
profiling — what we might think might be a typical drug user 
and pulling them over — and taking advantage of some of the 
pieces of the legislation that speaks to the ambiguity that exists 
that, say, with alcohol does. 
 
And we’ve come a long way in the science of determining 
impairment and levels of impairment in the blood or in the 
breath. And while we don’t have those . . . And it is interesting 
because it’s not like cannabis is new and we’re introducing a 
new topic to the police enforcement. Obviously this is 
something though that clearly . . . And it is interesting because 
this will be a new area for the police services to delve into. But 
driving while drunk will remain the number one issue, I’m sure, 
before us. And that’s really, really important that we don’t lose 
track of that and we continue to build on strengths that we’ve 
seen. 
 



3408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

So I just want to review some of the highlights of the bill that’s 
before us, and then I want to talk about some of the concerns 
we have. And some of the concerns actually is interesting, as I 
read through this legislation, that I’ve had raised to me over the 
last month or so. Because some of the new processes that I’m 
not sure whether it’s Justice or SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] have taken on in terms of serving notices. And when 
I look at this legislation I see references to that. And that will be 
one of our questions that we have for the Minister of Justice 
and/or the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 
But let me just do a quick review of what this is because the 
people at home may be tuning in and wondering, as with us all, 
what will be happening over the course of the summer months 
with the new cannabis legislation that the federal government is 
introducing. It’s passed the House but some of it is within the 
Senate, and we await to see what’s happening there. 
 
And so as I said, this bill adds some new federal drug offences 
under the Criminal Code to various sections of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act as well as The Traffic Safety Act. It adds 
a definition of drug to The Traffic Safety Act and so you folks at 
home when I go through the Act, I’ll make sure I review that 
for the people so that they are aware of that. 
 
The bill adds a new section to The Traffic Safety Act that 
outlines a zero tolerance for drugs. And what that . . . That may 
be the interesting part that we have to see how that plays out in 
the courts. And is that a reasonable stance and how do we arrive 
at that? And I think the reason in many ways we have a zero 
tolerance is because we don’t know what the tolerance should 
be. And how do you measure that tolerance? And so it’s just 
easier to say zero tolerance, but then that doesn’t make it any 
easier, Mr. Speaker, because you can be assured that there will 
be some people that will take that definition and they’ll raise 
concerns about what that really, really means and the 
implications of that. 
 
And we’ve seen that in drug testing in work sites and of course, 
obviously people don’t want to see people working when 
they’ve been under the influence of a variety of drugs. And so 
that sounds reasonable of one hand, but now that we’re more 
into that we can understand that there has been challenges with 
that and it’s not as straightforward as one may think. And so 
that will be the questions I know that we have. 
 
It sets out licence suspensions, vehicle impoundments, and 
administrative fines for drivers found to have been driving 
while having consumed drugs. Now it says — this may be 
interesting for the folks at home and what the implications are 
— drug offences will be dealt with in the same way as 
alcohol-related offences are dealt with except the ignition 
interlock can’t be used with the consumption of drugs. And that 
gets back to the fact that with the Breathalyzer and the 
technology that’s been developed with that, clearly is advanced 
in many ways and that the same is not . . . [inaudible] . . . can be 
applied to the consumption of drugs, in particular cannabis or 
marijuana because of the difficulty there. 
 
And of course, this speaks to the science that we need to 
develop. We need to have a better understanding, and 
understanding that is not laden with judgment but 
understanding more that this is an area that people in Canada 

expect and have . . . You know, the government of the day did 
win the election and one of their key promises was the 
legalization of cannabis. And I know for many people — and I 
was knocking on doors during that campaign — felt that was 
the right thing to do. 
 
But I think we all agree, as I said, that clearly we need to make 
sure that our streets are safe and that we do not have accidents. 
And so it’s not that it’s with the legalization that it’s an 
anything-goes, wild-west type of approach, but in fact that we 
are approaching it in a rational and sound and planned manner. 
And this is a big deal. So again this is where science comes into 
it and we need to make sure . . . and it will be interesting to 
know how much SGI and the government is setting aside for 
that kind of research. 
 
SGI has done a lot of good work in terms of being proactive, 
and I will be curious to know what kind of proactive activities 
will be happening. I’ve been reading some things about the 
Liberal initiatives in terms of media and their campaigns that 
they hope to get going and the impact it’s having. And it’s 
apparently not having a great impact because people . . . It’s a 
foolish thing that we all think that somehow we can drink and 
drive, or now we can smoke and drive, or toke and drive, but 
we can’t. We shouldn’t. And we should just be able to enjoy 
ourselves but have someone else drive, have someone else take 
the wheel. And we’d all appreciate that because we just don’t 
want to have something to happen on the roads. 
 
So we note that currently it’s illegal to drive while impaired, 
and whether that’s from alcohol or from drugs, and that remains 
the same with this bill. So that’s a very important point. And so 
as we go through the bill . . . And there’s some parts I do want 
to highlight, and I know we want to get to a few things tonight, 
but this is really important. 
 
And as I was saying, this is . . . Some things are forced or 
hoisted upon you because of other governments and their 
initiatives, and of course this government has found itself 
dealing with the legalization of cannabis and the responsibility 
that comes with it in making sure our province falls in line with 
other provinces, that we’re not out of line with that, but that we 
do all that we can to make sure our province is safe. 
 
[20:15] 
 
So we go through this, and of course I talked about the short 
title, and the short title is The Miscellaneous Vehicle and 
Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, so 
obviously dealing with vehicles and driving. And then the part 2 
talks about offences related to transportation, specifically drugs. 
And it talks about the chargeable incident and what that means 
and how that is related to the Criminal Code and section 130 of 
the National Defence Act. I’m not sure what that is specifically 
but obviously that’s a very, very important part. 
 
And I want to get down to . . . And this is what is very 
important, and if anybody at home or other people who may be 
reading my speech tomorrow would like to know that what the 
definition of a drug is. And a drug . . . This is section T-18.1 
amended: 
 

The following clause is added after clause 2(1)(h): 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3409 

‘drug’ means a drug or substance that causes or could 
cause a driver to be unable to safely operate a motor 
vehicle”. 

 
So that’s the definition. And so they don’t really get too much 
further. If you’re looking for a pharmaceutical definition of a 
drug, it’s not here. In fact they’re using the word to define itself. 
A drug means a drug. I’m not sure if that’s helpful, but we’ll 
see a statute bill in a couple of years maybe with more specifics 
on that. Or a “. . . substance that causes or could cause a driver 
to be unable to safely operate a motor vehicle”. So that’s pretty 
well straightforward, so you always have to have a definition to 
start that out, and that’s very important. So that’s there. 
 
Now it does talk about repealing a section that talks about the 
approved screening device and it talks about repealing clause 
(a) and substituting the following: 
 

‘approved screening device’ means a device approved for 
analysing the presence of alcohol or drugs in a person’s 
body pursuant to paragraph 254.01(a) of the Criminal 
Code”. 

 
And so clearly they’re thinking ahead that obviously we do 
have Breathalyzers, we have interlock devices, but we don’t 
have anything that can really do that for drugs. But in 
anticipation, they are thinking that they may have something 
down the road, and that’s very important. 
 
They talk about zero-tolerance drugs, and that’s a new section 
where: 
 

A peace officer may make a demand pursuant to section 
149 if the peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe 
that a driver drove a motor vehicle having any drugs in his 
or her body. 

 
And then that’s where we go back to the definition of what’s a 
drug. You know, a drug is something that was in his or her body 
and that causes a driver to be unable to safely operate a motor 
vehicle. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say this, and this is a drafting 
point. So if the drafters are listening, and I know we have some 
very good drafters over in Justice land, but I know we’re going 
to be back here by — could be next year, could be in 10 years. 
But the language “in his or her body” and the Minister of 
Justice knows this well, it probably should have been “their” 
body, not “his or her” body, because in the world of human 
rights, we’re moving away from gender-specific language. 
 
And so, not that we’ll vote against this . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . We’d be very happy to do that in the 
committee. But I see this, and you know, maybe I’m a little 
sensitive to it, but I hear a lot about this — his or her — and 
there’s others that don’t identify, but we all identify. We all can 
say “their” and that’s fine. So a little pronoun thing. 
 
The other issue . . . So we’ll put a marker in that and we’ll come 
back to that as a House amendment or if the minister will do 
that, but I think it’s one of those things that we should be really 
sensitive now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. But 
this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sure. Yes. We can. It’s one 

of those things that I think we should be talking about. 
 
Now the other thing that, you know, it talks about the parallels, 
and this probably is not new ground. But the one that I would 
like to raise and we would raise in committee in questions and 
this is often phrased or use this phrase throughout. And I’ve 
heard now three examples of where this is not working well. If 
a driver is served with a notice of suspension and the notice of 
immobilization or impoundment pursuant to the section. But the 
keyword is around “notice of suspension.” 
 
In the past, the notice of suspension was done by registered 
mail and now we’re hearing more and more that the notice of 
suspension may come through regular mail. And I’ve heard 
now three examples where people did not get their notice of 
suspensions and actually thought they had a licence and they 
didn’t have a licence and in one case was very serious. 
 
And all the cases were very serious where they found out either 
through an accident or a police stop and they found out that 
they didn’t have a licence and they really thought in good faith 
they did have a licence. But the suspension did not come, or the 
notice did not come through registered mail. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many people in this House and you and I 
may be of that generation where we do think important things 
come through registered mail. You have to sign for it and that 
means it’s important. You know, regular delivery is not 
considered high-priority mail. And these kind of things are 
very, very important, particularly when you’re thinking of 
people who drive for a living and that type of thing. If they’re 
not getting their notices by registered mail and they, in good 
faith, thought they’d done everything that they were supposed 
to do but there’s something that’s missing and SGI or the 
courts, whoever, send their suspension or notice of suspension 
by mail, regular mail . . . 
 
And you know, I have a lot of faith in the post office but we’ve 
seen that there’s been big changes in the delivery of mail, you 
know, I think particularly in rural Saskatchewan where we’ve 
seen many rural post offices being closed down. We see in 
many parts of cities where a regular house delivery is not the 
same as it once was. And this is an issue. And this will be a big 
one. So this will be one that we’ll be talking to both ministers 
about because it’s just simply not right that when we have such 
a critically important issue that the government, whether it’s 
Justice or SGI, cannot be bothered to send their notices by 
registered mail. 
 
And so this doesn’t say how it’s going to be sent, whether that’s 
in regulations, which makes me even more nervous that this can 
be seen as a money saver. But, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking 
about impairment, when we’re talking about whether it’s 
impairment due to drugs or alcohol, I don’t think we should be 
cheaping out on the price of a stamp. We should be using 
registered mail so people get their notices and they cannot use 
the defence of, I never got the mail or, something happened to 
the mail. 
 
And I’ve heard of three specific instances in the last couple of 
months where this has happened, and one person came up and 
talked to me about it. They felt very badly about it. It was 
impairing their . . . It was something happened at work and was 



3410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

not a good situation. Fortunately their employer was 
understanding, but it has ripple effects. In fact it had a ripple 
effect in terms of the corporation because the corporation then 
had a driver, had an illegal driver. That’s not good. So it 
impacts their insurance. 
 
So all of this has a ripple effect, and just for the simple case of 
not going that extra little distance of a registered mail that 
requires a signature to acknowledge that it’s been sent. 
 
So these are the kind of things that when we go through 
legislation like this . . . And we will take some time in 
committee to make sure that we have all the t’s crossed and the 
i’s dotted and there are no unintended consequences, i.e. 
creating drivers, illegal drivers because they have not been 
given their notices appropriately in the correct or a reasonable 
fashion. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say this. The person pointed 
out to me that in Saskatchewan we are the only province that 
will send out notices by regular mail; all other provinces use 
registered mail. And so why is it that we’re the only ones that 
do that? Now so we’ll have that discussion, find out if that’s 
actually the case, and if that is the case then I don’t think that 
makes any sense at all when we’re dealing with such a serious 
problem as this. And it shows, and I don’t believe this is the 
case because I believe both with SGI and Justice they take this 
matter very seriously and it’s one that they want to get right, but 
it may indicate a bit of a lackadaisical approach to it, that you’re 
just putting it in the mail. You hope the letter even got out of 
the building, you know. Who knows where the letter went? So 
this is a very serious matter and for these three instances it was 
a big deal. 
 
So you know, I think that we’ll need to have a longer talk about 
this. We’ll need to go through some of these things. As I said, it 
seems to parallel a lot of the alcohol-related processes and that’s 
good. It’s a sense of fairness, and nobody can say, well you’re 
picking on a younger generation or something like that. There is 
concern. So we want to make sure that people are fully aware 
and there’s good education on this and media about that. 
 
We’ll wait and see how the zero tolerance, how well that stands 
up because that’s a pretty brave statement to say, and it just 
invites challenge just because of the way it’s worded. But I 
hope that we will hear about best practices and that type of 
thing. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, this is one that we’ll be watching 
with a lot of interest and I know my colleagues will have some 
comments as well. 
 
So I would move adjournment of Bill No. 112, The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle 
and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 
2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to rise this evening and get into the changes 
that are being proposed to The Planning and Development Act, 
2007. The role of The Planning and Development Act is 
something I’ve always found very fascinating, and what it 
basically deals with is the intersection between city 
municipalities and rural municipalities, by and large. 
 
And as you know, as pressures on cities to expand their 
boundaries grows, then the pressure is also on the surrounding 
rural municipalities to deal with that additional growth as well. 
And there’s a number of notable examples in the news recently: 
the problems between the city of Saskatoon and Corman Park, 
and then in Regina area, of course, is Sherwood, the RM of 
Sherwood. So these pressures are real and they’re constant, and 
particularly when we see the rate of growth that we’ve seen in 
the province in the last few years. 
 
So these kinds of administrative Acts are really, really 
important and they really inform the orderly development of 
those areas where urban butts up against rural. And obviously 
this is an Act that has been around for a long time, but the 
minister indicated in his second reading speech that there’s been 
a pressure to revisit it and make some changes in order to 
facilitate the legislative framework for development of these 
municipal communities. 
 
So what he says in his speech from December was that the “. . . 
bill will incrementally improve Saskatchewan’s land use 
planning framework and save taxpayers money.” So he 
identifies a number of the things that the bill is attempting to do. 
One of the things I find interesting is the flexibility that is now 
being provided for regional partnerships. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there are hundreds and hundreds of rural 
municipalities in Saskatchewan and some of them are small and 
some of them are big and some are close to cities and some are 
more remote. Some have lost land base; some have gained land 
base. And so every municipality is different and they’re all 
very, quite unique, actually. 
 
But when it comes to the additional demands for infrastructure 
and administration, there’s questions around the viability and 
whether or not they should be . . . there should be as many as 
there are. And you see various articles from time to time 
wondering if that is the best approach. Mutual partnerships are a 
good way to consolidate some of the needs of these RMs. 
Obviously when it’s voluntary, that requires mutual consent 
from the participating municipalities and that can prove to be 
tricky from time to time as well. 
 
[20:30] 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3411 

But I’m going to go through in quite a bit of detail the changes 
that are being proposed simply because there are so many of 
them and it’s an important bill. It’s an important Act and I think 
we need to be familiar with some of the things that are 
happening in the Act. Some of them are interesting for just 
observational reasons, and others are interesting just because 
they are enhancing or facilitating the existing structures. So I’m 
going to go through this in quite a bit of detail. 
 
The first change that we see in the bill, 113, is combining the 
definition of board of education with the conseil scolaire under 
The Education Act. And I don’t know why that was necessary 
but they’re just combining them into a new definition on the 
definitions clause in section 2. So section 2 of almost every Act 
in Saskatchewan is the definitions section and that’s something 
you’ll find repeatedly, and in this case it’s no exception. So 
that’s the main change. 
 
There’s other changes to the definition clause. In this case 
they’re creating a definition for “day” that refers to days, not 
business days. And if you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, I was just up a 
few minutes ago talking about The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
and there they were changing the definition of “day” to business 
days. So it seems to be somewhat inconsistent, and I’m not sure 
why this bill would get rid of business days and that one would 
insert business days, but it could be just different drafters 
looking at it and trying to make it more clear. And obviously 
there’s different ways to get clarity when we’re talking about 
this. But in any case, in this particular Act we are getting rid of 
the definition of business days and we’re just saying calendar 
days. So in this definition, “day” now means calendar day. So 
it’s kind of interesting. 
 
Then there’s a number of changes in this Act where they’re 
adding . . . where it says the minister responsible for the 
highways Act, for example, they’re inserting three words here 
and they’re saying the minister responsible for “the 
administration of” the highways Act, or whatever Act it is. 
Again I think the attempt here is to achieve consistency with 
other similar phrases in the Act, but I can think of a number of 
legislation bills that we look at where it just says the minister 
responsible for the ministry of. So maybe it’s fixing a problem 
within this Act, but I’m not sure that it’s consistent with other 
Acts in the lexicon of our legislative catalogue. 
 
There’s a school division, new definition. I’ve already 
mentioned that. And the reason they say that these changes are 
necessary is to ensure the conflict of interest . . . Subsection 
2(2) is being amended: 
 

by adding “District Development Appeals Board,” after 
“Development Appeals Board,”; and [to make sure 
they’re] 
 
. . . adding “a regional planning authority,” after “a 
district planning authority,”. 

 
Because those are two different things and they want to make 
sure that the conflict of interest provisions apply. 
 
And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, there have been some fairly 
high-profile actual court cases about conflict of interest for 
municipal authorities and municipal leaders. And so that’s 

received some heightened attention. And I think some of the 
efforts in this bill are being used to address that, especially 
because of the conflict of interest amendment Act, 2015. So 
there’s been a number of changes under this Act because of that 
bill three years ago that made some changes to the conflict of 
interest provisions for municipalities. 
 
Now we see a change now to section 4 . . . Sorry, section 13 is 
being changed. And here we have an addition for the minister 
may . . . The addition reads as follows, 13: 
 

“(7) The minister may, by order, amend, suspend or revoke 
any order issued pursuant to subsection (1) if the minister 
considers it appropriate to do so”. 
 

And what the explanatory notes indicate is that there are 10 
cities in Saskatchewan that have been granted approving 
authority status. And it says: 
 

From time to time, there may be situations where the 
minister must modify the terms of the order granting 
approving authority status to achieve a provincial interest. 
This amendment is necessary to clarify the minister’s 
authority to do so. 

 
So this is where we see the heavy hand of the provincial 
government now being applied to the authorities that have been 
given to district planning authorities or regional planning 
authorities. And I think you can see some of the negative effects 
of that when you look at what’s happening at the Global 
Transportation Hub Authority because that authority was 
created by statute. And we know there’s a number of serious, 
serious financial issues happening right now in terms of the 
debt that that authority is incurring and its inability to pay its 
payments. So there may be some point where the government is 
going to have to step in and make changes to the structure of 
that authority or, heaven knows, a number of the leadership 
candidates even expressed interest in getting rid of it altogether. 
 
Well they said they’d sell it, but that’s the problem, Mr. 
Speaker — they can’t sell any of the land there. That’s why 
they’re so far in debt. So it was interesting to hear leadership 
candidates say they wanted to sell the GTH when that is the 
exact problem that the GTH has, is that they can’t sell anything 
at this point in time. So it’s always interesting where this 
government is willing to step in and take authority from 
municipal bodies. And here’s another example of that being 
added here in section 13(7). 
 
The next change that we look at is a change to publication 
requirements in the Gazette. So because this is a new ministerial 
order that is possible, that those orders now have to be 
published in the Gazette as well. There’s being changes made to 
section 19 and these are fairly minor, but the idea of this clause 
is site plan control. 
 
And the explanation here is indicating that, “Currently, the 
ability to apply policies for site plan control is limited to only 
commercial and industrial developments.” So it’s now being 
amended to add institutional or mixed use developments. So 
this was a change that was requested by stakeholders and they 
wanted the ability to apply policies for site plan control to those 
other kinds of developments. So this is a specific response to 



3412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

requests from stakeholders. 
 
The next change that’s being made is the removal of the word 
“vehicular” traffic in 19(3). And the explanation here is that: 
 

All modes of transportation have the potential to impact 
safety. By removing the reference to “vehicular” [traffic], 
the amendment . . . clarifies that additional types of traffic, 
such as . . . 

 
Now I was thinking, what could be traffic other than vehicular? 
Well apparently cycling and pedestrians. So I wouldn’t have 
thought of pedestrians as traffic, but that makes absolute sense, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 23(2) is being amended and this is the section relating 
to exemptions relating to other bylaws and plans. Here we see a 
change that we see throughout this Act, where we’re 
substituting the word “minister” for the word “director.” And 
the explanation that’s provided here, whenever we changed a 
reference to file something with the minister, it’s going to now 
go to the director. It says here that: 
 

Municipal planning bylaws are processed at the branch 
level. Most municipalities send bylaws directly to the 
branch. To improve clarity and streamline submissions, the 
reference is changed so bylaws are submitted to the 
Director of Community Planning instead of the Minister of 
Government Relations. 

 
And I suppose that adds clarity. I think though, if you look at 
the delegation of authorities Act, most ministers would never 
actually see these things land on their desk anyways because 
they’ve already delegated the authority to folks like the 
directors of community planning. But anyways for clarity, the 
powers that be have determined that we need to make those 
changes. So you see the substitution in section 23(2). We also 
see the same substitution here in subsection 24(6) under the 
public notice policy. 
 
And then the next changes that we see are in section 30. So 
section 30’s purpose is the requirement of an official 
community plan. This has gained popularity in the last 20 years, 
the idea that communities can draft official community plans. 
 
I was involved with a number of them back in the days when I 
was working with the federal government and the First Nations 
where they too were also having official community plans 
drafted. And I felt that the expectations and aspirations that 
communities developed as they went through the OCP process, 
the official community plan process, really kind of set them up 
with expectations that couldn’t be met. And there was a lot of 
disappointment in these official community plans because the 
communities had great desires for cultural spaces and 
recreational spaces and more liveable spaces, but of course 
those cost a lot of money. And I’m afraid to say that I think a 
lot of OCPs just end up on the shelf, because the vision and the 
aspirational aspects of it are often prohibited simply because 
there’s no money available to make those wonderful plans a 
reality. 
 
So I’m not sure exactly, and I don’t have the entire Act in front 
of me right now, but I don’t know if official community plans 

are an absolute requirement on the part of municipalities or if 
they’re still voluntary on the part of the municipalities. But 
section 30 seems to suggest that there could be a requirement by 
the minister for an official community plan. And the reason 
when the minister can do this is when there’s a provincial 
land-use policy or a statement of provincial interest. And this is 
where again the province can override the municipal interests 
and the minister can actually order the council to prepare an 
official community plan within two years. 
 
And what’s being changed here, and I think this was a bit 
punitive, it had to be done within two years. They’re now 
amending that section to say, “. . . or any other period the 
minister may require as set out in the direction.” So I think two 
years is not a long time for a community to prepare an official 
community plan, particularly if you are consulting properly and 
reaching out to all the stakeholders and ensuring that they’re 
properly engaged. So in this case it looks like the amendment is 
providing some flexibility, and I’m assuming it would be to go 
beyond the two-year period that’s already stipulated in the 
current legislation. 
 
The second part of this is the same thing. The minister can order 
an amendment to an official community plan, and there’s a 
six-month requirement for adopting that amendment. As soon 
as the minister says so, the municipality has to act within six 
months. This too is also now being amended to allow for some 
flexibility where the minister can extend the period if desired, 
I’m assuming if the municipality cannot comply with the 
six-month time period. 
 
The next section that’s being amended is the contents of the 
community plan, and there’s a new clause here. And I think this 
is probably the most substantive change in this bill, is the new 
clause which requires municipal reserves for school purposes. 
And I think, if I think of the school that my kids went to in 
Saskatoon, Victoria School, the green space requirements for 
that particular school don’t meet the requirements of the city, 
but it was the only space that actually had, not enough green 
space, but some green space to meet the city’s community plan. 
 
And so this part of the legislation I believe is being amended to 
ensure that school purposes are fully included in the municipal 
planning process. And if you look at the explanatory notes here, 
it says: “The province recognizes the need for municipalities, 
school divisions and the Ministry of Education to jointly plan 
for school purposes.” So I think there’s a recognition that those 
three players are incredibly important to the proper planning of 
school locations and school spaces. 
 
So there’s a new clause that’s requiring that the municipalities 
have to adopt policies in its community plan that ensure the 
creation of municipal reserve sites that are large enough to be 
used for schools and actually identify the location of those sites 
and provide for the fair treatment of all subdivision applicants 
and land developers within a region through the land dedication 
process. 
 
[20:45] 
 
And we were talking about dinosaurs earlier tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’ve done a lot of work looking at the original 
township plans of the province of Saskatchewan and there was 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3413 

always school lands that were set out in the . . . Every township 
that was created, there was one and three-quarters of a section 
that were identified as school lands. And those were to ensure 
that every township in Saskatchewan either had a school built 
or that the school boards had land to sell so that they could 
build schools. 
 
So you think of the Harwood School for example. It was on my 
grandfather’s home quarter, my parents’ . . . well, where I grew 
up. So that was the school lands and that’s where they built the 
school so that all the neighbouring kids could go to the school. 
So school lands have always been an important consideration 
for municipalities, and this is no difference here where I think 
there’s been a recognition that land developers, municipal 
planners, need to take into account future schools. And this is 
an important consideration. 
 
Now there’s also changes about safety. And in this case clause 
32(2)(k) . . . I want to make sure if that’s a new one, 32(2)(k). 
It’s a new clause; that’s correct. And it’s about “. . . 
management of lands that are in proximity to existing or 
proposed railway operations.” So we know how dangerous 
railways can be and, if you’re anywhere near schools, that there 
has to be a lot of thought put into that. And also just generally. 
So these require official community plans, not only to take into 
account enough land for schools but also the location and 
policies regarding development in proximity to railway 
operations, either existing or proposed. 
 
Now of course we don’t know how many new railways are 
coming in, but there haven’t been a lot of new railways in the 
last several decades. So I think that’s part of the new 
requirements. 
 
Yes, we’ve already talked about 32(4) a little bit. 
 
So in 32(2) we see the provision of municipal reserve for school 
purposes. 32(3) talks about the policies that are going to be 
developed in that area, have to be developed with the Minister 
of Education and the school division as well, and any 
municipality that could be affected. So again, this is 
municipalities touching municipalities, so it takes into account 
the interjurisdictional requirements. 
 
We see a few changes to section 32.1. These are minor and I’ve 
talked about the similar ones before. 
 
Again in section 49, the contents of a zoning bylaw, this is 
again talking about railways. And there has to be provisions in 
zoning bylaws now for regulating development and proximity 
to railway operations. So same idea. If you’re doing official 
community plans or zoning bylaws, you have to take into 
account safety provisions for railways. 
 
So a few changes to 51(5), again they’re minor changes and 
again this is where business days are being removed from the 
Act instead of added. So it’s contrary to, I think it was . . . yes, 
Bill 109 where the drafters have done the exact opposite. 
 
Section 83, there’s a new section being added there and this is a 
change that says, “The minister may, by order, amend, suspend 
or revoke any waiver given by the minister pursuant to 
subsection (1) if the minister considers it appropriate to do so.” 

And the explanation for this is that this is the waiver of 
ministerial approval clause, and the explanation is that: 
 

. . . the Ministry of Government Relations keeps a record 
of amendments to urban municipalities’ zoning bylaws. To 
improve clarity and streamline submissions, the reference 
is changed so bylaws are [now being] submitted to the 
Director . . . instead of the Minister . . . 
 
[And then] All urban municipalities in Saskatchewan have 
been granted the authority to amend their zoning bylaw 
without requiring approval from the minister. In the event 
there is a situation where the minister must consider 
modifying this waiver to achieve a provincial interest, the 
addition of subsection 78(5) is necessary to clarify the 
minister’s authority to do so. 

 
And I think this example of provincial interest was used again 
in the establishment of the Global Transportation Hub 
Authority where the province stepped in and said we need to 
remove this land from the city . . . Well first of all they added to 
the city of Regina; then they now took it out through the 
creation of the authority, where that land would normally be 
under the community plan and zoning bylaws of the city of 
Regina. So this was the superimposition of a third layer, I 
guess, within the municipal world of the provincial interest. 
Again it’s a hammer that the government has that they 
obviously have desire to use, so we’ll see how it will be used in 
the future. 
 
Minor change to section 83, 96, just a change from “pecuniary 
interest” to “conflict of interest or financial interest.” These 
changes occur throughout as well, and it’s basically to ensure 
consistency with The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment 
Act, 2015. 
 
Section 97 is being adjusted slightly and this is the agreement 
for establishment of a planning district. So previously when a 
city or an RM wanted to establish a planning district, it’s now 
being expanded to any municipality. So that’s one of the 
changes that’s being made there. It’s also allowing 
municipalities to establish as a district planning authority 
without first having to be a district planning commission. Now 
the explanatory notes here are saying this is to improve the 
flexibility of the legislation. So it’s giving a little more leeway 
for municipalities to organize themselves. 
 
Section 101 has the “pecuniary” word being removed and 
substituted to match The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act. Section 102 has the removal of the word 
“business” and it’s just “days” now, and expanded from 10 
business days to 15 days. So I don’t know what additional 
clarity that’s adding, but it’s I guess providing consistency 
throughout the Act. 
 
Section 103 is being amended. This is the zoning bylaw 
provision, and here it just allows the members of a planning 
district to amend an existing bylaw as long as it’s consistent 
with the district plan. 
 
Section 108 is also being amended here, some minor changes. 
Again it’s to allow for that flexibility that I just mentioned 
where they don’t have to first establish themselves as a district 



3414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

planning commission before they can become a district 
planning authority. And the note here says, “This will improve 
the flexibility of the legislation for municipalities who wish to 
plan regionally.” So again it’s providing some flexibility for 
those groups that decide that they want to work together. And 
doing it voluntarily is a good move, and I think it will allow 
municipalities the opportunity to consider how they could work 
better together. 
 
The powers of district planning authorities in section 109 is 
being repealed completely and really it’s being rewritten. Is that 
right, rewritten? I’m getting tired, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
that’s the right word. What the explanatory notes say here . . . 
This is a fairly large section. It says it’s going to be “. . . easier 
for municipalities to utilize the DPA tool,” which is this concept 
of a district planning authority. They go on to say that: 
 

A district planning authority is a corporate body for 
municipalities to address regional issues. Throughout 
consultation, a number of stakeholders requested that the 
ministry improve the clarity and flexibility of the section. 

 
So here’s some of the things that the change — repeal and 
replacement of this section — will do. First of all it improves 
clarity on the roles and responsibilities of the DPA [district 
planning authority] and allow member municipalities of DPA to 
delegate powers one by one. It allows these tools to be 
customized for each situation and improve the efficiency and 
potential use of the section. It will allow . . . It’s cleaning up 
section 109(4), which was a duplicate. 
 
Also it establishes a district development appeals board process 
to provide appeal oversight to any appeal-eligible decisions 
made by the DPA. Currently this would go to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board, but it sounds like there would be a local-level 
appeal first before going to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
I don’t know whether that is at the request of these 
municipalities or if it was just seen as a way to not clog up the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And again I have no idea how 
many of these disputes are being heard. 
 
The conflict of interest clause in section 112, and this is in 
relation to northern planning commissions, is just being 
changed to clean it up and ensure consistency with The 
Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act. 
 
Section 119.1(3), I referred to this earlier, but it currently says 
that a regional planning area can only be a city or an adjacent 
RM or municipal district. And of course that requires that there 
actually be a city in this regional planning authority. What 
they’re saying now is that, during consultation, a number of 
municipal stakeholders expressed their desire to use the tool but 
they weren’t urban municipalities or cities. So this expands the 
scope and provides flexibility for any municipalities to be 
included in a regional planning authority. 
 
Section 119.6 is also being repealed and replaced and this is the 
regional planning authority tool, the duties of a regional 
planning authority. So a number of significant changes that are 
being made there: improving clarity, improving efficiency, and 
again creating a District Development Appeals Board if the 
minister chooses to do so, because currently they’re all being 
sent to the Municipal Board, Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 

A small change in 119.7. 
 
Section 120 talks about, as a new clause, encroachment 
agreement. This is a bit cloudy for me but it says: 
 

A definition of “encroachment agreement” is needed to 
clarify when subdivision approval . . . [could] be exempt 
by the approving authority in order to implement existing 
clause 122(1)(h) that allows for an exemption from 
subdivision approval when there is an encroachment 
agreement. 

 
I’m not quite sure exactly what that means, but it’s attempting 
to ensure clarity from minor encroachments. And I know that 
when you look at property law, encroachments are probably one 
of the largest sources of dispute between neighbours, is 
encroachment. So hopefully that will help some of those 
disputes as well. 
 
A few changes to exemptions from approval and the criteria for 
approval, minor changes. There’s development standards on 
hazardous lands and there’s a notification process for that. 
Development levy bylaws, there’s a new subdivision where 
development levies must not be used as a substitute for 
servicing agreement fees. So I think that provides some more 
clarity there as well. Some changes to the use of levies and fees 
clause. Some changes to exempts from dedication. 
 
And there’s a new clause 195 for municipal reserves and public 
reserves that again talks about the need for clarification of the 
roles and responsibilities of school divisions, municipalities, 
and the Ministry of Education respecting the joint use and 
maintenance of dedicated lands. So that provides more clarity 
there. 
 
A few changes, minor changes to section 202, 213, some clarity 
added there. And then there’s a new clause for the appointment 
of the board, and that is section 214(4), and it talks there about 
the District Development Appeals Board. So it clarifies 
procedures for the establishment of that. 
 
Minor changes to 215, 218. And the application for appeal is 
going up. The cost of the application is going up from $50 to 
$300, and I have to say, Mr. Speaker, this is a pattern that we 
see in this government where fees and levies and licences are 
going up all the time. So hopefully that will help with the 
bottom line for the budget. Minor changes to 225, 226, 227. 
And then the rights of appeal are . . . There’s a minor change to 
clause 228. 
 
[21:00] 
 
So as you can see, there’s been a lot of work done on this. And 
thank you, Mr. Speaker, for staying with me for this whole little 
half-hour that I’ve been working on it. I appreciate your focus 
and your obvious interest in the discussion. And I think at this 
point, I know other of my colleagues are going to want to have 
an opportunity to weigh in on this. And certainly the current 
colleagues I’m sure are riveted and just ready to get into this 
bill as well. But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’ve exhausted my 
comments on Bill 113, An Act to amend The Planning and 
Development Act, 2007, and I would like to adjourn the debate. 
 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3415 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:01.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3399 
 Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3400 
 Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3401 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3403 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3405 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


