


















































March 20, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3503 
 March 20, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, I have the 
honour of introducing three important guests who have joined 
us in the legislature today. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
introduce, and if you could just give us a wave: the president of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, Ryan Labatt; 
treasurer and council member, Carole Bryant; and executive 
director, Karen Wasylenka. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are joining us here during Social Work Week 
in Saskatchewan. This special week is proclaimed each year to 
draw attention to the important role that social workers play in 
bringing change to people, families, and our communities. This 
week also gives us a wonderful opportunity to let Saskatchewan 
Association of Social Workers know how much we value the 
relationship that we have forged with their organization and 
their members. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers was 
established over 50 years ago, and in that time membership in 
the regulatory and professional organization has grown from 
100 to over 1,800 today. We are grateful that this organization, 
for the role that they play in upholding the aims and objectives 
of the professional social workers. Mr. Speaker, I would like all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister across and welcome our special guests to the 
Assembly today, Ryan Labatt and Carole Bryant and Karen 
Wasylenka. I’m sorry if I tortured that last name, Karen. But I 
know my colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, and I 
met with Ryan and Karen last year and talked about the 
importance of the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers 
and their role within the province in advocating for individuals 
in our province that might not have as strong a voice to 
advocate for themselves. 
 
So the members on the opposition here, we want to thank you 
for the hard work that you do for working with all the registered 
social workers within the province, advocating for more 
registered social workers. We just heard from the minister how 
the association has grown through the years, which is 
wonderful. And I was proud to do a member’s statement 
yesterday, talking about the good work that the Saskatchewan 
Association of Social Workers does for the province. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we want to welcome you 
to your legislature. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — With leave for extended introduction of 
guests, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 
for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Merci, Mr. Speaker. In the 
west gallery to you and through you, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce several groups of francophone students — one from 
École Monseigneur de Laval here in Regina. These students are 
the future of our Fransaskois community. 
 
Also joining us today in the Speaker’s gallery along with other 
members of the francophone community is Roger Gauthier. Mr. 
Gauthier is the president of the assembly of the Fransaskois 
organization. He works with our government to promote and 
strengthen our Fransaskois community. 
 
Would all our honoured guests please stand. I’d like to 
recognize you in the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. Thank 
you, Roger. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to officially proclaim March 1st to 21 as 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2018 in Saskatchewan. 
Rendez-vous is held annually throughout Canada in March to 
promote the French language and francophone culture. And it 
also coincides with the International Day of La Francophonie 
on March 20th. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we acknowledge the many contributions 
the Fransaskois have made to our province, both culturally and 
economically. I encourage all citizens, no matter their language 
or their culture, to join us in celebrating La Francophonie in 
Saskatchewan. Merci. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — I ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
member opposite in welcoming the members of the 
francophone community to their House today. With your 
permission, I’ll switch to French for a few moments. 
 
J’aimerais vraiment présenter, à vous et par vous, les jeunes qui 
sont ici avec nous de l’École Monseigneur de Laval. Et j’étais 
vraiment content d’être avec eux dehors pour la levée du 
drapeau fransaskois. Et je veux aussi présenter et accueillir les 



3504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

gens de l’ACF [l’Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise], 
incluant le nouveau président. Félicitations à monsieur Gauthier 
pour son élection. Et aussi un mot à monsieur Étienne Fletcher, 
le musicien qui nous a parlé en bas — un vraiment bon 
musicien et un fier fransaskois. Et je suis très content de vous 
voir tous ici pour la Journée internationale de la Francophonie. 
Bienvenue. 
 
[Translation: I would really like to introduce, to you and 
through you, the young people who are here with us from 
Monseigneur de Laval School. And I was really happy to be 
with them outside for the raising of the Fransaskois flag. And I 
also want to introduce and welcome the folks from the ACF, 
including the new president. Congratulations to Mr. Gauthier on 
his election. And also a word to Mr. Étienne Fletcher, the 
musician who spoke to us down below — a truly fine musician 
and a proud Fransaskois. And I am very happy to see you all 
here for International Francophonie Day. Welcome.] 
 
I’d also like to extend a welcome to folks sitting in the gallery 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. These are medical students who are here 
for their lobby day, their annual lobby day. And it’s always 
good to have friends from my alma mater, from the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
We had a group today. We had Olivia Friesen who did a great 
job organizing today’s lobby day. And beside her is Alison 
White, who you may have heard on the radio today. She’s a 
great spokesperson for the group. It may make sense that she’s 
so good on the radio, as her mother is Sheila Coles, our recently 
retired beloved host of The Morning Edition. We’re also joined 
by Samuel Simonson, Stephanie Beckett, Shyane Wieges, 
Kieran Johnson, Katherine Ludlow, Ashley Tshala, Conley 
Krieger — I had the pleasure of training with Ashley’s Mom, 
who’s Dr. Tshiyombo in Saskatoon — Sarah Neuberger, and 
Eric Yip-Lang, and Alexe Dick, who is a volunteer and worked 
at the SWITCH [student wellness initiative toward community 
health] student-run clinic. 
 
They brought today their concerns around mental health — 
around the waiting lists that are faced, the needs for an 
upstream approach to make sure that young people have early 
interventions, early support in their mental health needs. And 
we’re very pleased to have them join us with their concerns for 
today’s lobby day. My thanks to them for coming, and welcome 
to your legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, we would just like to welcome 
members of the French community. 
 
Nous voudrons souhaiter un bienvenue au membres du conseil 
fransaskois et de la communauté, et naturellement aussi aux 
etudiants de Monseigneur de Laval. Nous sommes très, très 
contents que vous étiez tous ici, et encore un grand bienvenue. 
 
[Translation: We would like to welcome the members of the 
conseil fransaskois and the community, and naturally to the 
students from Monseigneur de Laval. We are very, very happy 
that you could all be here, and again, a big welcome.] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I would like to join with the 
Leader of the Opposition in welcoming the students that are 
here from the Student Medical Society of Saskatchewan, the 
student representative body for the College of Medicine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the opportunity, along with the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health, and the Deputy Premier 
who is the Minister of Education, to meet with three of the 
students. I understand there’s 13, I believe, that have met with 
members on both sides of the House today. We had an 
opportunity to meet with Alison White, Alan Chan, and Olivia 
Friesen. We had a great conversation about the importance of 
mental health. I especially appreciated the fact that they weren’t 
just suggesting more funding, but they were suggesting where 
that funding could be targeted to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank them for their advocacy and the 
good work, and I want to wish them well in their studies and 
look forward to them all practising medicine in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to please give these students a warm welcome to their 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Minister of Health and the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming these medical students today from the 
Student Medical Society of Saskatchewan. We always 
appreciate their efforts and the work that they bring on their 
annual lobby. It’s always incredibly informative and we’re 
happy to amplify their voices. They always have very 
well-researched positions and reasons why they are bringing to 
the table what they are. 
 
Mental health is, I know, near and dear to many of us, and our 
caucus was extra appreciative of the focus on mental health. 
The focus on school-based programs for intervention, 
education, were really important. But the thing that I was 
especially appreciative about their presentation is they talked 
about the early intervention but then connecting students to 
necessary services and support and treatment. And as they 
pointed out in our meetings this morning, that that requires 
resources. You have to know where the resources need to go 
and then you actually have to put the resources in place. And I 
think that that message was not lost on us, and I hope that that 
message was not lost on government members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with that, I’d like to ask all my colleagues on both sides of 
the House to join again and welcome these young leaders to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — With leave for an extended introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 
leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3505 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce, in your gallery, a group of very dedicated volunteers, 
the Ministry of Agriculture’s crop reporters. From seeding to 
harvest, a network of crop reporters provides valuable 
information that many people and institutions rely on, both 
locally and internationally. Having accurate and timely crop 
reports available each week allows international traders to better 
predict market trends. 
 
Local producers are able to plan and evaluate each crop season 
to make the best business decisions. These decisions are crucial 
to strengthening our economy in Saskatchewan. This 
information is collected each week by a small army of dedicated 
volunteers. Each year, we celebrate those volunteers who have 
offered their time for 25, 35, and 40 years. By my calculations, 
the group we are honouring today has collectively contributed 
to a remarkable 9,000 crop reports. 
 
I want to recognize and thank each of the volunteer crop 
reporters here today. As I announce their names, I ask that each 
crop reporter and spouse stand to be recognized by the 
legislature. 
 
And for 25 years of experience we have Wayne Olson of the 
RM [rural municipality] of Lakeside; Diane and Marcel Perrin 
of the RM of Duck Lake; Aaron Koob of the RM of Viscount, 
who was not able to attend today. 
 
For 35 years of service we have Keith Stacy of the RM of 
Moose Range; Murray Janis of the RM of Glen Bain and not 
able to attend today; Lawrence Beckie of the RM of McCraney, 
who was not able to attend today. 
 
For 40 years of service we recognize Glen and Liz MacKenzie 
of the RM of Pinto Creek; Dave and Irene Ehman of the RM of 
Craik; Cecil and Mary Reimer of the RM of Barrier Valley. 
Thank you, and you may be seated. 
 
Thank you, everyone. We really do appreciate what you do. 
Your dedication and volunteerism are examples of what makes 
Saskatchewan such a great place to live, and you make an 
incredible contribution to the agricultural economy in our 
province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming these guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. I can scarcely think of two more Saskatchewan 
endeavours than talking about and checking in on the weather 
and volunteering, and to have been doing that for 25 to 40 years 
really is quite an accomplishment. We all here in this Assembly 
thank you for that. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, just because this work is not paid, certainly it 

doesn’t speak to the value of your contributions. As the minister 
said, this is information that is not only valuable to producers in 
your local area and across the province, certainly it impacts 
information right around the world. So due to that importance 
and the longevity of your service, I would invite all members to 
welcome these guests to their Legislative Assembly and thank 
them for their service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to welcome 41 of 
our best and brightest grade 8 students from Brunskill School in 
Saskatoon University. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Michael Kurpjuweit and Cory Farthing, and educational 
assistant, Bernie Sylvestri. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period this 
afternoon and answering all their questions and letting them 
know a little bit about what we do in this place. I know we’re 
going to have a very robust discussion this afternoon, but it will 
be respectful. So I’d ask everybody to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. No? 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No? All right. Don’t fake me 
out. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
people of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on this 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Claydon, 
Swift Current, and Frontier, Saskatchewan. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the 
underfunding and the cuts to post-secondary education. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Moose 
Jaw. I so submit. 
 



3506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to the following: to the fact that last year’s budget 
saw an additional $67 million in education property tax go into 
the General Revenue Fund, but also saw $54 million cut from 
our classrooms. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, these cuts have had a devastating 
impact on supports and services to children around the 
province, including supports that help deal with mental health 
issues in our classroom. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and to stop 
making families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
educational system pay the price for this government’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Melfort and in Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people that signed this petition want to bring to your 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even those 
living outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties; and that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. And we know, 
Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party 
has received $12.61 million in corporate donations, and of that, 
$2.87 million comes from companies based outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people. And the federal government 
and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, 
and now British Columbia have moved to limit this influence 
and level the playing field by banning corporate and union 
donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign 
finance laws, to end out-of-province donations, to put a 
ban on donations from corporations and unions, and to put 
a donation limit on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

once again to present a petition calling on the Sask Party to 
appoint a seniors’ advocate. Those who have signed the petition 
point out that the concerns of Saskatchewan seniors have not 
been a priority of the Sask Party government. They point out 
that there’s been many cuts that this government has been 
implemented, like the hearing aid plan, podiatry services, STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], increasing long-term 
care fees — many, many things, Mr. Speaker, that have made 
life unaffordable and more difficult for seniors. 
 
The petitioners point out that Saskatchewan doesn’t have 
legislated minimum care standards for long-term care, and even 
with continued reports — one just a month ago — and concerns 
from families on the issues in long-term care, the Sask Party 
government has failed to ensure safety, quality of life, and 
dignity for seniors. They point out that several provinces have 
seniors’ advocates who successfully work to ensure seniors 
have the supports they need and deserve. And they point out 
that a seniors’ advocate would provide vital support for seniors 
and their families across the province. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately appoint a 
seniors’ advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld 
and that all seniors across the province have the supports 
they need and deserve. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 

Reconciliation Regina Event 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I had the 
privilege to attend the announcement of Reconciliation Regina. 
The event was held this morning at mâmawêyatitân centre at 
Scott Collegiate. 
 
It began with a pipe ceremony and a prayer from Elder Noel 
Starblanket. There were also comments from the mayor of 
Regina, Michael Fougere, and Ms. Mary Culbertson, the 
Saskatchewan Treaty Commissioner. It was a great event, and 
we would like to thank the city of Regina for their work on 
reconciliation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the importance of 
reconciliation, and that is why we are committed to continue 
our work on the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] 
calls to action. We have already acted on 26 of the 34 calls to 
action directed at the provinces, and we continue work on 
additional calls to action that are directed specifically to the 
province. But we know there is more work to do. 
 
There are challenges Mr. Speaker, no doubt. We know that the 
wrongs of the past will not be resolved overnight. However, 
events like this highlight how important reconciliation is to all 
the people who call Saskatchewan home, and what can be 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3507 

achieved on the journey when we work together. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Fransaskois Community Celebrates la Francophonie 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Le lundi 5 mars, 
avec le député Kevin Waugh et Élise Proulx-Cullen, députée de 
Saskatoon à l’ACF, j’ai eu l’honneur de lever le drapeau 
fransaskois au coup d’envoi inaugural du 20e Rendez-vous de 
la Francophonie. 
 
Chaque année, le drapeau est élevé à Saskatoon à l’École 
canadienne-française où tous les élèves de la 1re à la 12e année 
se réunissent pour chanter “O Canada” dans la langue officielle 
du français et célébrer le drapeau officiel de la communauté 
fransaskoise. 
 
Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie sont une série 
d’évènements au Canada qui donnent l’occasion à tous les 
Canadiens de se joindre à la célébration des cultures et des 
patrimoines francophones et acadiens, et de défendre la dualité 
linguistique du Canada. Les RVF [Rendez-vous de la 
Francophonie] donnent à tous l’occasion de participer à une 
célébration mondiale encore plus grande — la Journée 
internationale de la Francophonie, qui est aujourd’hui, le 20 
mars. 
 
J’invite tous les membres à prendre part aux activités de 
Rendez-vous dans leurs communautés et à se joindre à nos 
communautés fransaskoises pour célébrer leur culture 
dynamique. Et si vous le faites, remercier les nombreux 
bénévoles qui contribuent à faire de ces événements une réalité. 
Merci, monsieur le Président. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, March 5th, 
with Member of Parliament Kevin Waugh and Élyse 
Proulx-Cullen, Saskatoon representative with the ACF, I had 
the honour of raising the Fransaskois flag at the kickoff of the 
20th Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. Each year, the flag is 
raised in Saskatoon at l’École canadienne-française, where all 
students from grades 1 to 12 gather to sing “O Canada” in the 
official language of French and to celebrate the official flag of 
the Fransaskois community. 
 
The Rendez-vous de la Francophonie are a series of events in 
Canada that provide the opportunity for all Canadians to join in 
the celebration of francophone and Acadian culture and 
heritage, and to defend linguistic duality in Canada. The RVFs 
give everyone the opportunity to participate in an even bigger 
worldwide celebration — the International Day of La 
Francophonie, which is today, March 20th. 
 
I invite all members to take part in the Rendez-vous activities in 
their communities and to join with our Fransaskois community 
to celebrate their dynamic culture. And if you do, thank the 
many volunteers who contribute to making these events a 
reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 

Social Work Week Proclaimed in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House to recognize that March 18th to the 24th has been 
proclaimed Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. Social Work 
Week is our chance to take the time to appreciate all that the 
social workers do for the people across Saskatchewan. This 
year’s theme is Bringing Change to Life. 
 
Every day across our province, social workers support 
individuals, families, and communities to seek and experience 
positive change. Social workers can be found applying their 
professional skill sets across all of Saskatchewan, from public 
and private practice through community-based organizations, as 
educators, innovators, researchers, and across government in all 
human service sectors. It’s also our opportunity to recognize the 
value of social work as a profession and the work that the 
Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers does as the 
regulatory and professional organization for social workers. 
 
Since its inception in 1962, the association has grown to more 
than 1,800 registered members. The association has many 
events and activities planned at a number of communities 
throughout the week, including in my hometown of Swift 
Current where I believe they had an event earlier this month, 
and I’m sure all of these will be a resounding success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask that all members join me in 
recognizing and thanking social workers for the important work 
they do for all people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Champions for Mental Health Message 
Brought to Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, mental health care is 
health care, period. Unfortunately, far too many Saskatchewan 
people are forced to suffer in silence without access to the 
mental health and addictions care they need. We must do so 
much better as a province. 
 
On March 17th I had the honour to bring greetings on behalf of 
the official opposition at the Champions for Mental Health 
dinner organized by the Schizophrenia Society of 
Saskatchewan. The members from Wascana Plains, Walsh 
Acres, and University also attended. The event’s keynote was 
Michael Landsberg. 
 
Canadians know Michael Landsberg best as the brash, 
quick-witted sports journalist on TSN [The Sports Network] 
who enjoyed an 18-year run with his show, Off the Record. 
Today Landsberg is still talking sports, but he dedicates much 
of his time to sharing his story of his ongoing battle with 
depression, encouraging people to talk about mental health and 
courageously reminding all that those that are suffering are sick, 
not weak. He did so last week in The Battlefords, in 
Fond-du-Lac, Cigar Lake, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to thank Michael Landsberg, the 
Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan and its leadership, 
president Bruce McKee and executive director Dr. Jamie Eng, 



3508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

and all those across Saskatchewan working to address the 
stigma and importantly working to extend services, supports, 
hope, and care each and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Athletes Inducted Into the Conexus Warriors and Legends 

Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
three exceptional individuals who were inducted into the 
Conexus Warriors and Legends Hall of Fame last month in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Goaltender Jason Fitzsimmons and forward Rob Reimer were 
inducted into the Hall of Fame, along with Toby Tobias, who 
was recognized in the Builders category. 
 
Jason Fitzsimmons spent three years in the net for the Moose 
Jaw Warriors playing 132 games. He is fourth in all-time games 
played by a Warrior goaltender and his 54 . . . fifth in franchise 
history. Jason now works as a pro scout and is involved with the 
major league operations of the Washington Capitals. 
 
And from Neville, Saskatchewan, Rob Reimer played in 250 
games for the Moose Jaw Warriors from 1987 to 1991. By the 
end of his career with the Warriors, he had 107 goals, 138 
assists for 245 points. Reimer is currently tied for fifth in 
all-time scoring for the Moose Jaw Warriors. 
 
And gentleman Toby Tobias, who served as president for the 
Moose Jaw Warriors board of directors in 1991 — he played a 
major role in building the foundation for this team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Jason Fitzsimmons, Rob Reimer, and Toby Tobias on their 
induction into the Conexus Warriors and Legends Hall of Fame. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Remembering Wendy Dammann, First Female Sheriff 
in Canada 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise in the House to acknowledge the life of an 
exceptional member of my constituency, Wendy Dammann. 
 
Wendy was born in Weyburn in 1948 and grew up in the 
surrounding area. She attended high school in Stoughton and 
after graduating, became a stenographer, taking a position with 
the Saskatchewan government medical records division in 
Regina. 
 
[14:00] 
 
But a career as a stenographer was to be short-lived. In 1969 
Wendy relocated to Weyburn and accepted a position at the 
Weyburn Court House as deputy sheriff and local registrar, and 
nine years later she was promoted to sheriff. Mr. Speaker, this 
promotion was significant because it made Wendy the first 
female sheriff in all of Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, Wendy was recognized in our community with a 
number of awards including Quota International’s Excellence in 
the Workplace and being named the Woman of the Year in 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she remained the sheriff until 2002 when she 
retired. And in typical Wendy fashion, she timed her retirement 
to begin at 12 noon on her last day — high noon. Mr. Speaker, 
Wendy was also a staple in the community throughout her 
career. She lost her battle with cancer last month, and I know 
that she will be missed by many. 
 
And so I want to acknowledge Wendy. But I also want to 
acknowledge the provincial Protocol Office, Central Services, 
and the Chief Justice for agreeing to lower the flags at the 
Weyburn Court House in her honour. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask 
everyone in the Assembly to join with me in acknowledging 
Wendy’s significant achievements and sending the best to her 
family in this difficult time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ministry of Highways Partners with Rural Municipality 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week an 
agreement was signed between the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure and the RM of Barrier Valley to form a 
partnership to upgrade the McKague access road. 
 
The agreement was signed as part of a recent initiative the 
Ministry has undertaken to join with RMs to develop 
partnerships and improve low-traffic rural highways. The 
objective is to work with the communities to provide residents 
with sustainable access to their communities using a 
combination of provincial highways and municipal roads to 
handle truck traffic in particular, to better facilitate the efficient 
movement of Saskatchewan goods and services. 
 
By forming this partnership, the RM can contribute in-kind 
contributions such as gravel, base materials, ditch mowing, or 
winter maintenance, and this has allowed the government to 
improve more kilometres of road. Each partnership is 
customized to fit each RM’s unique abilities and needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agreement with the RM of Barrier Valley 
marks the second recent agreement signed. The ministry has 
also agreed to a partnership with the RM of Reciprocity to 
improve Highways 361 and 318. Agreements regarding the 
Frenchman Butte access, Tantallon access, and Highways 18 
and 28 are also being discussed. 
 
This government has found an innovative way to make 
important repairs. We remain committed to working with local 
RMs and investing in rural Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before we go to question period, I also want 
to take the opportunity to introduce Ryan Labatt in the 
Speaker’s gallery. And Ryan and I worked many, many years 
together in the social services. Great to have you here, sir, to 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3509 

your legislature. 
 
Also would like to remind members . . . and also like to 
welcome the school group. Looking forward to debate as much 
as I’m sure they are. So let’s see where this goes today, all 
right? Best behaviour. All the best. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Services for HIV Patients 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, in December federal funding for 
HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome] outreach and support work was 
cut to Saskatchewan front-line service providers by almost 
$700,000 and with very little explanation. And as a result, this 
month we will see the closure of the Scattered Site facility in La 
Ronge, one of the only centres in the North where any 
harm-reduction supports are available and, in this case, 
delivered by an HIV-positive peer support worker. 
 
We’re facing an HIV epidemic that neither our federal nor our 
provincial government is taking seriously and, as a result, 
people in the North are losing access to the services and 
supports they need to survive. 
 
What is this government doing, Mr. Speaker, to advocate for 
northern HIV services? And what has the Premier done to fight 
for restoration of federal funding to HIV service organizations 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ve just been informed by the Minister of Health that he 
has wrote a letter to the federal minister. This was a federal cut 
to HIV funding here in the province of Saskatchewan. He’s 
asked him to reconsider, Mr. Speaker. I’ll let him speak as to 
whether or not he has heard a response to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition is correct because we need to 
continue to invest in all health care services, Mr. Speaker, and 
access to our health care services here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and access to those treatments, Mr. Speaker. And 
HIV investment has been strong in the province of 
Saskatchewan by the Government of Saskatchewan on behalf of 
those people, Mr. Speaker, totalling about $4 million annually. 
And now, Mr. Speaker, this funding has significantly improved 
our response in this province to HIV, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s much more to do, Mr. Speaker, and we need to 
continue to work with our federal government and our partners 
across the province to ensure that we can continue to supply the 
services that people expect of their provincial government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we have medical students here with 
us again today. They were here a year ago, and their ask at that 
time was that the government extend full coverage of 
antiretroviral medications for all people living with HIV in 

Saskatchewan. That antiretroviral treatment has been proven to 
not only improve the lives of the patients who take it but also 
prevent transmission to other potential patients. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan saw 170 new cases of HIV, by far the 
highest rate in the entire country, and each new case will cost 
our province $1.3 million. It would cost, on the other hand, only 
$500,000 per year to expand antiretroviral coverage to all 
patients who need it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a year and there has been no action 
on this. Will this government commit to, in this year’s budget, 
funding antiretrovirals so no one who needs those medications 
goes without? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we will find out the answer to 
that question specifically on April the 10th when we release this 
year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. But it is important to note that over 
90 per cent of HIV drugs here in the province of Saskatchewan 
are covered by the government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve invested $8.7 million, Mr. Speaker, in this needed 
service in the province of Saskatchewan to those individuals 
that require those antiviral drugs here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I acknowledge there’s more work 
to do, but acknowledge also that there has been work done by 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue with 
those efforts into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the best test of an investment is 
whether it’s adequate in dealing with the problem that it’s 
facing. When the numbers continue to rise, the investment is 
insufficient. And it’s been not just one year, it’s been over two 
years since people, experts in this field have been requesting 
full coverage of antiretroviral medications. 
 
This is the part that I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker: each new 
case costs us $1.3 million. It would cost only $500,000 a year to 
prevent so many more cases by being sure that everyone has 
coverage for antiretrovirals. What part of paying a little bit 
more now to save so many dollars and so many lives down the 
road does this government not understand? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to the investment 
that this government has provided over the last number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, up to and including last year, Mr. Speaker, and we 
remain committed to working on this investment far into the 
future. I’ve talked of $8.7 million, Mr. Speaker. Ninety per cent 
of HIV drugs are covered here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. When it comes to individuals, Mr. Speaker, First 
Nations on-reserve, First Nations are covered by the federal 
government. Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that steps in and 
ensures that those low-income people in the province of 
Saskatchewan are covered, or fully covered, Mr. Speaker, by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here are the stats: 38 per cent of HIV patients paid nothing 



3510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

for their HIV drugs, Mr. Speaker, here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Fifty-seven per cent of patients paid less than 
$100 over the course of the year for their HIV drugs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But specific to the member’s question, Mr. Speaker, it’s this 
government that has been committed to working with all of our 
drug formulary, Mr. Speaker, including that for HIV patients 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And we will continue to 
work with those patients and others across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that we can continue to have one of the most 
comprehensive drug coverage programs in the nation of 
Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Pharmacare Program and Coverage 
of Prescription Drug Costs 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s not how much you 
study, it’s whether you pass the test. If we’re still seeing that 
many new cases, we’re not having the investment we need to 
deal with the problem. 
 
Lack of access to antiretroviral drugs is only one part of a much 
larger problem, Mr. Speaker. Canada is the only country that 
has a universal health care system that doesn’t also include 
prescription drug coverage. And that lack of drug coverage is 
costing us billions, billions per year because we pay among the 
highest prices in the country for medications. 
 
When people have to skip their medications because they’re 
having to decide between paying their rent, paying for food, or 
paying for the drugs they need, that costs them and it costs us in 
more hospital visits and more complications from those 
illnesses. Mr. Speaker, if we had universal drug coverage in this 
country, we would save $7 billion a year just in the drug costs 
alone, let alone how much we’d save in downstream health 
costs. So my question, Mr. Speaker, is, what is the Premier 
doing to pressure the federal government for fast action for 
universal pharmacare for Canada? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as we’re 
aware, in the most recent federal budget, the federal 
government is looking . . . has struck a committee to look at 
pharmacare in the nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we look forward to, you know, how those discussions 
progress and how they would affect our comprehensive drug 
plan that we have here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for us to always 
be looking to where we’re going but always ensure that we are 
aware of where we’ve been as well, Mr. Speaker. And when it 
comes to a drug plan in the province of Saskatchewan, it is one 
of the most comprehensive drug plans in the nation of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s one that’s been constantly added to by this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and our commitment to that into the 
future remains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We understand there was a day here the other day with 
members opposite quite likely — and I think the MP [Member 

of Parliament]; I’m not sure if he’s in caucus or out right now, 
Mr. Speaker — but the MP unveiling their universal health care 
plan across the nation of Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, the fact of 
the matter is, is the federal government is already looking at 
that. We want to ensure and we will keep an eye and look on it 
with great interest as to how it affects the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and ensure that we are always providing the 
very best drug coverage on behalf of the people in this great 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m thrilled to hear that the 
Premier is in favour of universal pharmacare for Canadians. 
That’s great, and I hope that he will continue to pressure for a 
positive pharmacare program for the whole country, Mr. 
Speaker, because the math is clear — both the financial and the 
moral math. 
 
Reducing the amount that people pay for prescription drugs 
saves money and saves lives. The last provincial budget, 
however — if we want to talk about where we’ve been — the 
last provincial budget got that equation wrong, with 66,000 
families with children and 120,000 seniors paying more for 
medications because of drug plan increases from this 
government. Seniors and parents are watching closely, Mr. 
Speaker, to see what the next budget will bring as far as 
increases to the cost of living, increases to what we need for 
healthy lives.  
 
Will the Premier commit to at least not further burdening 
seniors and families in the next budget by not increasing cost of 
prescription drugs right here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions 
in there. I’m going to start at a couple at the front end of that 
question, Mr. Speaker. I may not get through all of them, Mr. 
Speaker, but I would like to clarify, Mr. Speaker, the member’s 
opposite interpretation of my comments to be fully supportive 
of a universal pharmacare program here in the nation of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just not quite the case, Mr. Speaker. We 
would look at what the federal government is looking at with 
their pharmacare program, Mr. Speaker, and we would always 
look at the impacts that it would have for coverage and costs on 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, we will always look at these items on behalf of the 
people and we’ll call them as we see them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that it’s been this government that is 
not scared to disagree with, not frightened to disagree with the 
federal government when it’s in the best interests of the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether it be on 
the development of pipelines with some of our provincial 
neighbours, Mr. Speaker, or whether it be with respect to the 
imposition of a federal carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to, you know, the financial or moral 
math, Mr. Speaker, that is a little bit ironic, Mr. Speaker, 
coming from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker — a party that 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3511 

has now committed two and a half billion dollars of spending 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, with absolutely no plan, no plan 
whatsoever to fill those holes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite for the question with 
respect to supports for seniors, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
remind him of the investments of this side of the House in home 
care, in long-term care facilities — one in my community, one 
in Prince Albert — across this province, Mr. Speaker. More 
work to be done we always acknowledge but, Mr. Speaker, the 
record of the Saskatchewan Party government and support for 
seniors is strong. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting to hear what 
the Premier has to say on that, because I’m a bit baffled about 
what he might not like about universal pharmacare, why he 
might be on the fence about that. Would it be the savings? 
Would it be the billions of dollars of savings or would it be the 
improved health outcomes that would cause him concern? 
 
We hear him talking about imaginary billions of dollars, but we 
know that $7 billion would be saved by this country if we had 
universal pharmacare. And if there’s any fight to be picking, it’s 
pushing for a universal pharmacare program that would cover 
every person, would save lives, and save money. 
 
And then the big question, Mr. Speaker, and this is the question 
I asked, which wasn’t answered, which is, will the Premier 
commit to not increasing what families are going to have to pay 
for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan in this budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
said at I think the first question here today with respect to the 
comprehensive drug plan that we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, one of the best and most comprehensive drug 
plans in the nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker, there are a number 
of provinces that have much lower coverage than the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, across the nation. 
 
And I guess the question I have for the members opposite is, if 
the province of Saskatchewan’s plan is here, other provinces are 
far below that, and the national plan comes in somewhere in the 
middle, would we be looking at reducing the coverage to 
Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker? Most certainly, this side 
of the House will not be doing that, Mr. Speaker. We will 
always stand for those people in the communities across this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for College of Medicine 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, if we ever 
want to become a province with universal pharmacare, the best 
mental health supports, we’re going to need incredible leaders 
like those that are with us here today from the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. But the Sask 

Party’s cuts and refusal to commit to long-term, stable funding 
puts all that at risk. 
 
Last year the Sask Party cut the U of S’s [University of 
Saskatchewan] budget by 5 per cent. They also initially cut the 
College of Medicine by $20 million — dollars that were 
desperately needed by the College of Medicine. They blocked 
the funding until the med school’s accreditation was at risk. The 
ministers of Finance and Advanced Education at the time said 
they restored the funding as a result of “due diligence.” Well 
making Saskatchewan’s med school hang in the balance is 
anything but due diligence.  
 
When will the Sask Party stop cutting the U of S College of 
Medicine and provide stable, reliable funding that will ensure 
its accreditation is never in question again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the member opposite for 
the question. You know, I spent this morning with the U of S 
board of governors, having a very vigorous conversation about 
just this thing. The college was first put on probation in 2002, 
as you know, under the NDP [New Democratic Party] and not 
reaccredited until 2009. They were given a warning in 2011 and 
placed on probation in 2013 and 2015.  
 
This year, however, we have provided a total of $89 million in 
targeting funding to the College of Medicine, and an additional 
20 million to support accreditation efforts after that. We’re 
going to continue to work with the College of Medicine on a 
go-forward basis, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 
subsequent questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Mental Health 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, across the province there’s a 
desperate need for more mental health and addiction supports. 
The suicide crisis in the North is devastatingly real and children 
are literally dying while stuck on wait-lists to see child 
psychiatrists. Still, last week the Health minister admitted they 
had failed to invest half of the $3.1 million the federal 
government has transferred for mental health this year, and he 
refused to say exactly where all the money they did spend went. 
Mr. Speaker, how can they possibly justify delaying the use of 
these badly needed funds, and can the minister guarantee today 
that none of the federal dollars have been or will be used to 
backfill Sask Party cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We recognize 
the importance of mental health. This isn’t just a Saskatchewan 
phenomenon, Mr. Speaker. This is an important issue right 
across the country. At the last federal-provincial-territorial 
ministers’ meeting for Health ministers that the Minister for 
Rural and Remote Health and I attended, it was a very 
significant part of the discussion at that table. 



3512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, there were several questions in the critic’s 
comments, and I would first of all take exception to the member 
saying that I didn’t answer the question, Mr. Speaker. We very 
clearly indicated where the money was spent. On subsequent 
questions I’d be happy to go into more detail. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, her point about using that money to backfill 
cuts is not the case, Mr. Speaker. That just simply isn’t 
happening. And, Mr. Speaker, we also didn’t forgo half of the 
money from the federal government; the federal government 
agreed that we could defer it. That along with the incremental 
increase in the federal grant money, Mr. Speaker, will be spent 
in the upcoming budget year, just like we’ll make use of every 
dollar of that federal money in subsequent years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again mental health is extremely important. I look 
forward to subsequent questions from the member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there were precisely two 
questions for that minister. How can he possibly delay or justify 
delaying the use of any of these badly needed funds? We’re in a 
crisis here, Mr. Speaker, and where exactly . . . I want to know 
precisely where that money went, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just 
about spending more money, but it’s about targeting it to the 
most appropriate use for that money, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
we’re going to do. 
 
To the specific point that she wants to know where that money 
was spent, 400,000 of it was spent for the University of 
Regina’s Online Therapy Unit; 200,000 to pilot an online 
module for parents of children with anxiety; 150,000 to increase 
opportunities for physicians to receive targeted training in child 
and adolescent mental health, Mr. Speaker; 640,000 to establish 
multidisciplinary teams. The member doesn’t seem as interested 
right now, Mr. Speaker. This is an important issue, Mr. 
Speaker: 640,000 to establish multidisciplinary teams and peer 
supports to provide client-centred services, and the list goes on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re happy to provide that information, Mr. Speaker. We take 
this very seriously. We are going to make use of every federal 
dollar, and we’re also going to be supplementing that as well, 
Mr. Speaker. As we mentioned the other day, our goal is to 
eventually reach 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased all 
health care spending which also increases that goal. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The medical students 
who are with us today join teachers and other experts in calling 
for capacity to be built in our schools to work with our kids 
directly in the buildings where they spend most of their days. 
Such programs can help respond to emerging issues, link 
children to effective treatment, and prevent devastating 
consequences. 

Instead of investing though, the Sask Party is cutting and there 
are fewer and fewer supports for Saskatchewan children in 
need. And the positions that are being cut are not just nice to 
have or extras, Mr. Speaker. They include the very mental 
health supports that children need today. 
 
So I ask the minister, instead of investing in finding solutions, 
why is the Sask Party cutting these needed mental health 
supports in our schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
has been quite eloquent in terms of indicating what the 
government’s support is in terms of working to alleviate mental 
health challenges. And in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker, we have 
invested over $30 million to provide for nearly 400 counsellors, 
Mr. Speaker — 236 counsellors, 70 psychologists and 70 social 
workers, Mr. Speaker. We continue to support a number of 
programs within our schools, Mr. Speaker, including the Kids 
Help Line, anti-bullying resources and grants, and mental health 
first-aid training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take this very, very seriously, and our 
government is going to continue to work on this, continue to 
have ongoing dialogue with our partners in education, Mr. 
Speaker — with teachers, with school boards, and with parents 
— to make sure that we’re providing the right resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning when we met with the medical 
students we talked about a program that’s available in Alberta. 
And I was pleased to have a conversation with the Minister of 
Health before question period today, the fact that his ministry is 
already investigating that program. Mr. Speaker, I look forward 
to having more conversation with the Minister of Health, to 
work together with the Ministry of Health and with the Minister 
of Rural and Remote Health, to see what further resources that 
we can provide in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker, to make them 
safe spaces to help deal with the issues of mental health in our 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker, and our students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Mental Health Issues and Improvements to 
Northern Airports 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Several 
months ago, the community of Fond-du-Lac was faced with a 
tragic plane crash. One person died because of their injuries, 
and many in the community felt that trauma and are continuing 
to struggle. Chief Louie Mercredi of the Fond-du-Lac Dene 
Nation is quite upset that no help is coming forward for his 
entire community, and I quote, “My whole community has been 
traumatized.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again people in the area are feeling forgotten 
by the Sask Party government. And since the crash, the trauma 
of the crash, more lives have been lost to suicide, with another 
person attempting this past Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fond-du-Lac is not alone. Across the North, there 
is a suicide crisis taking place. When will this government 
finally take action and provide meaningful mental health 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3513 

supports that are so vitally needed, so that my colleague from 
Cumberland and I can stop having so many funerals to go to? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, mental health issues in 
the North is something that’s very serious to this government, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s heartbreaking when — doesn’t matter 
where you are, what part of the province — you hear of 
someone that’s lost their life much too soon, especially when 
it’s to suicide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to make sure that people know that in a time of crisis 
that there is supports in place. I’ve referred to the HealthLine a 
number of times. Although it’s not the stopgap, it’s a good point 
of first contact for individuals to get the individual mental 
health supports they need and be directed to the services they 
need, Mr. Speaker. We know that a lot of funds have been put 
into specifically our former northern health regions to make 
sure that those regions are able to deliver the mental health and 
addiction supports that they can when they’re needed as well, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that there’s more to do though. 
 
The ministries of Health, Education, and Social Services, we 
continue to work with our federal and First Nations partners in 
coordinating responses, Mr. Speaker. But again we’re trying to 
be as proactive as possible. We continue to, through the health 
authority, provide supports to people at risk of suicide through 
schools, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], and of 
course our First Nations partners. We’ve invested in the 
Embracing Life committee, which helps communities have 
capacity to prevent suicides in the North. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
also initiated the northern training and response registry, which 
will help communities in the North find the mental health and 
suicide prevention supports that they need in one phone call, 
one contact, be able to contact all those agencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over the past two years through the ministry, we’ve invested in 
more community suicide prevention initiatives, including 
suicide prevention protocols that have been fully implemented 
through the northern mental health and addiction services. 
We’ve trained 93 human services staff in mental health first aid; 
228 have received Applied Suicide Intervention Skills Training, 
that’s the ASIST program in schools; 46 have been trained in 
safeTALK [safe tell, ask, listen and keep safe] protocols. A 
community suicide prevention coordinator has been hired in the 
North, and ongoing support through the SHA [Saskatchewan 
Health Authority] is available, Mr. Speaker. And if there’s any 
more questions, I’d be happy to talk about some more initiatives 
that we’ve invested in. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. They 
are the government and their responsibility is to govern for all 
and not avoid certain regions of our province. And today all the 
excuses that they’re giving are just not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Chief Louie Mercredi is going to come to Regina. 
He’s going to ask the questions on mental health supports. And 
he’s also going to ask the question on the community needs and 
the fact that the community counts on safe access to their 

community. 
 
This tragic accident, from his perspective, is the fact that their 
airport, being the lifeline for this community, needs upgrades to 
ensure public safety. The province told them to talk to the 
federal government, but the feds are pointing to the provincial 
government because the province operates the runway. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, the First Nations of this Athabasca Basin area and 
all people of the province deserve support, not only for this 
airport but other airports throughout the province, not the 
jurisdictional runaround that this chief is getting. 
 
When will the Sask Party respond to the requests of the 
community and widen and lengthen the runway at the 
Fond-du-Lac airport? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. We take the northern airports 
in northern Saskatchewan very seriously through the Ministry 
of Highways. We invest well over $2 million every year in 
airport maintenance and ongoing in that field. And we also 
invest over 50 million in total in highway, airport, and northern 
community projects. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do look forward to ongoing discussions 
with our federal counterparts on that. It’s one of the big 
discussions we’re having with the federal government, as we 
speak right now, that some of the new funding programs should 
really look at northern airports as their main means of 
transportation and transit. And we are pursuing that with the 
federal minister to try and lever even more money to try and 
improve the airports as it is. And we know it is our only means 
of transportation in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 77, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 77 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 



3514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 
Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
77 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
78, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee on the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 78 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 78 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
79, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 79 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
79 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3515 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
80, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 80, and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 80, be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Douglas Park on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During question 
period today the Minister of Health, when asked a question, was 
referring to a list regarding the $3.1 million of federal funding 
that had been transferred to the province for mental health 
services and where that went this year. We’d ask that, pursuant 
to rule 52 and the tradition of the House, that that document be 
tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — From what I understand it’s already been 
tabled in the House. If you can show to me in written questions 
. . . You asked it, I believe. I would ask the Speaker to check 
that, but check written questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming because of the 
limited amount of time the Minister of Health has to make an 
answer, he listed a few different locations and then said, I 
believe, “and the list goes on and on,” Mr. Speaker. So we 
would like the details. We’d like to have that document tabled, 
as is tradition of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Once we get to written questions. 
 
The Speaker: — The Speaker will defer the decision upon 
further information. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 106 through 128. 
 
The Speaker: — What was the first bit? Sorry, I recognize the 
Government Whip again. Could you repeat the numbers? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — 106 through 128. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 106 to 128 is tabled. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 129 through 131. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 129 to 131 is ordered. I recognize 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 132 through 137. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 132 to 137 is converted. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 



3516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

answers to questions 138 and 139. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 138 to 139 is ordered. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 140 through 143. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 140 to 143 is tabled. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 144 through 146. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 144 to 146 is ordered. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 147 through 157. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 147 to 157 is tabled. I recognize 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 158 through 163. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 158 to 163 is ordered. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 164 through 167. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 164 to 167 is tabled. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 168 and 169. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 168 to 169 is ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to join into adjourned debates on Bill No. 121, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act. So I thought we’d start 
off with a bit of a summary on what some of the changes are 
that are being proposed here. Of course this is a new Act, Mr. 
Speaker, so we know that we aren’t amending a different Act. 
It’s a new piece of legislation that has been drafted here so there 

are certainly a lot of considerations that go along with drafting a 
new piece of legislation and a lot of things for us to be 
discussing here today. 
 
So Bill 121, this bill is designed to create a regulatory 
framework for legalized cannabis. Some key elements of this 
framework include the fact that consuming cannabis is going to 
be prohibited in public spaces. Possession of more than 30 
grams and more than four plants is prohibited. People under 19 
years old are prohibited from possessing or consuming 
cannabis, which is punishable by a fine of up to $2,000. And 
possession of cannabis in a vehicle is going to be prohibited 
except when transporting it from the place it was obtained to the 
place it will be consumed. And of course the rules for retail 
stores selling cannabis are also established, so a whole bunch of 
different pieces to be considered in this legislation that we will 
need to have a closer look at. 
 
So as far as the overall details, it’s nice that we’re getting some 
of this information now, Mr. Speaker. I remember the federal 
Liberals making this promise as a campaign promise leading up 
to the 2015 election, so there has certainly been quite a bit of 
time for the Sask Party to consider how they were going to go 
about implementation. They’ve made some comments to the 
effect that it’s been a rushed process, or that they’ve been 
pressured into a timeline, but I will point to the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is now 2018. We have had well over two years 
since the Liberal government was elected, so quite a bit of time 
that did exist for the purposes of consultation, and the purpose 
of surveying and finding out what people of Saskatchewan are 
interested in in terms of this legislation. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So when we’re talking about possession of more than 30 grams 
being prohibited, I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t have 
a terrible amount of experience with cannabis. I’m not entirely 
sure if 30 grams is a reasonable amount or an unreasonable 
amount, but if anyone wants to weigh in on that, they’re more 
than welcome to do so. So I’ll leave that piece of the legislation 
to some . . . if there are more experienced folks to comment on. 
 
People being under 19 years old being prohibited from 
possessing cannabis, I know that there’s some contentious 
debate around what the minimum age should be, Mr. Speaker. 
And I definitely hear the different perspectives on this. 
Ultimately though, we are supportive of the age that was 
determined at 19 years old and having it line up with alcohol, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rules around transportation in a vehicle seem to be quite 
onerous and difficult to enforce, so we’re going to have some 
questions about how these rules are going to impact people. So 
again, possession of cannabis in a vehicle is prohibited, except 
where transporting it from the place it was obtained to the place 
it will be consumed. So there are questions, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of how these places will be determined and, in terms of 
implementation, what that is actually going to look like at the 
day-to-day level. So we certainly have some questions about 
enforcement and how that’s going to work. 
 
So that’s a broad overview of what we’re talking about in 
relation to Bill 121. I know that there was some public 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3517 

consultation that took place in the survey that was 
Saskatchewan wide. I participated in a survey fairly recently, I 
think about a month ago, Mr. Speaker, that was issued by the 
city of Saskatoon where they had a similar style of survey 
where they were trying to work out many of the details on how 
they were going to go about implementation within the city. So 
I know there were a number of residents of Saskatoon that 
participated in that survey as well, and just a ton of implications 
in terms of, you know, the distance that retail stores will need to 
be from schools and from parks and, you know, all these 
intricate details that need to be worked out because we’re 
bringing forth this legislation. So there is quite a bit of work to 
be done at every level of government to see this legislation 
through. So some interesting considerations and implications 
for our municipalities there. 
 
I also understand there are concerns in terms of the fact that no 
dollars have been allocated for the rollout of this legislation, no 
provincial dollars, and whether there’s going to be a cost to 
municipalities in terms of coming up with new enforcement 
measures. So that might be something that we need to be 
looking at here as well. 
 
Most of the members in this room know that this is a 
contentious issue. It’s a controversial issue. There has been 
quite a lot of public engagement and speculation about this 
legislation. Some individuals disagree with the fact that 
legalization is coming forward altogether. Some disagree with 
the different forms that it has taken. And so there are quite a 
few opinions on this and it’s difficult to reconcile all of those 
different opinions. And I also understand that a few 
communities have opted out of the licences that they are 
available to get. So that is definitely reflective of the different 
viewpoints on this piece of legislation. 
 
Some of the news articles we have seen . . . I have a news 
article by David Baxter of Global News that is from March 
16th, titled “Sask. aims to have comparable pot price to black 
market despite tax unknowns.” So there’s definitely a concern 
that the price of cannabis will be undercut by the black market, 
that those will be the sales and that will still drive those sales 
underground. So that’s one of the public concerns that exists 
with the legalization of cannabis. 
 
We have “Legalized pot price in Saskatchewan will be 
comparable to street price, province says,” CBC News by Adam 
Hunter on March 15th. And “Costs across the country will 
vary.” So different concerns about how the piece of cost will 
factor in. I also have an article from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix: 
“As provincial government introduces legislation for sale of 
weed, here are dos and don’ts of legal cannabis in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
And I think this is an important piece here, Mr. Speaker, as 
well, because here we’re talking about the fact that there’s 
going to have to be a huge public education aspect to this 
legislation so that people know and can follow what the new 
legislation provides. I know that it is not always clear when 
legislation changes. For example, there is still I think a lot of 
public confusion about some of the changes to drinking and 
driving laws from last year, I believe. And I know there’s still 
some concern about that. 
 

We need to make sure that there is strong public education, so I 
appreciate articles about dos and don’ts. And we need to be able 
to effectively communicate this at the government level as well. 
This is going to be a key piece to make sure that people know 
what is expected of them, and also what the repercussions are 
going to be if they don’t follow those expectations. 
 
“Legal marijuana age will be 19 in Saskatchewan.” So this is an 
article that talks about the fact that the legal age is going to be 
19. And we also have some more public news about the 
“Saskatchewan government rolls out its marijuana regulations,” 
March 14th. A lot of these quite current articles that exist in the 
news: “Saskatchewan sets minimum cannabis . . . age at 19, 
rolls out framework,” another article from David Baxter. 
 
And we just see the articles keep coming and coming. The 
public interest keeps coming and coming. So we know, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a tremendous importance for us to be able to 
get it right. And I know the intent behind this legislation is for it 
to be a little bit flexible, to review that legislation, and to review 
the policies, you know, a year out, three years out, so that we 
can make sure that we’re getting it right. And I think that that is 
a good approach. We should be reviewing the legislation. We 
should be looking at some of the implications here, because 
there are quite a few implications and the public is watching 
with interest on what we do in these areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also a provincial survey that was issued 
online that I referred to earlier. And there were a number of 
questions that were asked in this provincial survey, and the 
results were quite interesting. So I’ll go through that in a little 
bit of detail here if you’ll indulge me, Mr. Speaker, as well. 
And the survey results were released in a Government of 
Saskatchewan document called Saskatchewan’s Cannabis 
Framework: Framework and Survey Results. So there are some 
key pieces. I’m not going to go through all of the 17 pages here, 
Mr. Speaker, but there are some key pieces that I would like to 
identify from this survey. 
 
First of all, one thing that they identify in the introduction is 
that the goal in the provincial legislation is to be able to comply 
with federal regulation. And the federal bill is Bill C-45, the 
Cannabis Act. So they talked about what some of the intent is 
behind this legislation. So I think it’s important for us to keep 
that in mind as we’re talking about what our framework is 
going to look like in Saskatchewan as well. So some of the 
pieces were to: 
 

protect public health and public safety and, in particular, 
restricting youth access to cannabis; 
protect young persons and others from inducements to 
use cannabis; 

provide for the legal production of cannabis to reduce 
illicit activities in relation to cannabis; 
deter illicit activities in relation to cannabis through 
appropriate sanctions and enforcement measures; 
reduce the burden on the criminal justice system in relation 
to cannabis; 
provide access to a quality-controlled supply of cannabis; 
and 
enhance public awareness of the health risks associated 
with cannabis use. 
 



3518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

So I think it’s good for us to keep that in mind as well. 
 
And one important thing that they note, which I don’t know if 
we’ve had the full public education on, because I myself was a 
bit surprised to find out about, Mr. Speaker, is that edible 
cannabis products at this time are not being legalized. So on 
page 5 of Saskatchewan’s Cannabis Framework they identify: 
“Bill C-45 originally prohibited the sale of cannabis edibles and 
concentrates; however, the Bill was amended to include a 
provision that will provide for the . . . [legislation] of edibles 
and concentrates by the one-year anniversary of cannabis 
legislation.” I suspect that this has — I’m not an expert — I 
suspect that this has something to do with being able to measure 
THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] levels and so on. I know that 
there’s still some confusion about, you know, how are we going 
to move this forward and to be able to regulate edible products. 
But I thought that was an important piece to note. 
 
So when we’re getting to the survey results, the results that 
were received from the Saskatchewan cannabis survey — the 
survey was conducted between September and October of 2017, 
Mr. Speaker — there were 34,681 respondents. Of those, 
26,199 were complete surveys. The important thing that I found 
here, Mr. Speaker, is that this is the highest response rate 
received for any Saskatchewan survey. So I know there are 
some questions about the reliability of online surveys and how 
all of this works. I come from a social science background, so 
I’m no stranger to some of the criticisms of different types of 
methodology when you’re conducting surveys. But I will say 
that the highest response rate we’ve ever seen for a 
Saskatchewan survey, that is something quite impressive, and it 
really shows us the amount that the public is interested in 
engaging in this topic. 
 
And so if we have a scenario where the Government of 
Saskatchewan is indeed interested in hearing from the people, 
has conducted this survey to listen, presumably to listen to the 
results that were provided, it’s interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s not the course that they took and that we don’t see 
them taking that input in all cases. So I’ll get into that sort of 
piece by piece as we look at some of these survey results, but it 
strikes me that if you have a Saskatchewan survey that’s the 
highest response rate you’ve ever seen, that you would want to 
take some of those results into consideration. 
 
And in particular, what I’m referring to is quite a big piece of 
the picture, Mr. Speaker, and that is the model that they decided 
to work with. And having been the critic for SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] prior to the start 
of this session, I was watching quite intently to see what role 
the government was going to propose for SLGA. Because as 
you know, if we incorporated our already regulated distribution 
network, there might be more wholesale opportunities for us — 
bring some of that money into the province in a way that is 
outside of the regular proposed taxation system. So I’m 
interested in how we can make more money for this province, 
and I think that that would have been a good move. And 
evidently that’s also what the people of Saskatchewan have 
said. 
 
So in the very first question, “If retail stores are considered, 
who should sell retail cannabis,” the number one answer, at 45 
per cent of respondents — and remember this is quite a few 

people in Saskatchewan — was “Government run retailer 
(similar to Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
(SLGA)).” 
 
So I have a question about, if we’re talking about all these 
respondents and this open dialogue and the desire to listen, 
there is actually a line about how the government has taken time 
to consider the input provided in the surveys. I really have a 
question about how they wouldn’t take this information into 
account and whether it’s a simply ideologically driven decision 
or if they’re listening to what the people of this province want. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So that’s a key piece for me, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
acknowledging the residents of Saskatchewan. If we’re going to 
take time to consult, we have to listen to what people have to 
say. And I would say there is a pretty clear statement that was 
made in this survey, and I don’t know that the opinions of the 
people of the province were respected at the highest level. 
 
There were also some other questions about restrictions on the 
amount of cannabis a person can purchase. Should there be 
restrictions? People agreed, yes there should be restrictions on 
the amount, although what that amount is was not discussed in 
the actual question itself. So again, I can’t comment on the 30 
grams. I’m not entirely sure if that is adequate. 
 
What age should non-medicinal cannabis be legal for 
consumption in Saskatchewan? Most people agreed that it 
should be 19 years of age so that it was in concert with alcohol 
sales in Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen that that’s the direction 
the government has chosen to go. 
 
Do you think there should be zero tolerance for cannabis for 
driving? Total agreement was at 58 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Sorry, I have to lean down a little bit. We’ve got some very 
small text in this document. 
 
Do you feel cannabis consumption should be prohibited in 
vehicles? Strongly agree and agree — again 68 per cent of 
respondents agreed that it should be banned in vehicles. 
 
So in this case, the government seems to have listened to the 
questions that they have asked. In case of what the model’s 
actually going to look like, we haven’t seen that same approach. 
 
Do you believe there should be the same penalties for 
alcohol-impaired driving? Most people agreed with that as well. 
 
And we had some more questions as well that were asked 
around workplace safety, you know, concerns about the fact 
that more needs to be done to keep workers and their 
workplaces safe, and questions about growing at home and 
public health. 
 
Cannabis use in public spaces should be prohibited. And this 
was agreed upon 88 per cent, so this is probably the most 
strongly agree that we saw in the survey. And I think that’s just 
because people don’t want to be walking around and dealing 
with inhaling cannabis everywhere that they are. So the public 
spaces argument I think is pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. So those 
were some of the survey results. 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3519 

So now finally we’re at a point where we have some details on 
this bill. Despite the fact that this was an election promise, as I 
said, the Sask Party didn’t seem to have all the details in place 
until really this month. So it just shows the fact that there has 
not been the long-term planning that we would have liked to 
have seen. And we’ve heard some concerns about even some of 
the consultation that took place. Some municipalities feel they 
should have been better consulted and so on. 
 
So I think there’s some concerns there as well. We know now 
that there are going to be . . . the process for retail permits that’s 
going to exist. We have a list in a backgrounder that was 
provided in the government back in January, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, on the retail permits that are available. So there is a list 
of communities where the retail permits are available. 
 
We know that there is a two-step process to put forward a 
request for proposal. So in phase 1 we have initial screening, 
and in phase 2 there is a random draw or lottery. So provided 
you make it through phase 1, it’s going to be a lottery system 
for handing out licences. 
 
We also know though that there are some communities that 
have decided to opt out. So we have five municipalities who 
have decided to opt out at this point, to my knowledge, Mr. 
Speaker: Pilot Butte, Biggar, Kindersley, White City, and 
Shellbrook. 
 
So the way it works for communities who have decided not to 
opt out is that retailers in the tendering process, they have to 
submit a $1,000 non-refundable fee for each submission that 
they put forward. It will cost $5,000 for a retail permit in cities 
and 3,500 in towns. So we have a process that has been laid out 
here. We’ve heard concerns from some other areas that they 
would like to be considered for a permit and weren’t on the list, 
and some questions about how the permits were decided. So 
again some municipalities would have liked to have been 
consulted in that process as well. 
 
So I know that there is a lot to debate on this legislation and we 
have, you know . . . It is quite a substantial piece of legislation 
here, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t spend that much more time 
talking about it, but I do want to identify the fact that there are 
some concerns with the age of 19. We support the position, but 
I do want to identify there are quite a few concerns about, you 
know, developing teenage brains. I used to work with the cadet 
program and we learned a lot about teenage development and 
how the brain is still developing at the age 19. And I always 
found it a little bit offensive when I was 19 years old to learn 
that, but I appreciate some of the public health perspectives on 
the fact that, you know, our kids are still developing at this age 
and there’s a concern with the fact that their development could 
be stunted. 
 
And ultimately though, I think that if we were to make the legal 
age a little bit higher as suggested, if we were going to go into 
the 20s, then I think that there would be more opportunity for 
underground sales and the black market. So I think making it 
the same age as alcohol makes sense on balance. But I 
definitely understand that this was a difficult decision for the 
government, but ultimately support where they landed. I just 
understand a lot of the complexities that existed there. 
 

So that’s all I’ll say in this regard for Bill 121, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank you for the opportunity to weigh in. I know my 
colleagues will have much more to say about this as it’s a 
relatively new piece of legislation. But with that I will adjourn 
debate on Bill 121, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’re not rid of me 
just yet. I am also pleased to enter into adjourned debates on 
Bill 122, which could be cited as The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. So this 
piece of legislation goes hand in hand with Bill 121 which we 
were just speaking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Really what this piece of legislation does is it makes 
consequential amendments to other pieces of legislation so that 
they can align with the changes that are being made in Bill 121. 
So in bringing in these new regulations, we know that there is a 
ripple effect, that one change necessitates changes in other 
pieces of legislation and that that’s what’s happening here, Mr. 
Speaker — some housekeeping changes to reflect the fact that 
other pieces of legislation are indeed impacted by the 
legalization of cannabis and it’s important to make sure that our 
legislation aligns. 
 
I do not envy the folks who have to do this and I know that 
there is quite a bit of work that needs to go into making sure 
that legislation does not contradict one . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Apparently there isn’t. I don’t know. But I 
don’t envy the folks that have to do this and make sure that all 
the legislation lines up because it is certainly a difficult task. 
Having not been a lawyer by trade myself, I find reading the 
legislation can be somewhat thick at times. So you know . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So do lawyers. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — So do lawyers, my colleague from Regina 
Douglas Park says. And so you know, dealing with some of this 
cumbersome language and trying to identify what the 
contradictions are is certainly not something that I would be 
lining up to do with my time, Mr. Speaker. But I really 
appreciate the folks who do it because it’s so important for our 
overall functioning in society that everything lines up properly. 



3520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

So that’s what the intent is behind Bill 122. Some of the 
changes it makes, it makes changes to The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act, 1997, so it’s talking about the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority having authority over “regulation and control 
of.” And I believe the change here is that they’ve really added 
section 12(1)(f): 
 

any other matter that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
may assign to the authority. 

 
I believe that that’s the change that has been made to that 
section. 
 
And then of course there’s the French interpretation of the 
section as well, Mr. Speaker, because we are moving toward, 
you know, putting everything into bilingual terms, which I think 
is great in terms of accessibility, but also reflects the fact that 
we have two official languages in our province and country. 
 
There’s also changes to subsection 19(2): 
 

. . . the authority may establish one or more processes in 
accordance with the regulations for the allocation of 
permits and endorsements. 

 
And another clause is added about the procedures to be 
followed by the authority in establishing processes for the 
allocation of permits and endorsements. So this is talking about 
what I was just referring to in adjourned debates on Bill 121, 
the fact that permits are being provided out, and what the terms 
are of those provisions, so being able to provide those permits. 
We have to have legislation that grants that authority. 
 
There is also some changes to The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 
and The Vital Statistics Act, 2009, and then of course the French 
interpretation. I can’t comment to the French interpretation of 
the Act because I am very not proficient in French whatsoever, 
so I’ll trust that it says the same thing on both sides. So again it 
seems prudent that these changes need to take place. 
 
It seems like a prudent piece of legislation, Bill 122, and I’ll 
leave it to my other colleagues to provide more insights into 
that. And with that, I will move to adjourn debate on Bill 122, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to 
be recognized by your good self and to join debate today on Bill 
No. 115, An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, sometimes in this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, you make the mistake of listening to 
what various folks are saying over on the other side, and it can 
throw you for a bit of a loop. I thought I heard the member from 
Moose Jaw North saying, that’s enough out of me. But of 
course, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be the judge of that. Thank you very 
much. But anyway I guess, you know, when it comes to the 
various sentiments in terms of the speeches that I give, maybe 
that member gives, you know, we could get into what the 
feelings are, what the opinion is back and forth. But enough 
about my feelings, Mr. Speaker. Let’s get back to The 
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006, Bill No. 115. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is of utmost importance 
when it comes to matters of residential tenancies is for 
government to strike a fair counterpoint between the rights of 
tenants and the rights of landlords, and certainly the 
responsibilities back and forth across that line as well. Certainly 
in terms of the different abuses or challenges that are 
anticipated by an Act of this nature on either side of that street, 
Mr. Speaker, there is again a tremendous need for fairness, for 
balance, and for not pitting one side against the other because 
there are problems that arise on either side of that ledger. 
 
Over the years, I’ve had experience to observe what are in some 
cases the actions of slum landlords, but I’ve also had the 
occasion to observe the actions of folks that might be deemed as 
slum tenants. And certainly as residents have every right to 
expect well-functioning basic standards in terms of the safety of 
a residence, so too do landlords have an expectation around 
their property not being trashed, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 
how do you set up a regulatory regime that strikes that balance 
between these two interests that are, you know, oftentimes very 
much in balance? But certainly there are folks in either group, 
on either side of the equation, that step over the line. 
 
So it’s one of the tests that we look to in terms of this 
legislation, whether it adds to the fairness or builds upon 
fairness in the legislation, or if it favours one side against the 
other. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, in the situation where this 
legislation arises, it’s prompted by the changes in legislation 
around cannabis. And again we just had a great couple of 
speeches from the member from Saskatoon Fairview on the 
cannabis control legislation brought forward by this 
government, been a long time coming. But again, some fine 
speeches on offer there from the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
But certainly the changes in legislation around cannabis and the 
need that arises in turn around what are the restrictions on 
cannabis use in rental units, Mr. Speaker, it is obviously 
something that needs to be addressed. And certainly that’s 
something we’ll be looking to in terms of consulting, in terms 
of the different interest groups. We’ll be looking to see that that 
balance is maintained because of course, as a landlord has a 
right for certain expectations around the way that that property 
is going to be used, so too does . . . There are certain rights and 
responsibilities that accrue to a tenant in terms of reasonable 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3521 

expectation of using something that is a legal, duly authorized 
substance in that dwelling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll be looking to see how that is adjudicated under the 
Act. The minister, in his second reading speech, talked about 
various loopholes that the legislation is seeking to close that are 
being abused in some extreme cases, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
certainly be looking to ascertain whether or not those are 
representative of the normal experience between renters and 
landlords, Mr. Speaker, whether or not they’re exceptions that 
prove a rule or if there is a need for action. 
 
And we’ll certainly be looking in terms of the provisions in the 
Act that stand around the disposal of property that belongs to a 
tenant and the requirements for landlords to reach out to tenants 
and how that is to be appropriately sorted out, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
again something that needs to be pursued further in committee, 
and I am certain that that will be done in relatively short order. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again to finish off where I’d started, in terms 
of the change in the legislation around cannabis that has 
prompted parts of this legislation coming forward, in terms of 
the need for good access on the part of both landlords and 
tenants to the Office of Residential Tenancies, and in terms of 
the ability to have that balance between those two interests, Mr. 
Speaker, to have that fairness — these are the things that we’ll 
be looking for in this legislation. 
 
So I’m sure that other of my colleagues will have more to say 
about this legislation, Mr. Speaker, but with that I would move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to join in debate with regards to the bills that we’re 
discussing, and today I’m going to be putting some remarks in 
with regards to Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage 
Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. 
This was brought forward by the former minister for 
Post-Secondary Education in the fall sitting, and we’re here 
today to discuss it a little bit more and add some of my remarks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it was earlier announced today that we had an opportunity to 

meet with some medical students — I think they met with both 
sides, the government and us, the opposition — they were 
talking about mental health within our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And today in particular that’s a topic that’s top of mind for 
myself, Mr. Speaker. My daughter is attending a funeral of her 
fellow colleague today that committed suicide last week. And 
so when we talk about mental health, it is a real personal 
meaning, and I know most of us members here have been 
touched in some way with losing someone with regards to 
suicide and mental health. And so I think we need to really 
focus on that and take what the medical students have been 
saying to heart, and they had some really great suggestions. 
And like the Minister of Health said, they talked about, you 
know, ensuring that the dollars go to the right services that are 
needed, and I think that’s really important. 
 
I think it kind of relates to this bill in a way, Mr. Speaker, 
because we’re talking about the future of education for our 
students. And the medical students, they put a lot of investment 
in their education and their heart and soul with their continued 
learning. And I do sincerely hope that they continue their 
practice within Saskatchewan and we keep these young, eager 
students right here in the province. And in ensuring that, we 
have to ensure that post-secondary education is affordable, Mr. 
Speaker, for our young people here. And in Saskatchewan 
we’ve had a lot of challenges with regards to that, with having 
the highest tuition rates within Canada, and that oftentimes 
would make individuals consider seeking education elsewhere. 
 
And with regards to some of the cuts that we’ve been seeing 
with our post-secondary education, students have been talking 
about how, because of the cuts to our post-secondary education 
institutions, that that has resulted in having a reduction of 
options for classes, because of layoffs with regards to educators. 
And if we don’t have the classes and the availability for 
students and our tuition is high, we’re going to expect our 
young students to be leaving the province. And we wouldn’t 
want that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in the 2017-2018 provincial budget, the 
government announced the suspension of the SAGES grant 
payments as of January 1st, 2018, as part of the province’s plan 
to address its financial mismanagement and waste. And I’ll talk 
a little bit about the history of the SAGES program, Mr. 
Speaker. It was first announced and released May 14th, 2014 by 
the then Advanced Education minister, Rob Norris. And they 
were very happy to be announcing this program, which is a 
wonderful program to help make education more affordable for 
families. So SAGES enables the Government of Saskatchewan 
to provide a grant of 10 per cent on contributions made since 
January 1st, 2013 into a registered education savings program 
to a maximum of 250 per child per year. 
 
And to be eligible for SAGES, the following requirements must 
be met: the child is a resident of Saskatchewan when the RESP 
[registered education savings plan] contribution is made, is 
named as the beneficiary of the eligible RESP, and the 
contribution is made on or before December 31st of the year the 
child turns 17. And so those were the requirements and that was 
the announcement when that funding announcement was made 
March 14th, 2014. 
 
And so many people took advantage of this program. And we 



3522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

know that because of having this program cut, it’s going to 
impact . . . When we asked the minister how many people took 
advantage of this program and were recipients of the SAGES 
benefit, they gave us some answers here. And they said in 
2013-14 there was 36,357 recipients; 2014 to 2015, there was 
43,879 recipients; 2015 to 2016, there was 51,809; and 2016 to 
2017, there was 60,071; and 2017 to date, which they don’t 
have a date on here, but there’s 64,441, Mr. Speaker. So in 
essence, around 60,000 recipients are going to be impacted by 
the lack of having this program available for residents of 
Saskatchewan, which I think is very unfortunate. 
 
I’m going to read some quotes of some individuals that, once 
the announcement of the new budget and the cuts to students 
was announced, these were some of the quotes that were made. 
This quote was from Shawna North. She’s the vice-president of 
the education sector of the Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union. She indicated that “The cuts to 
scholarships and student aid will make it that much harder to 
afford for those enrolled in classes and the elimination of the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings means 
that parents saving for their child’s education are going to be 
paying more when their child starts post-secondary education.” 
 
And then also commenting here was Vianne Timmons. In an 
email that she provided, she indicated that this was “obviously 
disappointing” and that “more critically, the cuts ignore the 
affordability challenges facing students and neglect the 
significant economic and social benefits of post-secondary 
education.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue that as well. There is an argument 
to be made that investing in education will help improve the 
economy, and not in fact be a detriment to our economy, like 
this government is indicating with ending this program. And 
when times get tough, Mr. Speaker, this government decides to 
make cuts to health and education and social services and 
community-based programs, but provides tax benefits to the 
most wealthy and well connected in this province. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, this is all about priorities. This is 
definitely about priorities. Are we going to invest in the 
long-term benefits of post-secondary education for our youth in 
our province? Or do we feel that that’s not beneficial? I think if 
you ask a lot of people, economists and such, they’d say you’re 
going to get your best bang out of your buck if you’re going to 
be investing it in education. So I think this is going to be harder 
on our economy and not the right decision. 
 
So these “. . . cuts ignore the affordability challenges facing 
students and neglect the significant economic and social 
benefits of post-secondary education.” Like I said before, if the 
costs keep going up for students, and the availability of these 
programs are going to be limited because universities are 
having to minimize the amount of classes that they’re offering 
because of the lack of support from this government, we’re 
going to lose our young people from this province. And we 
can’t afford that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know the critic with regards to this portfolio will contact 
stakeholders and will have lots of information and will have lots 

of questions to put forward towards the minister at committee. 
And I know other colleagues on my side here will have more 
information that they would like to add to this bill debate, so at 
this moment, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 94, the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage 
Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into debate here today as it relates to Bill No. 95, An 
Act to repeal and amend miscellaneous Statutes and make 
consequential amendments to certain Statutes. There’s what 
would appear to be a fair amount of housekeeping in this 
legislation, cleaning up Acts that are no longer relevant, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting though to note on a few of these fronts some of 
the changes that have been brought forward here. I guess there’s 
changes as it relates to The Income Tax Act, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing that I could see within here pertaining to the tax hikes 
that have been brought forward by this government, so no 
changes there, Mr. Speaker. And I know that that’s something 
that many across Saskatchewan would have been observing and 
hopeful for within this legislation. 
 
Certainly of course as you’d know, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 
brought forward a billion-dollar tax hike on the hard-working 
people of Saskatchewan last year, and the impacts are real for 
households that are working hard to make ends meet but that 
are also dealing with a challenging job environment, Mr. 
Speaker, unemployment that’s risen, job loss that’s grown 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. So we don’t see changes 
within this Act to address those tax hikes at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do see changes to the . . . I guess it’s repealing The Community 
Bonds Act, and obviously this would have been a borrowing 
mechanism for municipalities. Of course we have 
municipalities across Saskatchewan that have had the rug pulled 
out from under them, Mr. Speaker, and were really blindsided 
by the elimination of grants-in-lieu over the last year. 
 
And the impacts, of course, have left communities, 
municipalities, elected leaders scrambling to make up that 
shortfall, to make up that loss of revenues. And the impact has 
been hard on households, on property tax payers, on businesses 
and families across the province. So we see in this Act, 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3523 

repealing The Community Bonds Act, and we see that of course 
at a time where municipalities across the province are not being 
treated well at all by this provincial government and have 
significant infrastructure needs as well. 
 
You know, it was interesting a few years back when the 
province discontinued the Saskatchewan savings bonds. And 
you know, many people utilized those Saskatchewan savings 
bonds and found them to be a solid investment, but it was also 
an investment in our province. And I know there was a lot of 
pride that Saskatchewan people took when they took out a 
Saskatchewan savings bond. And it became clear to me that the 
Sask Party government really didn’t want Saskatchewan people 
to have a keen eye to the fiscal house. They really didn’t want 
people observing the financial management of the province. 
 
And that program was eliminated at a time where 
unprecedented revenues were flowing into government, yet we 
had a Sask Party government that failed to balance the books, 
failed to get the job done and to leave our fiscal house in a 
better condition. In fact they not only depleted things like the 
rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, but piled on billions of dollars of 
debt. And in fact the Sask Party has doubled the debt in the last 
five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I found it interesting when the Sask Party eliminated the 
Saskatchewan savings bonds, Mr. Speaker. In many ways it 
would appear that the Sask Party really just didn’t want 
Saskatchewan people taking a keen interest in the financial 
affairs of the province, our public finances. And I guess that’s 
for partisan or political reasons, Mr. Speaker, but not in the 
public interest of our province. 
 
I also see that this bill repeals a section of The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, and that relates to recourse for 
payments owed. And we’ll take this through committee, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m not sure if this is related directly to the 
ripped-up agreements with municipalities from across 
Saskatchewan with respect to grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. But it 
would certainly, you know, not be strange for this Sask Party 
government to use their heavy hand as we’ve seen before to 
prevent recourse from those that are owed something by the 
provincial government. 
 
In the case of the grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker, we had 
agreements that were entered into by the Crown corporations 
with municipalities across Saskatchewan, the acquisition of 
assets, of power utilities or energy utilities, Mr. Speaker. And 
those municipalities had gone to the hard work, the due 
diligence, the organization to organize and to operate those 
utilities, and they did that in the interests of their communities. 
They also received from that healthy revenues for their 
communities. So this was certainly a common-sense approach 
to communities meeting the needs of their communities and 
also giving some security from a financial perspective. 
 
So what grants-in-lieu represented was the acquisition of those 
power utilities and energy utilities, and the contracts that were 
in place were there to compensate municipalities for the loss of 
revenue. So it was a royalty, if you will. But you know . . . And 
I’m getting heckled by the Minister of Finance here, Mr. 
Speaker, which doesn’t surprise me. I must have hit a nerve. I 
know that that minister has displayed a complete lack of 

understanding of this file, Mr. Speaker, and has really offended 
municipalities from across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
offended municipal leaders from across our province, and I 
think actually impacted the most, I believe, communities like 
Humboldt and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know those communities and those municipal leaders and 
frankly the taxpayers of the province are owed more respect 
from their Finance minister who has, you know, pushed forward 
these changes, of course with the Premier who went out the 
door, Mr. Speaker. And it’s past time that that Finance minister 
and the new Premier dig into this file and understand what those 
grants-in-lieu represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s actually quite the message that this Sask Party 
government is sending to Saskatchewan people when they just 
rip up agreements, rip up contracts, Mr. Speaker, with no 
accountability, and then with the heavy hand of government 
ensure that there’s not any recourse there as well. 
 
And you know, the impacts are real, Mr. Speaker. Everyone 
that’s received their tax notices and what the increases are going 
to be will know what the impacts are of the broken promises 
and the disrespect from the Sask Party. They know it all too 
well in Melville. They know it all too well in Yorkton. They 
know it all too well in Saskatoon and Regina. They certainly 
know it in Humboldt as well, Mr. Speaker. And I’d say it’s past 
time for the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 
Humboldt and the Finance minister of Saskatchewan to sit 
down with those municipal leaders who have been willing from 
the get-go to explain to that minister what those grants 
represented. 
 
I also see the Sask Party here is eliminating The Home Energy 
Loan Act, Mr. Speaker, and at the same time as we see no 
activity from this government at a critical time where we should 
be supporting the creation of thousands of jobs across 
Saskatchewan through an ambitious energy efficiency retrofit 
program. We see a government that’s not acting in the interests 
— long-term interests — of our province, from certainly an 
environmental perspective, but they’re failing us economically, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re failing to create the good jobs and the investment that 
we need across this province. And that’s disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have . . . Certainly Saskatchewan people 
who are being hit with tax after tax after tax by the Sask Party 
are owed good jobs. You know, they shouldn’t be handed the 
costs of the mismanagement and scandal and waste of this 
government and they certainly shouldn’t be handed, you know, 
a weakened economy because of the choices — the poor 
choices — of the Sask Party government. 
 
You know, and I find this interesting. This piece of legislation 
as well addresses the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker, the film 
employment tax credit. And of course here’s just another 
example of ideology of the Sask Party trumping common sense 
and the long-term interests of our province. 
 
We once had a thriving film industry in our province, that was 
in a position to grow exponentially. We have a world-class 
sound stage that films and productions were lining up from 
around the world to compete to come and film in. And of course 



3524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

we had the spinoff of thousands of jobs within our province and 
investment within our province, diversification to our economy 
as well. 
 
And even the chamber of commerce within the province 
weighed in when the Sask Party axed the film tax credit, driving 
investment from our province, driving so many workers and 
families from our province, and weakening us from an 
economic perspective. And it’s right now where you see the 
poor economic conditions that the Sask Party have placed us in. 
We know we would be stronger if we had the sector in place, 
the film sector in place, and the jobs and investment that’s with 
it. 
 
I know next door in Manitoba there’s over $200 million of 
investment being made this year, driving up their GDP [gross 
domestic product], creating jobs. We see more than that in 
Alberta and then we see billions of dollars in British Columbia. 
But of course the Sask Party took those jobs away from 
Saskatchewan people, weakened our economy at a time where 
we had an unprecedented opportunity with strong commodity 
prices. They chose to weaken our province and pulled 
diversification out of our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we see on some of these measures that we see, these are 
housekeeping changes. In other cases, they’re the consequences 
of a government that has failed to deliver for the people of our 
province and has failed to serve the best interest of our 
province, certainly from a social perspective, but from an 
economic perspective as well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And front and centre within this legislation is the repealing of 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. And you might recall Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, it came with the sort of 
lofty language that the Global Transportation Hub once did as 
well, Mr. Speaker. This was the showpiece for the premier that 
just departed, Mr. Speaker, when he came to office. This was 
his economic plan, Mr. Speaker, and obviously it was a 
complete flop. It was something that wasted millions of dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, but more than that it wasted the energy and efforts 
of hundreds of good people from across the province who were 
tapped to be engaged in this mismanaged project of the premier, 
of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. But that was a key component 
of, you know, what that premier was running on in 2007 as he 
came to office. 
 
And in fact the other thing he did through that process is he 
took over local economic development within our province, 
took it away from communities. I see the member for 
Moosomin here, and I think of the good folks out there in 
Moosomin who dedicated themselves to economic development 
within that region and to great effect, knowing the assets and 
interests of that region and having skin in the game, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what we saw from the Sask Party was certainly a 
disrespect of the local economic minds and those that had skin 
in the game, those that were creating investment across our 
province, those that knew the assets of our communities and 
regions best, Mr. Speaker. And it was taken all over, taken all 
over into the auspice of Enterprise Saskatchewan. Bunch of 

money thrown at it, wasted of course, Mr. Speaker. And they 
brought all sorts of very good people from across the province 
and brought them into the fold through that process and wasted 
their time, Mr. Speaker. So like so many things that the Sask 
Party has touched, wasted money, wasted time, and failed to 
deliver for the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And right now, you know, if we look across Saskatchewan we 
sure would be well served by leaning on and trusting in local 
communities from across Saskatchewan when it comes to 
economic development. And we’re, you know, sort of the 
exception in Canada around local economic development 
funding, where this government blew up the efforts of regions 
and local communities, took over that control, of course 
mismanaged their enterprise project, wasted time, wasted 
money, and now has left us in a spot where we’re one of the 
only provinces in Canada that doesn’t fund local economic 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that needs to change. I think we should be trusting 
in the people of this province. I think we should be trusting in 
the good people of Prince Albert and area, the good people of 
Moosomin and area . . . I’m being heckled by the member from 
Indian Head. You know, certainly Indian Head is a community 
that we would be well served by having local economic minds 
being engaged in economic development. It’s a community 
that’s been hurt by the choices of this government and, you 
know, the film industry through to the tree nursery, Mr. 
Speaker. These are all important. 
 
And we’re talking about economic matters here at a time where, 
of course, this government’s failing to get the job done for 
Saskatchewan people, failing to create the jobs that 
Saskatchewan people need, putting forward a performance 
that’s pitiful, Mr. Speaker, from a perspective of the GDP — 
lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And those impacts are all felt 
by Saskatchewan people. 
 
And then we have a government that sits on their hands at a 
time where we have a rail system that just simply isn’t 
performing, Mr. Speaker. And right now, at this time we have, 
you know, certainly producers not able to get product to market, 
but impacts that are cascading across our economy as we speak 
— a refinery that’s not running at full capacity because they 
can’t get the product to market, potash producers who can’t get 
product to port right now, manufacturers from across our 
province that are hamstrung right now. 
 
And my message to the Sask Party around rail transportation is 
this is a time for this government to act. Unfortunately, under 
the Sask Party and also because of things like lower commodity 
prices, we don’t have the economic strength that we should. But 
the fact of the matter is that our rail system isn’t even 
performing at this point within our GDP, at this point within our 
economy. And we want to grow new markets, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to expand trade. We want to serve our exporters from 
across Saskatchewan. But if the Sask Party sits on their hands 
on the file of rail transportation, Mr. Speaker, they’re failing a 
whole generation of businesses across our province. They’re 
failing the future of our economy. And the goal, of course, is to 
bring that economy back into stride, to see it firing on all 
cylinders, to create the kind of jobs that Saskatchewan people 
need and deserve. But we’re not well served by a government 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3525 

that gives lip service to an underperforming rail transportation 
system, the duopoly that’s simply not getting the job done for 
Saskatchewan people. And this is the time that we should be 
addressing this within our province. 
 
And you know, I get a kick having ministers and backbenchers 
heckle throughout this speech. I’d urge them, they should . . . 
This is a matter of urgency. This is a matter that’s costing us 
real dollars today from a fiscal perspective. And look at their 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. You’ll understand what the consequences 
are there. But it’s costing jobs. It’s costing the bottom line of 
Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker, and it’s impacting an 
entire province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d spoken to a few of the elements in The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act that’s 
been brought forward, some of it being housekeeping, a lot of it 
representing really poor choices of this government, a 
government that really hasn’t served the interests of the people 
of our province, that couldn’t get the job from a fiscal 
perspective, couldn’t get the job done economically, Mr. 
Speaker. And as such I know there’s a lot within this Act that 
would allow me to go a lot longer within this Assembly. 
 
But I think what’s important is, you know, there’s a bit of a 
debate across the floor. What we need to remember is we’re 
talking about real people, real jobs, real lives, real communities, 
and there’s real hurt out there, Mr. Speaker. And they deserve 
so much better than a government that breaks its promises and 
has its own partisan self-interest well ahead of the long-term 
public interests of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Bill No. 95, you know, there’s lots 
more to be said. I know more will be said by my colleagues. 
There will be more within committee. But at this point in time, 
I’ll adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to 
enter into the debate on Bill No. 97, An Act to amend The 
Arbitration Act, 1992. And I’ve been listening to many 
speeches on this and it’s one that is very, very important. And 
I’ll reflect a little bit on what I said yesterday about the 
mediation and some of the other tools that the minister has 
brought forward. And this is one piece of the puzzle, a very 

important piece. 
 
It does talk about defining arbitrators, or also known as umpires 
or other . . . or a family arbitrator, and defines it as “a person 
who is recognized by the minister as meeting the requirements 
prescribed in the regulations for family arbitrators.” And a 
family dispute means “a dispute between the parties respecting 
a matter to which one of the following applies.” 
 
It talks about The Children’s Law Act, 1997, and other than a 
hearing pursuant to that section 12, it doesn’t change section 12. 
The Family Maintenance Act, 1997. The Family Property Act. 
The Divorce Act of Canada. 
 
And as I said yesterday, this is very important considering 
where we find ourselves here in Saskatchewan, that we have the 
highest rates of domestic violence here in Saskatchewan. And 
so when we talk about arbitration or mediation or family in 
dispute, quite often it is very, very tragic and it’s one that could 
lead to very difficult situations. 
 
So while this is important, we need to recognize the fact that, as 
with many things, we can put forward pieces of legislation, 
tying up the legislation, but if our resources aren’t there, if there 
isn’t access to justice, then it really means nothing, doesn’t it, 
Mr. Speaker. It really is a simple nothing. 
 
Hopes are created that maybe we’ll have a more . . . a friendlier 
court system, one that people feel welcome and that they won’t 
be shunned or felt to believe that somehow it’s not for them, 
that in fact they have access to justice and they can make things 
happen. 
 
So in many ways this is a good piece of legislation, but I think 
the challenge remains. And we wait until early April. And as 
the Premier said today, that we have to wait until then to find 
out what kind of commitments they have. And of course this is 
something that I feel we’ll need to know the answer to as soon 
as possible while we wait for the budget. I understand that. It’s 
clearly something that people are very, very impatient, and 
there can be tragic circumstances. We’ve seen especially when 
it comes to interpersonal violence, domestic violence, that that 
in fact can lead to death and we know, matter of fact, the 
Minister of Justice has a process in place examining that. 
 
So I know we’ll be having lots of people who want to speak to 
these issues. We’ll have questions about access to arbitration 
and arbitrators. And we’ll have more questions about the 
implementation of this process. The key though will be 
resources, not so much in terms of the language in the bill — 
we get that — but it’s the resources. You can dress it up all you 
want but if you’re not going to really support it, then what’s the 
point. And particularly in this, it’s very, very sad. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 97, An Act to amend The Arbitration Act, 1992. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



3526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
and enter into second reading debate on Bill No. 98, the 
miscellaneous statutes amendment Act. As has been previously 
discussed both by the minister and members on this side, the 
intention of this bill is to amend a number of Acts including: 
The Children’s Law Act, The Family Maintenance Act, The 
Family Property Act, and the family — I maybe already said 
that — The Family Maintenance Act, Mr. Speaker, updating 
some language, and adding some measures to deal with 
mediation, and to divert some of the matters that maybe would 
have previously been dealt with by the courts, diverting them to 
family mediators and some other professionals as I will get into 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just going to go back to the minister’s, the then minister’s 
comments back on November the 21st, 2017 when he 
introduced this Act in second reading, noting that there’s an 
encouragement or a move towards encouraging “. . . parties to 
use out-of-court dispute resolution processes for family disputes 
where appropriate.” Of course, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 
evidence towards this that the more that those type of disputes, 
that by their very nature tend to be heated and have very large 
impact on families but particularly on children, if we could look 
at best practice to maybe reduce some of that animosity and 
some of the impact that is experienced by families when they go 
through this process, I think that is indeed a very good and a 
needed goal within the justice system. 
 
One note in the minister’s comments: “Parties to disputes need 
to be aware of the range of options available for early 
settlement and to maximize these opportunities to reduce the 
financial and emotional cost of separation.” So certainly similar 
to the comments made by my colleague from Saskatoon Centre. 
It is very important to change the legislation, but in other pieces 
making sure that the necessary resources are there to support 
those changes. 
 
So those are a number of questions that I’m sure my colleagues 
will have when we get to committee with this bill. Will the 
resources be there and where will the resources be for the 
additional training that’s required? And I’ll go through that as I 
go through my comments. Will the resources be there to make 
sure that families are aware of these resources in the community 
and how will that be made apparent to them? 
 
[16:00] 
 
I have done a little bit of research looking for some of the 
definitions and some of the background information here, Mr. 
Speaker, and found it a little bit difficult to find. I did find it on 
the Internet, but in some articles that were . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member from Cannington is 
cautioning me, probably with some veracity, that I should be 
careful about what I read on the Internet, but this is from the 
Government of Sask site so hopefully, Mr. Speaker, I can trust 
that. Although, hey, maybe that is good counsel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that the minister mentioned in his comments in 
second reading that there will be new provisions: 
 

. . . will create exceptions in certain circumstances on 
application to the court or another prescribed person. For 
example, where there is a history of violence, a child has 
been abducted, or [there’s] a restraining order . . . in place, 
a party may seek an exception. 

 
I was very glad to see this in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course mediation is desirable and helpful and beneficial for a lot 
of reasons, but it is not something that can be applied in all 
circumstances, and the one that I’m most familiar with is in the 
case of domestic violence. If it is required or entered into when 
there is that type of not only physically but emotionally abusive 
relationship, it often is used as further means to further that 
abuse and continue with that relationship. 
 
So I was very glad to see that some exceptions would be made 
here. I believe what’s being anticipated is that, barring those 
exceptional circumstances, there would be every, not every 
opportunity but every attempt would be made to divert as many 
of these cases to these alternate dispute processes as possible. 
 
It goes on to say in the minister’s comments: 
 

Where parties choose mediation, they will be required to 
use the services of a family mediator. 

 
And that definition has been changed throughout all of these 
pieces of legislation and defined. And: 
 

The qualifications for this special type of mediator will be 
set out in the regulations. Family mediators will have 
special training in family law and have enhanced 
knowledge of the conflicts that may arise in and the 
intricacies of family law disputes. 

 
And I think that that is something, again going back to my 
earlier comments, I have many questions about, and I’m sure 
the critic will as well. Who is being met with to determine these 
qualifications? Just a shout out to the SASW [Saskatchewan 
Association of Social Workers] who were here earlier today, 
and this in the midst of Social Work Month in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Hopefully I would hope that those bodies, the 
regulatory bodies for a profession such as social workers would 
have been able to be consulted with regard to the training that’s 
required. 
 
But also I would be curious to know where this training is 
available. Is it offered in Saskatchewan? Is it offered at the 
polytechnic or at the universities? And even more so, are we 
ensuring that there is proper funding and resources to ensure 
that these new, what seem to be in some cases new programs, 
that that training is there? The other thing is, you know, where 
these new workers will live, or where they will be housed with 
regard to ministry. 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3527 

The amendments to The Children’s Law Act will also include 
revisions respecting parenting coordinators. And I may stand to 
be corrected on this, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think that we 
currently have parenting coordinators in the province. So this is 
something that we see in Ontario and BC [British Columbia], I 
believe, and it’s something that’s being anticipated here. So you 
know, where that training will take place, is this something that 
people can access online, that type of training? And how will 
they fit into this government’s 5 per cent reduction mandate 
within the public sector if these are being introduced as new and 
much needed? 
 
I think the minister did a good job of outlining the reasons that 
these professionals are needed, the benefit on both the financial 
side but particularly the benefit to families and in particular 
children to have these professionals accessed within or prior to 
entering into the more formal court proceedings. I hope that the 
corresponding dollars will be there both for the training and for 
the hiring of these important positions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just going to . . . I’m quite fascinated by the idea of the 
parenting coordinators. I’ve looked up an overview of parenting 
coordinators: “. . . is a child focused or child centered form of 
dispute resolution which provides parents with an alternative to 
managing child related disagreements during or after 
divorce/separation.” 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, anyone who’s been through 
even the most amicable of separation and divorce knows just 
how difficult these situations are. And having someone there to 
help you navigate, help you come to an agreement that really is 
in the best interest of the children, which I think a lot of people 
enter into, you know, saying that that’s what they want, but 
emotions get heated and some long-standing resentments can 
build up, and really it’s often the children who pay the price for 
that type of animosity that builds up. So to actually have these 
parenting coordinators in place in these situations prior to the 
more acrimonious process which happens in the courts, I think 
that that is something that is very desirable and I hope that we 
will have enough. 
 
We were hearing today about wait-lists for children seeking 
mental health services in this province being in some cases in 
large cities up to two years, Mr. Speaker. I hope that we’re not 
looking at that type of a wait-list here because, you know, in the 
minister’s own background documents here and some of the 
documents on the Justice family law website, the longer these 
disputes go on the more expensive they tend to be, but also the 
greater impact there is for the children, and more heightened the 
conflict can become. 
 
So I think this is a good idea and I would like to see that there 
would be some assurances that it’s properly resourced and that 
the access, there is the right level of access, that this can be 
accessed without delay. Otherwise we lose the benefit of having 
these positions in place, to too large of a degree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in this background document I’m just going to reference 
here at the top — it’s under publications on gov.sk.ca. It’s titled 
Early Dispute Resolution in Family Law Disputes and dated 
June 2017, but there’s no attribution of who compiled this 
document. It looks like it’s may be a stakeholder document that 
was soliciting feedback. But it does talk about a number of the 

changes that have been incorporated into this bill. 
 
I would like to . . . Types of ADRs — so that’s alternative 
dispute resolution — looking at the mandatory resolution: 
 

Mandatory ADR would permit parties to participate in 
their choice of ADR. There are a variety of ADR methods 
that may assist parties in the early resolution of family 
disputes. 

 
Of course mediation, as is noted here, is likely the most 
well-known of these disputes, but also there is collaborative law 
services that are referenced in The Children’s Law Act, The 
Family Maintenance Act, and The Family Property Act. 
 
So these are mechanisms that are in place now, perhaps 
underutilized and lesser known than they might be when some 
of these changes are made provided that there is a proper level 
of resourcing to ensure that people going through these 
situations have both knowledge and access to the programs. 
 
In terms of timing, and I think that is important . . . it’s 
something that I’ve mentioned, the importance of the timing 
with the availability of these services. The proposed provisions 
would permit parties to participate in their choice of ADR and 
the timing would occur either before pleadings are filed or 
immediately after the close of pleadings. 
 
If issues aren’t resolved through this process, it’s anticipated 
that the issues proceeding through a court resolution process 
would have been clarified and narrowed. So I guess what that’s 
saying there, Mr. Speaker, is that even, you know, if sometimes 
these processes, for a number of reasons, don’t work and the 
matters do proceed to court proceedings, there is a provision in 
this new bill that doesn’t allow any of the evidence overturned 
within the mediation process to be disclosed in court unless 
there is agreement from both parties. And I think that’s very 
important. It’s protective. Otherwise if members going into the 
mediation process are guarded with the information that they 
share and that they bring forward for fear that it will be brought 
up and used against them in court later, I think that really would 
go a long way to damage the efficacy of the mediation process. 
So I do think that that is a very important provision in this bill 
as well. 
 
I’m just going to move down through this — sorry, I’m still 
getting used to the new bifocals here, Mr. Speaker — and back 
to the parenting coordinators, Mr. Speaker. So this is a 
relatively new, new to me, perhaps new to the province 
classification of professionals within the dispute process, the 
family law process. And I just want to read this into the record: 
 

Parenting coordinators can help parties after an agreement 
or order is in place to resolve disputes over how an 
agreement or order is interpreted or put into effect. 

 
They don’t create the agreements, of course. Those are, I would 
assume, created through the ADR process or sometimes through 
court. But they do help parents navigating parenting time 
arrangements, dates, pickups, holidays, and they may be an 
effective way for parties to resolve smaller disputes over 
existing agreements and orders outside of the court. Again, 
here’s the piece that I referenced earlier: 



3528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

Parenting coordinators are present in other provinces, such 
as British Columbia and Ontario, and offer parties in high 
conflict relationships an avenue for resolution that does not 
involve more court applications. 

 
So this is another piece — sort of on the other side of the court 
process — that allows parents a way to deal with their disputes 
without going back to court. And certainly, unfortunately again, 
Mr. Speaker, there are probably people even in this House 
today who have experience or a tale of disputes, particularly 
around custody agreements that have gone on for a long time, 
that have been highly conflictual, and that have, I guess plainly 
put, Mr. Speaker, cost both parties a lot of time, a lot of energy, 
and a lot of money in many cases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And again, both on the emotional side of things, the trauma side 
of things, children pay the impact there. But also sometimes, 
you know, I’ve seen parents go broke trying to get back at the 
other parent. So this is an alternate avenue for parents outside of 
the court system, and quite possibly a way to reduce some of 
that animosity and conflict. 
 
And again, I think we’ll be looking for what the qualifications 
will be. I believe it says here that those will be the 
responsibilities . . . The bill will set out, the services of a 
parenting coordinator may be used, and the types and 
determinations the parent coordinator may make, and the 
minimum training and practice criteria an individual will need 
to qualify as a parenting coordinator. And so that’s to be 
determined, I guess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Something that I have a personal interest in but I think is very 
important, along with the other questions that I’ve raised around 
where those seeking to have these qualifications, where they 
could gain them and how they’ll be regulated, and if there are 
new courses that need to be established within the province, 
where the funding for that will come. I think that those are 
likely on the list of questions that the critic will have when this 
bill moves to committee in short order here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Using the closing comments of the minister on second reading, 
“This suite of family law amendments will assist to promote 
alternate dispute resolution methods in family law matters for 
the timely and cost-effective resolution of family law disputes.” 
Mr. Speaker, I think if this legislation is enacted and resourced 
properly, I think it has the potential to do so. And there’s some 
parts of this bill that I think are long overdue and am quite 
excited to see in here. Again I’ll go back to, particularly the 
understanding that while mediation is effective and desirable in 
many, many cases of family law, in cases where there is abuse 
or there has been . . . It doesn’t specifically note child abuse but 
only child abduction. I guess that’s a question I have. Why not 
abuse, only abduction? 
 
But with some notable exceptions and important exceptions, the 
potential of mediation and bypassing the court on many of these 
issues both deals with issues that we see with court backlogs, 
but also maybe a more appropriate avenue where it’s possible 
for two parties to come to an agreement in a lower stakes and 
lower conflict situation through some of these ADRs. 
 

So I do have more questions, but I’m sure that the critic will 
have even more and we’ll be coming to them shortly. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, for hearing my thoughts on this. And with 
that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into debate here this afternoon again, this time on Bill 
No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017. The title of 
this legislation doesn’t really sound like much, Mr. Speaker. It 
sort of leaves, I think, the average person watching at home to 
think that this would be a general piece of housekeeping. But of 
course this represents a betrayal of the people of this province 
when it comes to our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course, not too long ago — a couple years ago and for many 
years before that — the Sask Party had promised and pledged 
that our Crowns weren’t for sale, that they wouldn’t privatize 
our Crowns. Of course they went to Saskatchewan people in 
that last election, just two years ago, made that promise to the 
people of the province, hand over heart, promising that our 
Crowns weren’t for sale. 
 
And then of course, shortly thereafter, we realized that that just 
wasn’t the case. We had a government that desperately 
scrambled to sell off STC and then tried to put up to 50 per cent 
of all of our Crown corporations up for sale, Mr. Speaker, 
representing a massive betrayal to the people of our province, a 
breaking of trust with the people of the province on an issue so 
important to not just today but to our future. 
 
Of course our Crown corporations were built by and for 
Saskatchewan people. They create hundreds of millions of 
dollars every year in dividends that they return to pay for things 
like our classrooms and health care across Saskatchewan. They 
support and create thousands of jobs all across our province and 
thousands more through supply chains with local businesses all 
through our province. In fact this is an area that should be 
strengthened and improved, strengthening those Saskatchewan 
supply chains, indigenous supply chains, making sure that we 
maximize the economic benefit of our Crown corporations. And 
of course our Crowns also provide low rates, affordability to the 
people of our province, and service, Mr. Speaker, in places that 
wouldn’t otherwise receive service. 
 
So our Crowns are critical to today. They’re critical to future 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3529 

generations. And the Sask Party’s betrayal on this front won’t 
be forgotten by the people of our province. They know where 
the Sask Party stands on this issue. They know that they simply 
can’t be trusted with our Crowns. And this is going to be a 
critical issue into that next election, Mr. Speaker, because 
people recognize that when it comes to our Crowns, when 
they’re gone, they’re gone. It’s so hard to rebuild Crown 
corporations that are desperately sold off for a quick buck under 
this government, and Saskatchewan people will rally as they 
have to protect our Crown corporations for future generations. 
 
The Sask Party brought forward legislation that would have 
allowed the sell-off of up to 49 per cent of all of our Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. Now they pretend as though they’re changing that 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, but really they’ve left the door wide 
open to sell-offs. And Saskatchewan people have also learned 
that they, of course, simply can’t take the Sask Party on their 
word when it comes to our Crowns. And they recognize as well 
that a majority government has a lot of power on these fronts, 
which is why I’m rather certain that Saskatchewan people will 
remember this matter and be very mindful of our Crowns when 
they go to vote in the next election — as they will in the 
by-election, for example, up in Northeast, you know, where the 
Finance minister got out of Dodge, Mr. Speaker, and now we’re 
going to be having a by-election here in Regina. And I know 
people up in Regina Northeast felt tremendously betrayed on 
this front and were let down. And I heard it from door after 
door after door through Regina Northeast, Mr. Speaker, from 
people who felt that they simply weren’t straight with them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, the member who had his cameo in the leadership 
race there, the member from Meadow Lake, is heckling a little 
bit here, Mr. Speaker. He’s heckling, but the point around 
Northeast, Mr. Speaker, that’s the Finance minister’s riding. 
And I know, you know, since that last election it’s been a place 
that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It was the then Finance 
minister’s riding. Of course he’s got out of Dodge, Mr. Speaker, 
after he cranked up the debt and broke promises to the people of 
the province. 
 
But I’ve been out on those doors an awful lot, along with our 
team and along with many local volunteers, and the number of 
people that voted for the Sask Party in the last election who 
clearly won’t again, Mr. Speaker, because of this betrayal, a 
betrayal that matters to the people of our province, is 
significant. 
 
I know we went out one time, Mr. Speaker, and I was out with 
the member for Regina Lakeview, I think the member for 
Regina Douglas Park as well. We took petitions out to the then 
Finance minister’s riding, Mr. Speaker, after the broken 
promise and the betrayal and the sell-off of our Crown 
corporation, STC, and the attempted sell-off of our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was hard to find a door, Mr. Speaker, that 
wouldn’t sign that petition calling on the Sask Party to stop the 
sell-off of our Crown corporations. And Saskatchewan people, 
hard-working Saskatchewan people, recognize of course that 
this is a broken promise, but they also recognize that as the Sask 
Party sells off our Crowns, they’re selling out Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker, and selling out our future. 
 
Our Crowns need to be locked down with the highest level of 

protection possible, and they need to be strengthened and 
utilized to meet the needs of today and into the future. At a time 
right now where we’ve got economic challenges caused in part 
by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, we need to utilize our Crowns 
to crank up job creation within our province and also address 
some of the challenges that we face — say, for example, from 
an environmental perspective, reducing emissions and creating 
jobs. Our Crowns are in a perfect position to be leveraged on 
this front. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan New Democrats, the official 
opposition, the people of our province, won’t allow the Sask 
Party another chance to sell off our Crown corporations. They 
will remember. They won’t forget. And we’ll work to make 
sure that our Crowns are protected for future generations.  
 
With that being said, there’s much more on this debate, and I 
think a team of us maybe will go out and spend some time 
talking to the good people of Northeast here tonight, Mr. 
Speaker. I will adjourn debate as it relates to Bill No. 99. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate around Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017. Mr. Speaker, it’s always good to take a 
look at the minister’s second reading speech to have a sense of 
where the government is coming on a particular bill. And this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, came out of recommendations from 
the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan, titled reform of 
the land contracts Act. I can hear the Deputy Premier, actually, 
who is speaking from his seat, who is very proud of this bill and 
talks about the time when he initiated this process, Mr. Speaker. 
So we hear from the Deputy Premier. 
 
The Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan does really, 
really great work actually, important work in terms of 
evaluating Saskatchewan legislation and seeing where we 
should go. And the minister in his second reading speech does 
in fact say that it was building on recommendations, but I 
haven’t been able to do a side-by-side comparison of the Law 
Reform Commission’s report and this legislation. But I know 
when we get to committee that our critic will, and will ask some 
very specific questions around that. 
 
The minister, in his second reading comments, points out that 
the land contracts Act is “. . . consumer protection legislation in 



3530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

place to protect borrowers by requiring lenders to obtain leave 
of the court before starting a foreclosure proceeding.” 
 
He points out that: 
 

The protection is provided as . . . time to bring the 
mortgage up to date; refinance or sell the property before 
foreclosure or judicial sale; or if that is not possible, [he 
points out that it’s] time to find alternative 
accommodation. This [particular] Act does not apply to 
farm land. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the point about time to find alternative 
accommodation, it was interesting yesterday. My colleague 
from Regina Lakeview pointed to some stats from the Canadian 
Bankers Association. You’ll have forgive me. I really think I 
need to start wearing reading glasses here, or get longer arms. 
But looking at the statistics, Mr. Speaker, what the Canadian 
Bankers Association does is they produce a list of the 
percentage of arrears to total number of mortgages. And it’s 
important to point out here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 
are three times the national average. The percentage of arrears 
of total numbers of mortgages here in Saskatchewan is point 
seven four per cent. 
 
We can look to provinces like Alberta and the Maritimes to see 
where they’re at. We’ve had similar challenges around being 
resource-dependent economies, and they are lower. We’ve got 
Atlantic Canada at point five four per cent and Alberta at point 
four three per cent. But I think that the striking thing again, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Saskatchewan is three times the national 
average, which this particular number, this percentage signifies 
969, the number of mortgages in arrears in Saskatchewan as of 
November 30th, 2017, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
You think about those numbers and those are families, those are 
real people who are struggling with affordability, struggling 
with lack of jobs, lack of employment, and trying very hard to 
keep their head above water but failing, Mr. Speaker. And this 
Sask Party government has failed in many regards in providing 
the proper . . . At a time when our oil resources or our natural 
resources are low. And we also have a government making 
affordability more difficult, increasing the PST [provincial sales 
tax] on folks. I think it was five increases in SaskPower rates in 
the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think this signifies something very serious and this number 
represents — we can’t ever forget here in this place — that that 
number represents real people with families, people who just 
want a good livelihood, Mr. Speaker, and to be able to have a 
home. When you purchase a home, you want to put down roots 
and feel like you’re connected to something, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s close to 1,000 people, 1,000 families who are losing that. 
 
But just with respect to Bill No. 103, the minister in his second 
reading speech points out that this particular bill, the land 
contracts Act, is more than 70 years old, being enacted in 1943. 
And the commission’s final report, the Law Reform 
Commission’s final report considered the steps required by the 
land contracts Act for non-farmland mortgages and 
recommended reforms to better protect borrowers in current 

conditions. Again, so it’ll be interesting to see how much the 
bill matches the Law Reform Commission’s recommendations. 
 
The minister points out the Act will maintain the time and 
notice provided by the current Act but reduces the cost to those 
involved in the process. He points out that in Saskatchewan we 
are the only province that requires any pre-action process for 
foreclosure, and he goes on to say that “The current Act 
requires a number of steps before the application for leave to 
commence an action.” And he is arguing that this doesn’t serve 
the interest of borrowers or lenders, and many steps can confuse 
borrowers and cause unnecessary expense to the lender that 
may be passed on to the borrower. 
 
So as he mentions, the Law Reform Commission’s report and 
the recommendations, it recommended that: 
 

. . . the first step in the new Act for foreclosure proceedings 
will be a plain-language notice of application for leave to 
commence an action. The notice will be first in legislated 
form and secondly served on the borrower and the 
Provincial Mediation Board at least 60 days before the 
hearing date. 

 
He points out that the new process eliminates two steps: 
 

The 60-day time period between the notice and the hearing 
will be retained. It will allow the borrower to negotiate a 
payment plan with the lender and put the land up for sale 
or, alternately, to prepare to appear in court. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister argues: 
 

The new process will ensure both the borrower and the 
courts have the most up-to-date information before an 
application for leave to commence a foreclosure action is 
heard. It will require their copy of the mortgage or 
agreement for sale of the land as reasonable evidence of 
the value of the land . . . and reasonable evidence of the 
value of the land be served with the notice. It will also 
require updated arrears information to be served on the 
borrower and filed with the court prior to the hearing date. 

 
He also points out that: 
 

The court will continue to be limited to eight months of 
adjournments on an application for leave to commence a 
foreclosure action. This provides certainty [He believes it 
provides certainty] to the process for both parties. The bill 
will not apply to properties used for commercial purposes 
at the time of default. 

 
He argues that it’s “. . . consumer protection legislation that is 
not intended to apply to purely commercial transactions.” 
 
It also, Mr. Speaker, repeals two bills, The Home Owners’ 
Protection Act. and The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Act. 
Elements of it were moved into this bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that our critic responsible — I believe 
it’s our Justice critic, who is a very able individual — I know 
that she will have many questions in committee on Bill No. 103, 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. But with that, at this 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3531 

time I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure and an honour to rise today to enter into the debate on 
Bill No. 104, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code and its Administration and repealing a certain Act. 
And it’s an interesting piece of legislation. We were kind of 
surprised when the minister brought this forward. And we 
thought, what could this be? This is a huge undertaking. And 
then we found it was simply a translation piece and that it was 
just going to be translated into French. 
 
And we think usually when you bring big bills into the 
legislature there’s reasons, and you don’t just bring something 
of this magnitude, one of the foundational bills or pieces of 
legislation of our province, and then have nothing much else in 
it. It just begs for debate. And so today I hope to raise a few 
issues that I think — and particularly in this time that we find 
ourselves in our province, both in terms of the truth and 
reconciliation period that we’re in — that people are really 
looking for improvements around human rights. And also with 
the increased population of newcomers to our province and a 
young population, people have a much higher expectation for 
human rights than, say, a few decades ago. 
 
So when we found this piece of legislation was just about 
translation. Well that is very worthwhile and I want to even say 
on today when we mark the special day for the francophone 
community, the Fransaskois of Saskatchewan, it’s only fitting 
that it be translated into French. That is a very laudable goal, 
and of course we support it. 
 
But as we look through it we go, in this time are there 
improvements that we could make to the legislation ourselves? 
We know that we have a very activist commissioner who has 
guided the Human Rights Commission to new areas that I think 
have really caused a lot of interest for people in Saskatchewan, 
particularly with a new issue around education and the 
commitment he has and what he’s caused many people to speak 
of. And we wish him well in that, and we think that’s a good, 
good thing. He talks about rights and responsibilities. 
 
But at the same time, we have to stay close to the knitting. We 
have to say, what is our Human Rights Code and is it meeting 

the current challenges of the new millennia and particularly 
here in Saskatchewan? But not only in Saskatchewan, as we’ve 
said that our province really plays a large role. We’re really part 
of the world and we’ve always been known as the world’s 
breadbasket, but now we’ve expanded that. We’ve diversified 
that and I’ll talk a little bit about how we should even talk a bit 
about that in our Human Rights Code. And I think it’s a missed 
opportunity. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the interesting things about our 
Human Rights Code is, I think and I’ve been told, that we’re 
one of the few that actually has a bill of rights. And this is a 
really, really important piece, as people at home and many 
people in the House may not be aware that we have certain 
rights that are enunciated in The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code. The first is the right to freedom of conscience, and with 
that “. . . opinion and belief and freedom of religious 
association, teaching, practice and worship.” 
 
And right to free expression, that every person has the right to 
“. . . freedom of expression through all means of 
communication, including . . . the arts, speech, the press or 
radio, television or any other broadcasting device.” 
 
Now I have to stop there. Mr. Speaker. If there’s ever a time to 
modernize language, let’s modernize this part because, I tell 
you, radio, the press . . . You know, when we’ve been talking 
about another bill this government has introduced around 
revenge porn, they talk about expanding that definition, but here 
we are still using the word “radio” and “television.” And for 
many people, even the word “television” is becoming archaic 
because they’re watching online. You know, the old family TV 
for a period of time, maybe 50 years, 60 years, now it’s sort of 
becoming kind of passé. So I think the minister should make 
note of that because we’ll probably be coming back to talk 
about how that really needs to change, the right to free 
expression, the right to free association. 
 
And I just want to say, interestingly, and this is one thing that I 
. . . When we were talking about the bill, it talked about revenge 
porn and that. And I talked about the right to be forgotten. And 
as we talk about the right to privacy . . . You know, we have 
right to associate, but even more . . . And we just heard 
yesterday about how Facebook was mined and it was a 
Canadian that was the whistle-blower, talked about how I 
believe the company — I can’t remember the name of the 
company but it was on the news . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Cambridge analytics, yes. And it had its roots in Canada in 
terms of data mining, and how that’s really become something 
that we have to be very careful about. 
 
And so the right to be alone, the right to privacy is becoming as 
much . . . as important as the right to free association. And I 
think that’s very, very important. It goes on to right to freedom 
of arbitrary imprisonment. And the one that I found very 
interesting is a right to elections. And here, if I could draw this 
to the attention of the folks opposite, here again, you know, in 
the Human Rights Code we’re caught in a binary stereotype. 
We talk about, has the right to express freely “his or her 
franchise in all elections.” I think it would be much more 
appropriate and much more modern to say “to exercise freely 
their franchise in all elections.” We know that people identify 
and express their gender in many different ways, and it’s more 



3532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

than just two. “His” and “her” are limiting, and in fact it may be 
even grounds for legal action further on. 
 
And so that takes me back to another issue that we have here, 
that we talk about the prohibited grounds. And this I do want to 
say. We congratulated the government just a few short years 
ago where they expanded this. The commission believed 
strongly that the idea of trans rights was covered under gender 
and sexual orientation but soon understood that that was not the 
case, that in fact they needed to think more broadly than that. 
 
So they added a prohibited ground subsection (o), gender 
identity. But we need . . . And we do know, we do know this is 
sort of halfway there, but not even very close when there should 
be “gender identity and expression.” It’s the expression part that 
you’ll be discriminated against. It’s how you express yourself 
that will cause the discrimination. It will not be your identity 
that is in your mind. And so while this may seem appropriate, 
that this is the time to really fix this and really come to terms 
with making this the best Act that we could have, the best code, 
the best bill we could have in Canada. 
 
And so just a few observations on the actual wording here if 
you’re wordsmithing. And we’ll be talking to the minister about 
if there is a possibility to see these as friendly amendments, 
because the intention is the same. If they argue that identity is 
the same as expression, then say what you mean and mean what 
you say. It’s as simple as that. So it’s accessible justice and not 
one that is a half measure. Change “his or her” to “their.” Be 
straight with that so that’s inclusive, not exclusive, because this 
is the time to improve the legislation. 
 
Now there are some things that I do want to put on the record, 
Mr. Speaker, because the thing is, when you do open up these 
kind of pieces of legislation, you are opening up ideas. And I do 
want to bring this to the attention of the House. One of the 
things we have concerns about — and we look at the stats in the 
back of the annual reports and we look at them very, very 
carefully — and we do have . . . We know, and I’ll come back 
to this a little bit later, we know the government has changed 
the processes of dealing with new cases or complaints in the 
Human Rights Commission. And so we’ve seen the number of 
complaints grow over the last several years and we’re not sure 
what is the cause of that but I do want to draw attention to some 
of these numbers that I think are quite alarming. 
 
[16:45] 
 
In the most recent Human Rights Commission report, April 1st 
of 2016 to March 31st, 2017, they had taken in a total number 
of new complaints of 444, of which 141 were formalized. Now 
they have to . . . So there’s 141. Of these 141, some under 
employment, we see that it was some 78 per cent. Now I want 
to make sure I have the right number. No, 83 per cent, 84 per 
cent, 83.9; 141 actually were dealing with employment. Now 
they say that many of these cases can actually have more than 
one stand for what the prohibited ground was, so it might add 
up to actually more than the 141. In that case, 84 per cent were 
dealing with employment. And then you go down to some of 
the others like education, there were 8; housing, 3; other was 2; 
public services was 13. So they really dug in quite detail but 
they kind of left the employment. But even that, for example 
under disability, 78 complaints dealing with employment. And 

then the others were quite small. 
 
But the shocking number that we have a lot of questions about, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’ll raise this in committee or in estimates, 
is the number of complaints that were found to have no 
reasonable grounds. And what they saw was an increase from 
177 to 220, or approximately half the complaints were found to 
have no reasonable grounds. Now that may be the case, and I’m 
not arguing their judgment, but I would like to know more 
about those 220 cases. Are we missing something in our Human 
Rights Code that we should be addressing? Because how is it 
that 220 people come forward in one year with a complaint that 
they think is a human rights case, and they’re wrong? Half the 
cases are dismissed because they’re not reasonable grounds. 
And we have no more data other than it’s 220. How can that 
be? Isn’t that worth a little bit more attention? 
 
When we had the Ombudsman come forward a few weeks ago, 
she has that same case, where several were not falling within 
the provincial Ombudsman’s mandate. And so we could ask 
her, so what were they? Well they were either federal situations 
or they were something to do with another type of situation. 
And so we soon found that it just wasn’t as relevant. But I do 
have this concern that it’s gone from 177 up to 220, some 45 
more cases being dismissed. So we have deep concerns about 
that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, we have some concerns about 
what’s happening here that we need to really address. We have 
situations that, in the spirit of Truth and Reconciliation, the 
Sixties Scoop, that is this an opportunity to speak more 
articulately to the indigenous population, to the indigenous folk 
here in Saskatchewan, about what Human Rights Code means 
for them and particularly in terms of the treatments received 
that they’ve had. 
 
But one other issue that I do want to get on the record and I 
think it’s important and I have shared with the Minister of 
Justice, and while I’m not expecting that we get this on to the 
bill today or this session, it’s one that we really need to talk 
about. And this is one about the use of criminal record checks 
by employers who are doing that during the hiring process and 
that this creates significant barriers for people who hold 
criminal records that may not be applicable to the situation. 
 
We see this situation rising in America where they’ve actually 
created a movement called Ban the Box because so many 
people are experiencing or having to go to jail because of three 
strikes and you’re out — you’re going to jail. Angela Davis was 
just here a few weeks ago, on March 8th, talking about the 
criminalization of both men and women that see unheard-of 
numbers in the States. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that here 
in Saskatchewan, particularly around sectors of our population 
that really causes some real problems. 
 
So anyway, in the States they’ve got this Ban the Box 
movement that began in 2004 to stop the discrimination that 
criminal record holders face when answering the question “do 
you have any criminal convictions?” on job application forms. 
 
Now of course there is a time and place for that, truly. When 
you’re dealing with schools or daycares, clearly you need to 
know about criminal records. Clearly you need to know about 



March 20, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3533 

criminal records when there’s a position of trust, dealing with 
money, for the potential of fraud. So we’re not saying get rid of 
this completely, but where it’s applicable. That quite often 
we’re seeing . . . 
 
And this is the issue of human rights. It’s not the case of, do 
you need to know? People feel they want to know, and because 
they want to know, they have to know. And really they should 
not be asking that. And so the campaign, this Ban the Box 
campaign, wants to open up employment opportunities for 
people who have past convictions, welcome people back to 
their community, and institute fair hiring processes concerning 
past convictions, and eliminate any restrictions on membership, 
volunteer, or board participation that may exclude people with 
arrest or conviction history. And we want to make sure we 
understand that it’s got to be relevant. It’s got to be relevant. 
 
Now why isn’t this happening in Canada? Why hasn’t this got 
more attention here? Well we used to have a process in Canada 
about Canadian pardons or record suspensions. But we saw in 
2010 this was suspended under Prime Minister Harper. Bill 
C-10, for safer streets and communities Act, which made 
substantial changes to the pardons Act, increasing the length of 
time and quadrupling the cost of getting a pardon, which went 
from $150 to $631 — really impacting people who might have 
had that choice of getting a pardon but now they can’t. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, with the passage of Bill C-45, the 
Cannabis Act, and Bill C-46, the Act to amend the Criminal 
Code, there will be even more uncertainty about people who’ve 
had a criminal conviction concerning cannabis. But now with 
the legalization of cannabis, what happens to their criminal 
record? 
 
And so this is something that we need to look into. We know 
both Quebec and British Columbia have tackled this issue, and I 
think that it’s time that we take a look at it in Saskatchewan. 
Because we know that we have . . . For example, the indigenous 
population accounts for 15 per cent of our population, but 
indigenous adults make up 80 per cent of the prison population 
and indigenous women make up 87 per cent of all female 
admissions. 
 
So this is something that really is tied to human rights. And I 
think it’s time that we take a look at how can we make sure, 
when people have paid for the consequences of their illegal act, 
that they can then re-enter the community and not face further 
discrimination because of something they did in the past. I think 
it’s time that we really take a look at this. And you know what it 
does is it drives people to work underground. We’re missing 
potential taxation because they’re working . . . And then that 
even creates even more problems. People are on social 
assistance longer because they can’t get to work. 
 
And really, Mr. Speaker, this is not an arbitrary idea or 
something. I’ve had many people in my office talk about this, 
and so I really want to make sure that we think about this. And 
I’ve asked the minister to consider, to take a look at this 
because, while we all want to make sure that our streets are 
safer, that people do pay for their crime, that in fact we do want 
to make sure that if there’s no implications that they can get 
back to work as soon as they can. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to also take a look and I . . . This is a 
very important Act for me as critic for human rights. And I 
know the Justice critic will want to speak longer on this as well. 
But this is a very important piece of legislation so I went to the 
library, got this book out: Speaking Out on Human Rights: 
Debating Canada’s Human Rights System. This was written in 
2013 and so it’s current up to 2013. 
 
There’s a couple things that I want to highlight here, and the 
first is the fact that . . . And this is interesting as I read this. And 
I’ll read this quote, recommendation no. 10: 
 

The Saskatchewan government should undertake a study of 
the Saskatchewan human rights system to determine the 
impact of the loss of a specialized human rights tribunal on 
a level of access to justice, the types of remedy offered, 
and the length of delays compared to other systems in 
Canada. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to revisit that debate we had a 
few years ago, but I think that . . . This was written in 2013, I 
think five years after we passed the legislation to end the 
tribunal system, and people across Canada are watching how 
our legislation is. And if they’re calling for changes, I think 
that’s pretty serious when we’re actually named in a textbook 
on human rights in Canada. 
 
The other one is this, recommendation 14: 
 

Governments should amend human rights legislation to 
include specific authority to work with international human 
rights networks and international human rights systems. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have talked about this because as an 
exporting country, many of our situations finding ourselves 
involved in a global issue. And one that I have raised, for 
example, is the Myanmar situation, the genocide of Rohingya 
that was happening and continues to happen. It’s been going on, 
but really hit the headlines in the fall when people were very 
concerned about what was happening in Myanmar. 
 
Now that may be seen to be far away, and what’s that got to do 
with Saskatchewan? It has a lot to do with Saskatchewan 
because, you know, we export peas to that country. They’re one 
of our main customers, in fact, and if I have the numbers right, 
we went from 300 tonnes a few years ago to, just a couple of 
years ago, 33 000 tonnes. And so, Mr. Speaker, the cost of that 
was $200,000. It is now a $16 million export for us where we 
export peas. 
 
But of course there was a little hiccup prior to 2014. I should 
not . . . I don’t want to minimize it by using the word “hiccup,” 
because it was pretty serious when we were taking a look at 
what was happening in Myanmar, and the dictatorship that was 
happening. And so we had cut off trade with Myanmar, and that 
was limiting our ability to export. That came off in 2014 and we 
responded in kind, increasing our export of peas. But now we 
see that they’re engaged in what many would call a genocide 
practice against the Rohingya. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility. We have a 
global responsibility to have an authority for the province or the 
commission to make comments on that. We can’t just wash our 



3534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2018 

hands and say we’re just the exporters. We know, and we’ve 
seen this in South Africa, the impact of joining together to ban 
sales. In fact, boycotts can have a powerful effect, a non-violent 
way of approaching resolution to global issues. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that we should consider 
that. So while I wrap up my comments, and I want to say that 
we’ll see this, and I’ll have lots of questions in committee. And 
not just that we do support the French translation — very 
important that this code be in French, obviously a very 
important aspect of Canada. 
 
But this is the opportunity to clean up some of the other 
language, make sure that it’s gender friendly in terms of getting 
rid of the terms “his” and “her” and replacing them with “their.” 
I think that that needs to be an emphasis we’re seeing over and 
over again with this province. We need to modernize the 
language about social media in the Bill of Rights. It’s very 
important. 
 
I would really encourage the government to take a look at 
considering the impact of the employment record checks. I 
think that’s having a huge impact. And in our spirit of truth and 
reconciliation, what a great time to say, hey, let’s explore this. 
It’s very important to explore this. And I would also, Mr. 
Speaker, think that we should take a look at the international 
implications. We are a major trading partner in this world and 
that is good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would move adjournment of the Bill No. 104. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate the 
committee sitting tonight, I would make a motion to adjourn the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader the Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3503 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3503 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3503 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3503 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3504 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3504 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3504 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3505 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3505 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3505 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3508 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3505 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3505 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3506 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3506 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3506 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Reconciliation Regina Event 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3506 
 Fransaskois Community Celebrates la Francophonie 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3507 
 Social Work Week Proclaimed in Saskatchewan  
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3507 
 Champions for Mental Health Message Brought to Saskatchewan  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3507 
 Athletes Inducted into the Conexus Warriors and Legends Hall of Fame 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3508 
 Remembering Wendy Dammann, First Female Sheriff in Canada 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3508 
 Ministry of Highways Partners with Rural Municipality 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3508 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Services for HIV Patients 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3509 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3509 
 Federal Pharmacare Program and Coverage of Prescription Drug Costs 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3510 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3510 
 Funding for College of Medicine 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3511 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3511 
 Funding for Mental Health 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3511 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3511 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3512 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3512 
 Mental Health Issues and Improvements to Northern Airports 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3512 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3513 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3513 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3513 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 77 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3514 
 Bill No. 78 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3514 
 Bill No. 79 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3514 



 

 Bill No. 80 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3515 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3515 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3515 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3515 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3515 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3516 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3519 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3520 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3521 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3525 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3526 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3528 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3529 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3531 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


