


















































April 30, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 30, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4087 
 April 30, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Asked for an extended introduction. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
today I rise to acknowledge one of our dedicated provincial 
public servants, a man who contributed more than 41 years to 
doing the people’s work in Saskatchewan. I speak today of John 
Edwards, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, one of the province’s 
professional career civil servants, joined today by his son 
Wesley and some of our GR [Government Relations] staff.  
 
John is retiring, but it’s fair to say that John’s name and 
reputation will no doubt be known by many urban and rural 
municipal stakeholders and by many current and former 
ministers and MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
That’s thanks to a career spanning more than four decades. 
During that time, he has professionally served various 
provincial governments of nearly all political stripes. He is also 
a man who’s forgotten more about municipal legislation than 
many of us will ever know. 
 
But John was not originally a prairie boy. He was born and 
raised in Ontario, where he studied at the University of 
Waterloo and later at the University of North Carolina. He also 
briefly worked for the Government of Canada in Ottawa for 
about two and a half years. Finally he saw the light and 
escaped, moving west to the land of living skies, and he tells me 
he has never regretted it. 
 
He then began his career as a young public servant with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, back in the days of the Gestetner 
and Rolodex. Nearly all of his efforts for the provincial Crown 
have been working with the municipal sector, first for what was 
known as the province’s urban development branch, then with 
stops along the way that included various policy and program 
positions. His tour of duty also included being an acting 
assistant deputy minister from time to time. His last post before 
retirement is executor director of the policy and program 
services branch at the Ministry of Government Relations, my 
ministry. 
 
Throughout his career, John has also been involved in various 
special committees and projects. For example, last summer in 
Regina he was one of the chief architects of the annual meeting 

of ministers responsible for local government. The meeting was 
an opportunity for my predecessor to discuss issues with our 
provincial counterparts and to show off a little bit of our great 
province to the country. John was instrumental in leading a 
team that helped pull off what was a flawless meeting. This was 
no doubt because of his vast experience having attended many 
of these annual meetings throughout his career and being 
Saskatchewan’s representative on the provincial-territorial 
officials committee for ministers responsible for local 
government. 
 
In 2016 he received a Deputy Minister’s Award for Excellence 
as a member of the RM [rural municipality] of Sherwood 
inspection and inquiry team. He has received a Centennial 
Medal, presented by one of the former Lieutenant-Governors of 
Saskatchewan, the Hon. Lynda Haverstock, proving that he is 
close to the same age as dirt, carbon dating proving that he and 
the Minister of Justice are of the same vintage. 
 
In 2005 and ’06 he attended and was involved with IPAC 
[Institute of Public Administration of Canada] international 
programs for Sask-Namibia partnership work, including two 
trips to Namibia focused on property assessment and taxation. 
And one of his most notable achievements was John’s 
leadership being key to updating The Municipalities Act, The 
Cities Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act. Literally, John 
has helped develop the municipal skeleton of this province. His 
work helped bring these three pieces of provincial legislation 
into the 21st century. 
 
Other noteworthy projects include participating in the creation 
of the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, known 
as SAMA, and the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, known as 
SMB. These are just a handful of highlights for a man who has 
attended thousands of meetings and briefings with stakeholders, 
other civil servants, and ministers alike. 
 
And although John has been a very dedicated public servant for 
more than the 41 years, he does have other interests. My 
understanding is that he has a very green thumb when it comes 
to plants. He enjoys refurbishing antiques — I’ll leave the 
Minister of Justice out of that one — and he likes to renovate, 
especially flooring. 
 
But his office staff will tell you that it’s very easy to know 
when John is around. All you need to do is look at the office’s 
candy jar in the waiting area. Apparently it doesn’t stay full for 
very long when Mr. Edwards is around. But John’s staff will no 
longer have to watch that candy jar quite so closely because 
John’s office door is closing for the last time and our public 
service is saying its final goodbye to a man who has served with 
great humility and professionalism since 1976. For the 
government this is our loss, but a gain for John’s family. I’m 
not sure I have the budget, actually, to hire the four people that 
it’s going to take to replace John, but I’m sure his wife of more 
than 40 years, and two children, will be happy to spend more 
time with him. 
 
John is a positive example of dedication to the public service 
and its value to the people of Saskatchewan. We will miss him, 
and thank him for his service. John, we wish you all the best. 
Happy retirement. And I ask all members in welcoming John 



4088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

and his son Wesley to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
minister across and also welcome John and his son Wesley to 
the Assembly here. John, I appreciate all of the guidance and 
information you provided as the critic of Government Relations. 
Your expertise on taxation is amazing, and the way you can 
explain it has been so helpful. And so we know that 41 years in 
public service is very much appreciated, but the legacy that you 
have left is going to leave a long mark on government relations 
in Saskatchewan. I’m sure you’ve touched all of the members 
here, and we appreciate all of the hard work you have done. I 
hope you greatly appreciate your retirement, enjoy and spend a 
lot more time with your family, and enjoy your hobbies as well. 
So thank you for everything you’ve done. And thank you for 
the 41 years you’ve contributed to our province. So thank you. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
another guest in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and that is my niece 
Elizabeth Pala. She is here on a job . . . well, for her class. 
They’re doing a work placement and she chose to follow me for 
the week, Mr. Speaker. So it’s going to be great to have 
Elizabeth with me. 
 
Elizabeth is my oldest great-niece, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s 
wonderful to be able to spend this time with her. Elizabeth is an 
amazing young lady. She does so well in school. She’s thinking 
about a career in nursing when she graduates. She’s in grade 10 
right now and she’s actively involved in her student council, 
Mr. Speaker. She is the class representative for her grade 10 
class but she’s also the secretary and treasurer. So she’s really 
impressive. And she also has some art right now in the Mann 
Art Gallery in Prince Albert on display till the end of May, so 
she’s also an impressive artist. So we’re very proud of Elizabeth 
and I’m very happy to have her this week. 
 
And I hope any members that come across her, introduce 
yourself to her. She’s really excited. This is her first time in 
Regina and definitely her first time here. So I ask that all 
members of the Assembly welcome Elizabeth to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I’d like to join with the Minister 
of Government Relations in welcoming John Edwards to his 
Legislative Assembly. I’ve known John for many, many years 
— my time in the municipal sector, before politics. There’s not 
a time I didn’t know that John was involved in municipal work 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to clear up a bit of an egregious comment that . . . The 
Minister of Government Relations took an unjustified shot at 
the Justice minister, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to point out that there 
is no truth to the rumour that John Edwards sat beside the 
Minister of Justice at the ribbon cutting to the Legislative 
Building, Mr. Speaker. That’s not factual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to point out, especially in my 

time when I had the privilege to serve as minister of 
Government Relations and had an opportunity to work closely 
with John, his corporate knowledge is just outstanding, Mr. 
Speaker. I think we can’t lose sight of that. I’m sure he’s 
instilled that in some of the other staff but, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to commend him for a lengthy career in municipal work 
and ask all members to please join me in welcoming him to his 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Minister of Health, the Minister of Government 
Relations — I think — in welcoming and thanking John 
Edwards for a strong and illustrious career. I’ve been in 
government for, since the . . . for quite a few years, and he’s 
been around through that entire period of time and has been a 
valuable stalwart of the legislature of the province. For that I 
thank him. And given the support that I’ve got from my 
colleagues on this side, I’m glad to see there’s empty space on 
that side, should I want to consider a move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to welcome Louise Schweitzer to her 
Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, Louise is the executive 
director of the North East Outreach and Support Services in 
Melfort. Mr. Speaker, the northeast transition house was first 
opened in Saskatchewan since 1989.  
 
Louise works hard every day to help survivors in her 
community. In particular she is here to day to raise awareness 
for the Walk a Mile in Her Shoes event that is held annually in 
Melfort to show support in ending domestic violence, sexual 
assault, and gender violence. This year’s event is being held in 
memory of former member from Melfort, Kevin Phillips, who 
was an avid supporter and advocate for everything that they do 
at the North East Support Services.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to thank Louise for the work that 
she’s done following the Humboldt tragedy. She was very 
active in providing support services for people throughout that 
area and I want to thank her and the people that work with her 
for doing that. She raised important issues that the support that 
was required is not merely required on the day or the week of, 
that it’s an ongoing obligation, and it’s something we need to 
look down the road at and continue to do. So we’ve given that 
message to the various government agencies as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all MLAs, I want to thank Louise for 
the work that she’s done. And I want to ask all members to join 
me in welcoming Louise to her Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the minister in welcoming Louise to her Assembly this 
afternoon. I understand she spent the morning with colleagues 
from both sides of the House taking photos and doing some 
recognition in honour of the event that is happening in Melfort 
on Thursday. And I want to wish you the best of luck, Louise, 
with that event. I’m sure it will be a great success. Louise, as 
you know, is from the northeast transition house. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4089 

I do want to take this opportunity while I’m on my feet to thank 
Louise and her staff for all of the work that they do in an area 
that’s unfortunately so desperately needed, providing transition 
services and shelter services for individuals fleeing 
interpersonal violence. So thank you for all that you do. I’m so 
happy that colleagues on both sides of the House were able to 
support Louise and her event today in this Chamber or in this 
House. And I’d like all members to join me in welcoming her to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d also like to take the opportunity to 
welcome John and congratulate him on retirement but also your 
years of service. They were commendable. On behalf of the 
province, thank you. I’d also like to welcome Louise. I’ll see 
you Thursday. Thanks so much for, not only the invitation but 
the ongoing work. You’ve done a marvellous job, so thank you 
for that. 
 
And while I’m standing, I’ve got a couple of people that I used 
to . . . spent an awful lot of time working together: Tammy 
Kirkland and Cheri Kellington. I don’t know how many . . . 
Everybody was throwing around the word “dirt.” Well I’m 
probably as old as dirt, and we worked together at Social 
Services many years. But I’d like to take the opportunity to 
welcome everybody to their legislature. And with that . . . 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Sask Party to stop their attacks on our 
already strained children’s classrooms. Those who have signed 
this petition wish to draw our attention to a few things: that the 
Sask Party cut $54 million from our kids’ classrooms in the 
devastating 2017-18 budget; that the 2018-19 budget only 
restores a fraction of what was lost with that $54 million cut; 
even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids 
are actually getting less; and these cuts have had a devastating 
impact on classrooms all around this province, from the loss of 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs for children with special 
needs, including those who are hard of hearing, to the loss of 
buses for kindergartners. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Regina and in Lumsden. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Flaxcombe, 
Marengo, and Alsask. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
in my place today to present a petition for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert. The individuals who signed this petition want to 
draw the following points to your attention: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today; Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution; that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
critical infrastructure issue; and that the local municipal 
governments have limited resources and require a second bridge 
to be funded through federal and provincial governments and 
not a P3 [public-private partnership] model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
intimate partner violence amongst all of the provinces, and we 
all must do much more to protect survivors of domestic 
violence. 
 
Those who experience intimate partner violence, Mr. Speaker, 
for them the violence will often follow them to their workplace, 
which is why the signatories to this petition are calling for five 
days of paid leave and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made 
available to workers who are survivors of domestic violence, 
and that critical workplace supports made available to survivors 
of domestic violence be also made available to workers living 



4090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

with PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of 
domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are at the front line of this 
crisis are calling for, just to name a few, the YWCA [Young 
Women’s Christian Association] of Regina and the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses of Saskatchewan. This is what 
we’ve called for in our private member’s bill, Bill No. 609, 
which is the fourth time we’ve tabled those provisions in this 
House in the last two years. It’s time for the Sask Party to step 
up, do the right thing, and pass that legislation. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party to pass legislation to ensure critical supports 
in the workplace, including reasonable accommodation and 
paid and unpaid leave for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Well-Known Author Receives  
Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, on April the 13th, six Saskatchewan 
residents were awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
Well-known Regina Lakeview resident Gail Bowen was one of 
those deserving recipients. 
 
Bowen is an award-winning author who has thrilled many 
readers with her mysteries. She is perhaps best known as the 
author of the Joanne Kilbourn series, a series that now totals 18 
books and counting. She has also penned the Charlie 
Dowhaniuk Rapid Reads novellas for reluctant readers. 
 
In 2008 Reader’s Digest named Bowen as Canada’s Best 
Mystery Novelist. In 2009 she received the Derrick Murdoch 
Award for her contribution to Canadian crime writing from the 
Crime Writers of Canada. Her 18th Kilbourn novel, The 
Winners’ Circle, has been shortlisted for the 2018 Arthur Ellis 
Awards. 
 
The Saskatchewan Order of Merit was established in 1985 and 
recognizes those who contribute to the social, cultural, and 
economic well-being of the province and its residents. Bowen 
has invited us to view our city and our province in a new light 
through her work, and she is a shining example of the 
abundance of talent in our province.  
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Gail Bowen and 
the other winners and nominees. Thank you, Gail, for inviting 
us along on Joanne’s adventures, and for your contribution to 
our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Missing Persons Week 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week 
marks Missing Persons Week in Saskatchewan. It is an 
opportunity to raise awareness and focus on what needs to be 
done to help prevent people from going missing. 
 
Every year approximately 4,500 missing person reports are filed 
right here in the province. Fortunately the majority of these 
cases are solved within 48 hours, thanks to the hard work of 
family members, police, social service staff, community 
workers, and others. The combined work of all these individuals 
speaks to the heart of our theme this year entitled, We All Have 
a Role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are still 126 long-term missing persons 
recorded on the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police 
website. The toll left on the lives of families and friends and on 
communities searching for answers is immense. Our province 
takes this issue seriously. That is why we established provincial 
partnership on missing persons just over a decade ago. The 
committee was first of its kind and has since become a model 
for Canada. 
 
There is still work to be done, but we will continue our efforts 
to help bringing missing persons home and reduce the number 
of people who go missing. You are not forgotten. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, on April 28th, along with the 
Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport, I attended the 25th 
annual Saskatchewan Book Awards at the Conexus Arts Centre 
in Regina. Writers and publishers from across our province 
were recognized for their contributions to Saskatchewan’s 
vibrant literary scene. 
 
Ven Begamudré took home the Regina Public Library Book of 
the Year Award for his novel, Extended Families: A Memoir of 
India. Dawn Dumont, a columnist for the Regina Leader-Post 
and Saskatoon StarPhoenix, won the Muslims for Peace and 
Justice Fiction Award for Glass Beads: Stories. One book that 
won multiple awards was Trevor Herriot’s Islands of Grass, 
which tells the history of our beloved prairie grasslands. This 
book won the University of Saskatchewan Non-Fiction Award 
and the City of Regina Book Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another book that was recognized was by Beth 
Goobie. Her book, breathing at dusk, is a collection of poems 
that follows the story of a girl escaping her painful childhood 
memories. Goobie’s book won the Saskatchewan Arts Board 
Poetry Award and the City of Saskatoon and Public Library of 
Saskatoon Book Award. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the award 
winners and nominees and to thank them for telling our 
Saskatchewan story so well. I’d also ask all members to thank 
Léa Prpick, the Chair of the Book Awards, and all of the 
volunteers and staff who make this event a success every year. 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4091 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Opening of Royal University Hospital’s  
Mental Health Assessment Unit 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Friday I had the pleasure of attending the grand opening of 
the Royal University Hospital’s mental health assessment unit 
in Saskatoon, along with the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health, the Minister of Education, the Minister of Central 
Services, and the member from Saskatoon University. 
 
This unit will provide more appropriate and suitable space for 
patients seeking mental health emergency services, and for staff 
of the emergency department. Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure 
of touring the unit, and it is a beautiful, quiet, and calming 
space, thoroughly designed to meet the needs of the patients. 
The grand opening was also a great opportunity to express 
gratitude to all involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Les and Irene Dubé are well known in this 
province for their role in raising awareness and breaking down 
the stigma that surrounds mental health. Thanks to the Dubé 
family’s incredibly generous $1 million donation, this unit was 
able to be built. Mr. Speaker, this project also benefited greatly 
from the contributions made through the Royal University 
Hospital Foundation. We want to recognize the foundation for 
their tremendous work on this project, and of course thanks to 
the Saskatchewan Health Authority for their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the need for 
appropriate and timely access to mental health care, and we will 
continue improving mental health services and supports for our 
residents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm River. 
 

Volunteer Receives Lieutenant Governor’s Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Proud to rise in 
the House today to speak about the great volunteerism from a 
constituent of mine, Bruce Elke. Bruce is a long-time member 
of the local community, having attended school at both Jansen 
and Lanigan. He went on to receive a diploma in agriculture at 
the University of Saskatchewan. Since then, Bruce has run their 
farming operation and has found time to sit as a reeve for the 
RM of Prairie Rose from 1999 to 2016. He has also been very 
involved as a volunteer to many community initiatives, sports 
teams, and organizations. 
 
As a result of all Bruce’s hard work as a volunteer, he was 
nominated for the Lieutenant Governor’s Award for 
Outstanding Service to Rural Saskatchewan. This well-deserved 
award was presented to Bruce on March 14th, 2018 at the 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in one nomination letter it is noted his community 
contributions seemed endless. He has been a member of the 
Jansen & District Kinsmen Club for 30 years, along with the 

Jansen community land project for 20 years, being crucial in 
organizing Jansen Lites Up the Nite! community events. His 
commitment to his community and the province of 
Saskatchewan is truly inspiring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating Bruce on earning the Lieutenant Governor’s 
Award for Outstanding Service to Rural Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Under-18 Women’s Curling Team Recognized 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
congratulate Team Ackerman from Moose Jaw in placing 
second at this year’s Canadian Under-18 Women’s Curling 
Championship which was held in Saint Andrews, New 
Brunswick. 
 
Before nationals, Team Ackerman successfully won the 2018 
winter games with a 7 and 0 record. Though it was tough to 
come so close to taking home the gold, the team is very proud 
of their accomplishments and how much they have grown as 
athletes in the process. Mr. Speaker, Team Ackerman faced 
Nova Scotia for gold. The final score was 6-3, Nova Scotia.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Chantel Hoag on 
being presented with the Fair Play Award by the Curling 
Canada officials as well as Coach Patrick Ackerman on taking 
home the Coach’s Sportsmanship Award from nationals. I know 
that I speak on behalf of everyone in this Assembly when I say 
how proud I am to see our athletes recognized for their 
leadership and sportsmanship, both on and off the ice, as they 
have represented our province so well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating Team Saskatchewan — coach Patrick 
Ackerman, skip Skylar Ackerman, third Madison Johnson, 
second Chantel Hoag, and lead Samantha McLaren — on a 
great run at the nationals. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 

Tribute Concert Supports Humboldt Broncos  
and Their Families 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was 
billed as a night to heal, a night to love, and a night to live. 
What it turned out to be was a night that 12,000 people will 
never forget. Country Thunder’s tribute concert in support of 
the families of the Humboldt Broncos bus tragedy was held at 
SaskTel Centre this past Friday night. 
 
Country Thunder is an international entertainment and 
promotion company, and one of the largest in North America. It 
was founded by Saskatchewan-born Troy Vollhoffer, Bryan 
Andrews, Ted Gross, and Kim Blevins, and in true 
Saskatchewan nature, they always want to give back. They 
reached out to their friends Brett Kissel, Chad Brownlee, 
Hunter Brothers, Gord Bamford, Jess Moskaluke, and Dallas 



4092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

Smith, as well as Kelly Chase and 38 current and former NHL 
[National Hockey League] players to help in this memorable 
night. 
 
When Shaunavon’s own Hunter Brothers performed “Amazing 
Grace,” there wasn’t a dry eye in the place. Hearts were 
pounding when Chad Brownlee performed Tom Cochrane’s 
“Big League.” Everyone was out of their chairs, encouraging 
Langenburg’s Jess Moskaluke, and video messages came from 
Saskatchewan’s Mark McMorris and others. You could hear a 
pin drop when our Premier passionately spoke about what this 
event meant to Saskatchewan. He was followed by thunderous 
chants of “Go, Broncos, go.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Country Thunder and all the 
performers of this event. Almost $1 million was raised. As Brett 
Kissel and his Saskatoon-based manager, Louis O’Reilly, 
always say, “Tough times don’t last, but tough people do.” We 
are all Humboldt Broncos, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wage Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today for 
the Premier is, does he believe that someone who is working 
full-time hours in Saskatchewan should be earning enough that 
they don’t need to count on supports like the food bank and 
other social services just to make ends meet? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, over the last decade it’s been 
this government, a Saskatchewan Party government under 
Premier Wall, and all of the members and others on this side of 
the House that have consistently and repeatedly advocated for a 
stronger economy here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have advocated for that to some success, I 
might put forward, with some 62,000-plus jobs here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in communities right across this 
province, in communities where I live, in communities in the 
North and in all corners of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
All the while, with those jobs and those careers that come, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve invested in training to ensure that we can keep 
our best and brightest here in the province, to increase our 
standard of living. And I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 
our standards of living, our standards of earnings here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, they rank very well. And we’ve always 
ensured that we’ve had every support, Mr. Speaker, for those 
that need it here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is our growth agenda, Mr. Speaker. This is our plan for 
growth. This is the Saskatchewan advantage and this is the path 
that we’ll continue on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fifteen per cent of 
those who use food banks in the province cite wages as their 
main source of income. Does the Premier believe that people 
working full time should be earning enough to have incomes 
that lift them over the poverty line? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, as we continue to 
advocate for a stronger economy here, wages continue to 
increase in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And in 
fact since February of 2007 our wages, average weekly earnings 
in this province are up some 38 per cent to $730.24, Mr. 
Speaker. This ranks as the second-highest growth percentage in 
average weekly earnings compared to 2007, only behind, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d put the provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador. 
 
So understanding there is always more to do in the way of 
advocating for jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
advocating for good, high-paying work for all the residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan, and ensuring that they have the 
education to achieve that and the supports, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that they’re able to attend that education — we continue 
to remain committed to all of that on behalf of the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, in the past and the present and into the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims that we rank 
well nationally in earnings, but in fact Saskatchewan has the 
dubious distinction of having the lowest minimum wage in the 
country. As a result we have many people working full time and 
still living in poverty. Fifteen per cent of food bank users have 
wages as their main source of income. Mr. Speaker, no one 
who’s working full time should have to chose between paying 
their rent, feeding their family, or keeping the lights on. 
 
Responsibility for this injustice, Mr. Speaker, rests with the 
Premier. It rests with his cabinet. They set the minimum wage 
and, after a decade in power, they’ve allowed workers in our 
province to fall further and further behind. Many are calling, 
Mr. Speaker, for the minimum wage to be raised to $15 an hour. 
But at the rate we’re going, Saskatchewan won’t have a 
$15-an-hour minimum wage for 17 more years, Mr. Speaker. 
This inaction hurts people and it stunts our economic growth. 
 
The Premier has admitted there is more to do. Will the Premier 
commit to raising the minimum wage enough to lift 
hard-working Saskatchewan people out of poverty? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, since 2007 minimum wage in 
this province has been raised some 10 times, Mr. Speaker, up 
some 37 per cent in just over a decade, Mr. Speaker. We 
committed to a process a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. That 
process involved indexing our minimum wage to a formula that 
we put forward at that point in time and consulted on, that was 
weighted on the average increase of the consumer price index as 
well as the average hourly wage for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4093 

This has been the position of this government since we 
introduced that, Mr. Speaker. It was a formula that was put 
forward at that point in time. We stand by it, Mr. Speaker. And 
I guess my question to the members opposite: are they 
committed to a $15 minimum wage here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? I think employers in this province would like to 
know. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Rail Transportation Issues 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the lowest minimum wage in the 
country and more people looking for work. Last Friday over 
600 workers at Nutrien, Saskatchewan’s largest mining 
company, were laid off. These job losses have serious impact 
on workers and their families, on communities, on local 
businesses, and on our economy as a whole. For far too long, 
our underperforming rail transport system has been holding our 
economy back. The federal government has been asleep at the 
switch when it comes to making sure our exports arrive at 
market in a timely fashion. And the Sask Party has been 
missing in action. 
 
What is the government doing to support these laid-off workers 
and their families? When will we finally see a rail transport 
system that actually works for farmers, miners, and 
manufacturers in Saskatchewan? And, Mr, Speaker, will this 
government ever be successful in advocating for 
Saskatchewan’s interests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, that is an amazing question 
considering the occurrences and happenings in the introductions 
of initiatives that were put forward in this House and in this city 
by this government on behalf of the residents, the hard-working 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it will always be this government that advocates for the 
free flow of our goods to port and advocates with our federal 
government and our provincial counterparts to ensure that we 
can continue to transport our products, Mr. Speaker, our 
agricultural, mined, energy, manufactured goods, our forested 
goods, to port over rail lines, through pipelines, Mr. Speaker — 
the most safe and efficient method to transport those products, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we advocated for that last week with the introduction of 
The Energy Export Act, Mr. Speaker, as well as we’ll advocate 
for the port capacity and the free trade agreement so that we can 
continue to grow our economy, Mr. Speaker, grow our jobs, 
grow our population on behalf of the people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. What’s the member opposite say? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Highway Intersection Safety Review 
 
Mr. Meili: — It would be lovely to see some changes in our 
rail transport system, but we don’t see any successful advocacy 
from that side of the House whatsoever. We also don’t see a lot 
of success taking action on the recommendations that have been 

given by experts, experts that they have consulted. 
 
In 2016 a project team consisting of the Saskatchewan Ministry 
of Highways and Infrastructure, Associated Engineering, and a 
group of research advisers and stakeholders delivered a report 
called Safety Countermeasures for Saskatchewan Highways. 
The report concluded that converting two-way stop-controlled 
intersections to roundabouts would reduce total collisions at 
those intersections by 67 per cent and would reduce injuries and 
fatal injuries by 87 per cent. The report recommended that 
roundabouts should be considered first in place of two-way 
stop-controlled intersections. 
 
So to the Premier: has any action been undertaken by this 
government since they received this report in 2016 to identify 
high-risk intersections that should be converted to roundabouts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll let the minister speak 
specific to the actions taken with respect and considerations 
with respect to the report, Mr. Speaker. But I think it is 
important that we speak to this topic of intersection safety in the 
province of Saskatchewan given the last number of weeks’ 
events here, Mr. Speaker, and what is quite likely one of the 
most tragic incidents that we have experienced in this province, 
and that is with our Humboldt Broncos’ bus crash. 
 
We’re continuing to work through the Ministry of Highways, 
Mr. Speaker, on the policies that we already have to ensure 
they’re being enacted across the province, Mr. Speaker, 
ensuring that we have visibility at our intersections across the 
province. And we will be out this spring, Mr. Speaker, ensuring 
that our right-of-ways are clear across this province as well as 
working with the Ministry of Highways and others to ensure 
that we are taking every opportunity that we can to ensure the 
safety of our intersections in the province of Saskatchewan on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I would say that I have talked with members of the family, 
Mr. Speaker, this weekend, with respect to their thoughts on 
what we can do here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is a conversation that will be ongoing on 
behalf of the people of the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When asked about 
roundabouts week before last, the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure responded, “I won’t rule it out . . . at this time, 
[but] we haven’t really looked at them.” Now that was an odd 
statement, given the fact that the ministry had studied and 
reported on these life-saving measures back in 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s transportation minister has recently 
called for a review of all highway intersections and anticipates 
that roundabouts will replace many dangerous intersections in 
that province. Well-designed roundabouts are increasingly the 
go-to around the world for their proven safety record. 
 
Will the Premier commit to a similar review of dangerous 
intersections in Saskatchewan to determine where replacing 
stop-controlled intersections with roundabouts is likely to save 



4094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

lives? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Ministry of Highways has safety as a priority for us in 
everything we do in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We review 
our highway intersections ongoing on a three- and a four-year 
rotation, Mr. Speaker, and we look at everything. We look at 
safety. We look at traffic patterns. We look at intersections. A 
good example is we do have a roundabout in the province of 
Saskatchewan out on the bypass out at Balgonie working very 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have looked at intersections, Mr. Speaker. We’ve actually 
done some speed reductions at some major intersections in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. So we have a commitment to improving 
safety at our intersections. We actually have a budget-allocated 
amount of money, Mr. Speaker, that we do that. 
 
We do that internally with our Highways officials, and we look 
at program safety improvements to enhance either signage or 
pavement markings or whatever the case may be. Forty-three of 
the 59 projects we did, Mr. Speaker, this year were at highway 
intersections. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, those were roundabout questions, 
but we were hoping for direct answers as to why no action has 
been taken since 2016. 
 
Saskatchewan teachers have also been getting the roundabout 
from this government. At the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] council last week, President Pat Maze said that it’s 
time for government to step up and reinstate the full funding 
that was cut in last year’s budget. Teachers know that cutting 54 
million then giving back 30 is still a $24 million cut. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure why the government has such a hard time 
with this math. Maze noted that kids are in larger class sizes 
with fewer supports, and even restoring the $54 million cut 
won’t keep pace with inflation or with growth. 
 
If the minister wants to repair relationships, here’s a tip: it starts 
with returning the 24 million to kids’ classrooms. When can 
divisions, teachers, and students expect this funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week I attended the spring council as well, and 
spoke to the STF and members of their council. And I’ve stood 
in this House on many occasions since this session started, Mr. 
Speaker, talking about the $30 million commitment that we 
made in this budget, which followed up on the seven and a half 
million dollar commitment, the in-year funding that we 
committed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ve talked in this House, Mr. Speaker, about the 
efficiencies the school divisions found as a result of what 
happened last year, Mr. Speaker. But I can also tell the member 

— and I’ve said this before — that we’re going to be looking at 
the fall enrolment projections, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 
give some consideration to that. 
 
But at all times, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we provide the right 
services and the right supports to the classroom is a priority of 
this government. And the $30 million commitment that’s been 
made in this budget is a good indication of this government’s 
commitment to public education, and we’ll continue to do that. 
We’ll continue to have dialogue with teachers and school 
trustees, Mr. Speaker, and parents, to make sure that we do just 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, boards have been asking for years 
for transparency and for predictability, and I’m not sure that 
they’re looking for more dialogue. They’re looking for the 
money. 
 
Last week I asked the minister why the Sask Party has become 
less transparent in the way that they allocate education capital 
funding. He got his facts mixed up. There isn’t $179 million in 
PMR [preventative maintenance and renewal] funding this year; 
it’s 49. But I digress, because the minister still has not answered 
the question. 
 
Up until 2013, this government used to post their capital 
prioritization lists. As recently as last budget, they posted 
approved capital project lists. Now this year, school divisions 
have nothing but an unordered top 10 school wish list. This is a 
huge step backwards in terms of transparency and leaves 
divisions in the dark about what to expect in terms of funding to 
replace crumbling schools like St. Pius, Imperial, and St. 
Mary’s. 
 
Why is the government moving this process backward and 
making the job of keeping kids safe in schools so much harder? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, here’s some interesting numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. Preventative maintenance and renewal record under 
the New Democrats — nothing, Mr. Speaker. Emergent funding 
under the New Democrats — nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year this government completed the largest 
capital infrastructure build in the province’s history, Mr. 
Speaker. We are very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 
to continue to look to see what the emergent needs are with 
respect to capital builds within the divisions, Mr. Speaker, 
across the province. 
 
We know there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 
question about that. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be 
diligent about that. We’re going to be diligent about making 
sure that we commit the right resources where they need to be 
resourced, Mr. Speaker. All in the context, Mr. Speaker, of 
bringing our budget back into balance by next year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4095 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, predictably the minister goes back 
to what did or didn’t happen in the ’90s. I’m afraid that those 
who are sitting in schools and whose children are in schools 
where the ceiling tiles are falling on their heads want more of an 
answer from that minister. He’s missing the point. 
 
Divisions are saying that they’re forced to use the lion’s share 
of their PMR funding to keep these crumbling schools in one 
piece. This diverts funding from other schools, which will also 
deteriorate as a result. 
 
Moose Jaw divisions are in a bind. Should they invest the 
money to fix a caving roof, or should they hope and pray that 
the next budget will include the funding that they have 
requested to amalgamate? This budget announced no new 
schools, and there’s only 36 million pegged for school capital 
next year. That looks like money for maybe one school or 
maybe two, but a far cry from what is needed. 
 
When will divisions get some clarity around school capital so 
they can have the information that they need to make informed 
choices to keep our kids safe? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we continue, Mr. Speaker, 
we continue to have ongoing conversations with school 
divisions with respect to their capital needs. Fifteen per cent 
increase in preventative maintenance and renewal, Mr. Speaker. 
More money for emergent funding, Mr. Speaker. These funds 
are intended to ensure that the schools that our children go to, 
Mr. Speaker, are safe — safe not only for students but for 
teachers as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that our commitment to capital 
in this sector, Mr. Speaker, over the years that we’ve been in 
government, is second to none — 40 new schools, Mr. Speaker; 
25 major renovations across the 10 years that we’ve been in 
government. 
 
We’re going to continue to make sure that we address the needs 
of teachers and of students in the classrooms, Mr. Speaker, by 
continuing to make the commitments that need to be made, and 
we’ll do that through ongoing dialogue, Mr. Speaker. The 
member can expect to hear more from us when it comes to 
more capital funding, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue 
to have that conversation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Rental Housing Supplement 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget, just like 
the last one, cuts supports for the most vulnerable within our 
communities. Cutting the rental housing supplement for 
families and people living with disabilities on the edge of 
homelessness is not only unfair, it’s indecent. This support 
keeps families off the streets and with a roof over their heads. 
We’ve heard from those on the front lines in the fight against 
poverty that this cut will do serious harm to many across 
Saskatchewan. Will the Sask Party do the right thing and scrap 
this indecent cut to the rental housing supplement before it 
devastates families and people all across our province? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I need 
to clarify again for the record, the opposition seems to be 
leading the public down a path. Nobody that’s on this program, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to be off this program. Everybody that is 
currently on the rental housing supplement program will 
continue, Mr. Speaker. And I would very much appreciate them 
not creating a fear factor out there in the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have done is new intakes on the program 
as of July 1st will no longer be receiving the rental supplement, 
Mr. Speaker, because of . . . the market has dictated. We notice 
that there is a 9 per cent vacancy. We have a huge amount of 
Sask Housing — over 700 in our two major cities, Mr. Speaker 
— that aren’t currently being used, Mr. Speaker, and we want 
to make sure that we’re utilizing the assets of this government 
to its maximum potential. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a $5 million cut. 
The decision to cut the rental housing supplement will only hurt 
Saskatchewan families who are already struggling, people 
living with disabilities, families with children living on the 
tightest of budgets on the margins, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister tells us here again today that they’re 
grandfathering people that are on the program. He suggests that 
that shows some sort of decency. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 
this pledge before in that when we witnessed this, when they’ve 
said they’re going to grandfather supports, that only meant if 
they didn’t have any change in circumstances. That means if 
they move so often or have a change in their family situation, 
those supports were taken away. 
 
The Sask Party’s completely unclear on this cut. People deserve 
the straight goods. To the minister: under his plan, will people 
who depend on the rental housing supplement have their rental 
housing supplement cut if they experience a change in 
circumstance? But most importantly, why won’t he scrap this 
cut that will devastate people and families all across our 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 
I’ll clarify and get this on the record, Mr. Speaker. Nobody that 
is on the program right now will change if their eligibility isn’t 
going to change, Mr. Speaker. If they move and their eligibility 
stays the same, Mr. Speaker, they will remain on this program. 
So again I have said this in the media, Mr. Speaker. We have 
done that in our news releases. And I’d like to be able to put 
that again on the record, Mr. Speaker, that as long as their 
eligibility is there, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t change, then 
nothing will change on the program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I will talk about, Mr. Speaker, if I can, is some of the 
great investments that we did do in Social Services here, Mr. 
Speaker, about the $10.4 million that we put into our 
community-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, to help out those 
most vulnerable. So when the member talks about those most 
vulnerable in our community, we are making that investment in 



4096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

those most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Administrative Segregation in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we know an internal government 
report was undertaken to assess whether Saskatchewan 
correctional centres were meeting international standards for 
solitary confinement. This report shows that administrative 
segregation is overused, often outside of legislated criteria. This 
report was never made public, presumably because it paints a 
worrying picture of confinement practices in Saskatchewan’s 
jails. 
 
Of the segregated inmates in this study, 86 per cent were 
indigenous. At Saskatoon Correctional, 46 per cent had 
identified mental health issues, while at Pine Grove, 70 per cent 
of the women had a mental health diagnosis. This is shocking, 
Mr. Speaker. Why was this report never released and what has 
been done to address this practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The safety and 
security of our staff and inmates is always a primary 
consideration when it comes to decisions regarding 
administrative segregation. Our government is committed to the 
policies and practices that adhere to the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms and that are enshrined in Canadian law. 
 
Since June of 2013 inmates can only be segregated if they are 
jeopardizing the safety of other inmates, their own safety, or the 
safety and security of the staff or the facility itself, Mr. Speaker. 
The review process, when an inmate is on administrative 
segregation, includes visits by nurses after a certain duration 
period and a review by the segregation review panel established 
by the directors. 
 
Administrative segregation is a policy, Mr. Speaker, of last 
resort and is only used when the facility manager is satisfied 
that there is no reasonable alternative. Mr. Speaker, we follow 
policies and procedures with respect to administrative 
segregation. As I said earlier, it’s a policy and an action of last 
resort. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister would have read 
her ministry’s own report, she would know that the policy she 
just quoted is not being followed. The conditions in 
Saskatchewan correctional centres have been under the 
spotlight for years, and the minister should have a handle on 
this issue. The reports says, “Our counts continue to present as 
the strongest barrier for reducing our counts in Administrative 
Segregation Areas.” 
 
Overcrowding is not a new issue, but it is a persistent one, even 
during the minister’s first crack at the can. It doesn’t just lead to 
missing international norms; it is a costly problem. Last year 

Justice had to provide an additional $10 million in mid-year 
funding to pay for extra inmates, and Justice and Corrections’ 
overtime is more than double any other ministry, more than $17 
million in a single year. Despite this growing problem, why 
does the minister continue to cut funding to programs in the 
jails designed to ensure inmates will not reoffend? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure what 
the member is . . . what question she’s asking and what question 
she’s wanting to have answered. Either we’re talking about 
administrative segregation or the population in our correctional 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to stick with administrative 
segregation. 
 
Our most recent review, which focused on addressing issues 
that emerged during the 2014 review, Mr. Speaker, is currently 
in its final stages. So as a government, we do undertake the fact 
that policies and procedures must be reviewed on a regular 
basis because circumstances change. That’s what we’re doing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The issues of the most recent review that we are looking at 
includes ensuring appropriate use; limits respecting the length 
of stay in administrative segregation; the possibility of 
independent oversight — we’re considering this, Mr. Speaker; 
and exploration of reasonable alternatives in general, Mr. 
Speaker. This is part of a review, Mr. Speaker. We’re wanting 
to do the right thing, given the circumstances that we’re facing 
in our facilities. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology  
Start-up Incentive Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 129, The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved the Minister of Advanced 
Education that Bill No. 129, The Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive Act be now introduced and read a first time.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4097 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join on Bill 
121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act I would just 
want to, I guess, some comments and . . . What’s interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, with this bill, the government itself I think 
preparing for the legislation that this government’s introducing 
and the bill, Bill 121, it’s kind of interesting. 
 
And I’ve listened to some of my colleagues talk about this. I 
listened to some of the leaders, the public talk about it. And the 
government, I believe, the federal government said in one of its 
campaign promises in 2015 it was going to be moving ahead 
with legalizing cannabis. So the government’s moved ahead 
with that. It’s coming ahead. 
 
The government of, you know, of the day, and the Sask Party 
government provincially, had the opportunity and should have 
gone out and done its homework and should have made sure 
that at the last minute we’re not rushing to make sure of certain 
things. And I want to talk a little bit about that because I think 
it’s important to talk about being ready. 
 
We know that there is a large number of individuals or 
organizations, companies, that have applied for a permit, 
business licence to operate cannabis sales and be in the retail 
and selling of cannabis. Now I know the government has hired 
an agency to assist them with selecting those. But, I guess, 
when you look at many of the rules and how this is going to 
play out, they’re asking for clarification. And I think individuals 
and those leaders in our communities — I think school 
divisions, schools — may have questions wondering exactly 
what location will these be granted from a school. Will they be 
some in a certain distance that they have to stay away from a 
school? So there’s a lot of questions people are going to be 
asking. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And I know from my colleagues, you know, doing the work that 
they’re going to have to do and we’re asked to do, there’s a lot 
of questions about possession. And I think about it, I realize 
some of the rules, some of them the government has made it, 
has put it into and will put into legislation and part of the 
regulations and rules. And I want to talk a little bit about that. 
 
Government has selected to use the age of 19. To possess, to 
buy, purchase, to consume cannabis, you must be 19 years of 

age. If not, there’s a possibly . . . If you’re somebody who’s, 
well I guess that’s found under the age of 19 with cannabis in 
your possession, you can be fined up to, I believe the fine will 
be somewhere around $2,000, could be to a max of $2,000. 
 
There’s also some of the questions people have about age, you 
know, and concerns. And I think I’ve heard different people, if 
I’m correct, talk about the concerns that they had when it comes 
to at a certain age, developing of individuals and, I mean, they 
have had concerns from individuals raised about it. They’re just 
not sure. And I guess people are wondering, whether it’s 
parents, I guess there might be lots of different areas and 
professionals who are wondering what impacts will that have on 
young people. And will there be impacts? 
 
Like I don’t know; I’m no expert on it. I’m just going to go 
through this as an individual, and we’re going to watch how this 
is going to roll out. And of course we will have those experts. 
Those individuals who have the knowledge hopefully will come 
forward and will provide that to the government of the day 
who’s making the rules and regulations. And again this could 
have been done, and I give that this could have been done with 
more input. 
 
And I know they also have done some surveys, and I’ve seen 
different parts of that and people talking about that. And some 
of my colleagues have referred to some of the survey they did. 
Whether or not, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to provide enough 
information as to where we go from here, again I think the 
government could have taken the time, could have done this the 
way it needed to be done to ensure rules, regulations. 
 
Those businesses that were going to be granted, and I’ll go back 
into that, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a company hired, from my 
understanding if I have my facts straight, to accompany the 
government on selecting who will be awarded the licence or 
who will be given a permit. And apparently, I don’t know . . . 
From what I’m getting, there has been a great interest in people 
applying for the licence or, I think somewhere, you know, the 
number, like really high, but in the end I believe it’s about 41. 
Fifteen hundred might be even a number I’ve heard. And that’s 
good and, you know, we’ll see. 
 
But at the end of the day, at the end of the day, I’m just going 
on what I believe, you know, information shared with me. Now 
having said that, I guess in committee we’ll know for sure the 
numbers when we get a chance to talk to the minister and 
officials. But having said that, we know that there’s a small 
group that will be selected to set up operation of selling 
cannabis and some . . . I know there’s been an interest because 
I’ve been in some of the meetings listening to the leadership 
talk. In my community I have two municipalities and a First 
Nations community that will be looking at it. And I guess they 
will have an opportunity to say whether they’re going to go 
ahead with it, what they’re going to do. 
 
Now I don’t know what say they will have in the legislation on 
the rules and how this business will operate as far as selling 
cannabis in the community, if it meets the business licence, if 
the community approves it. I don’t have all those details. And I 
guess we’ll find out as things roll out, and those municipalities 
will find out who is going to get . . . How they’re going to do it 
and what role they will play in this rolling out the business. 



4098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

And I mean there’s different ones that have applied for it, as I 
said that. But having said that, I guess at the end of the day 
we’re going to have to move forward because we know we’re 
going ahead with it. So there’s a short window of opportunity 
here, and government could have, like I’ve said, could have 
taken the time to do this right, not at the last minute, just rush 
and try to get this done, because I think even those individuals 
who will find at the end of the day that they will be given a 
licence or a permit to sell cannabis. 
 
What are the rules going to be like? Like there’s many 
questions I don’t think people have, you know, been given the 
questions and they’re waiting for government at the last minute 
to give them before. So here we are; we’re going to be opening 
up and the government’s going to be saying, well we’re going 
ahead with this, but here you go and here’s your licence. 
 
Now I’m concerned and I think people should be concerned, 
you know, whether it’s for my grandkids, I want to make sure 
that we have done our due diligence. And we have to do our 
due diligence to make sure the rules, regulations, and whatever 
is required and needed to make sure this process has rules and 
regulations just like it does. I mean, there are those that may not 
follow the age limit, may have possession of more than, I 
believe it’s 30 grams that they’re allowed to have in your 
personal possession. It’s 30 grams you’re allowed to have in 
your possession. So there may be issues about that, I guess. 
 
One of the ones I’ve really been thinking of for enforcement, 
and I think about the enforcement as far as officers that are 
going to have to deal with this, how this will roll out and their 
role in it. And my understanding from the legislation that’s 
being introduced, the person will go into one of the facilities 
that have been granted a permit or licence. They will buy their 
cannabis. They will now have to transport that cannabis home. 
They can’t go anywhere else. They’ve got to go from the place 
of purchase to their place of residence where they will consume 
and use the cannabis, as long as they’re at the proper age. So 
there’s that factor that plays into it. 
 
You know, and I say this: it goes back to the rules, the rules, 
Mr. Speaker, of how this is going to be sold and the rules and 
regulations. And who will be doing enforcement on and making 
sure that there is compliance to making sure that those 19 years 
of age are only the ones that get to purchase this or will be 
allowed to purchase it? How are they going to ensure . . . And 
what role . . . I haven’t seen that and maybe there will be a 
process. I’m not sure who’s going to be enforcing, checking on, 
regulating them. Is it Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming? I’m 
not sure who will be doing that, as they do with alcohol. I know 
our restaurants and establishments, they may do that. So it’s 
going to be interesting to see how they’re going to deal with 
that. 
 
The other area, I guess I would say when we talk about 
enforcement, how is that going to be done? And I don’t know; 
I’m curious to see. And it’s going to be interesting to see as a 
law and our police and law authority and those individuals who 
will pull you over. As you know we’re understanding it, you 
cannot be using marijuana in a vehicle. You should not have it, 
be consuming it in a vehicle and be driving. It’s going to have 
the same . . . And I don’t know about the rules if you’re caught 
under the influence of cannabis. We’re not sure. 

Like I know people are going to have to have training and 
they’re going to say, like many of us . . . And I think people are 
going to watch how is this going to roll out. And you know, I’m 
not no Mr. Expert on it, but I’m sure, like everything else, 
people maybe consume cannabis and think they’re good to go 
to drive, and they go and drive. Like I’m just saying I have no 
proof of that, but I’m just saying if people consume, I don’t 
know how much they consume, then they drive, it’s going to be 
interesting to see how our law enforcement will act on that, and 
how this is all going to play out. There’s so many questions that 
are left undone, you know. And I don’t know, I know people 
are going to be wanting some of those answers. And maybe 
some of our law enforcement, maybe they’re weighing in on it 
and giving their suggestions. And I think there’s maybe 
concerns raised all over the place, from families, from 
employers, you know. There’s going to be many issues as this 
rolls out and it’s legalized. 
 
But the government again of the day had an obligation and had 
time because they knew since 2015 but now, at the last minute, 
we’re just pushing ahead and trying to go with this. And I don’t 
know if this is really doing the justice that they should’ve done 
in the sense of the rules, the laws around possession of cannabis 
and the use, when the government knew this day was coming 
and it was coming fairly quick. 
 
So having said that, I know my colleagues, some of them, you 
know, have shared their views and their concerns. And I think 
many groups, leaders, some people are watching closely to see 
how this will play out. And you know, the government of the 
day is the leader. You are supposed to be leading on this file. So 
I think many are going to be watching. 
 
But I think right now, a lot of people are confused. They’re not 
sure how this is all going to roll out. How is this going to play? 
How are the rules . . . Like, they’re going to be opening up shop 
and just, I don’t know. Like how are they going to be trained 
and everything else? 
 
So I mean, there’s so many more questions, and this 
government has not given the answers and should’ve given the 
answers, Mr. Speaker, and should’ve provided the leadership 
that one wants a government, especially when we’re going into, 
you know, the sale of cannabis. And they had the time; they 
knew it was coming. They could’ve done their due diligence, 
made sure we did this right, as best they can. There’s no perfect 
way, but the government could’ve consulted a lot. They 
could’ve talked to law enforcement. They could’ve done many 
things if they wanted to do that. 
 
So really at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’ve kind of went over 
some of the areas and points I wanted to make. I have very, you 
know, little information on it. And we’ll see. I know we’re 
going to have lots of questions in committee, and my colleagues 
will have lots of questions. 
 
So at this point on, you know, just having an opportunity to 
make a few points on Bill 121, I’m prepared and, I know for 
myself and my colleagues, we’re prepared to see this go to, it’s 
ready to go to committee and do the work that my critics and 
some of us will have, asking information of the minister and the 
minister’s officials as to rules and regulations, how this will 
proceed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4099 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 121, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in and have, 
you know, adjourned debates on Bill 122, I guess the 
consequential amendments. And this bill actually will make the 
consequential amendments to other pieces of legislation so that 
they’re in line with Bill 121. Having said that, they’re 
consequential amendments, and they will make the adjustments 
that are needed by those individuals that do the good work for 
the Assembly.  
 
So at this point I’m prepared to just allow this to go to 
committee and do the work that committee needs to do. So with 
that, I have no more comments on Bill 122. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 122, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 122, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2018 be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 126 — The Energy 
Export Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour this 
afternoon to rise to speak to Bill No. 126, The Energy Export 
Act. Mr. Speaker, it appears that there is some lasting confusion 
on the part of some members opposite with regard to our 
position with regard to this pipeline. So I will be concise and 
unambiguous and hopefully with my remarks can clear up some 
of that confusion. 
 
The position of the Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic 
Party] for many years has been very clear. This is a federal 
project that is in Saskatchewan’s interest that needs to go 
forward, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan NDP also supports a 
triple bottom-line process that ensures social, economic, and 
environmental assessment of risks and benefits. And it is also 
our assertion that the Trudeau Liberals need to show leadership 
so that this project gets built. Of course this is a project that 
they have approved, that is in their jurisdiction. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know that we can be more clear about that. 
 
It is also clear that we support the 1,100 workers at Evraz, Mr. 
Speaker, here in Regina, who will be supplying some 75 per 
cent of the steel for this project. And I don’t think that there can 
be any confusion about that or our support for those workers at 
Evraz, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing though that we do have an issue with, and this I 
don’t think is a surprise to anyone, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask 
Party’s failure to address climate change or have any credibility 
on the environment which, Mr. Speaker, makes it harder to get 
projects like this built and garner the support that’s needed. Just 
to recap: they failed to lay an inch of pipeline to tidewater over 
their decade in power, Mr. Speaker. They’ve cut funding for the 
climate change and green energy fund, including, Mr. Speaker, 
an additional 18 per cent just with the most recent budget. So 
that lacks some credibility, Mr. Speaker. They also have no 
credible plan, with the emphasis on “credible,” to reduce 
greenhouse gases. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again the Sask NDP’s position has been clear 



4100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

for years, that this is a federal project that is in Saskatchewan’s 
interest and that needs to go forward. And we call on the 
Trudeau Liberals to show the leadership that’s needed to ensure 
that this project gets built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I’m sure that other of my colleagues will 
have other comments which will be equally clear and 
unambiguous. But with that, I will move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 126. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Lakeview has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 126. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 127 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 127 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
in the Assembly today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill 
No. 127, which is The Income Tax Amendment Act of 2018. 
Overall this bill deals with the Sask Party’s walk-backs on their 
income tax plan to change the tax rates back to where they were 
before. The explanation that was provided by the minister in the 
second reading speech talks about the fact that this legislation 
temporarily suspends the tax rate reduction plan which we 
know, Mr. Speaker, means that the promises of lowering the 
personal income tax are not being followed through here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This was something that was heralded in the 2017-2018 budget 
as to provide some sort of solace to individuals who were 
dealing with tax increases in many different areas. So 
individuals who were dealing with PST [provincial sales tax] 
now being applied in new areas where they hadn’t seen PST 
applied, so adding PST 6 per cent onto restaurant meals, onto 
children’s clothing, onto the construction industry — which 
we’re starting to see the impacts on now, Mr. Speaker — 
increasing the PST overall and adding PST to these new areas. 
 
One of the presumed bright spots in the budget was the fact that 
the personal income tax was going to be lowered, Mr. Speaker. 
And right now we have before us a bill that shows that that plan 
is being put on hold now, Mr. Speaker. So we see this in the 
explanatory notes quite quickly in the first provision: 
 

An amendment to section 5 is required to ensure that the 
appropriate percentage . . . is updated to include tax rate 
changes announced in the 2018-19 Budget. This means 
[that] certain references are no longer required. 

 
Now if you don’t speak legalese, Mr. Speaker, or if folks have 
looked this up at home and haven’t followed what’s going on, 

we’re here to provide some clarification in that this is a 
walk-back on the promises that were made last year, Mr. 
Speaker. Overall this demonstrates a government that does not 
have a long-term plan. 
 
And I have asked before. We’ve seen this flip-flopping before 
of, well we’ll make one change and we’ll see how that works, 
and we’ll make a change over here and we’ll see how that 
works, and flip-flop around. That’s not vision and that’s not 
long-term planning, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve asked the Minister 
of Immigration and Career Training for long-term plans in 
terms of jobs when I had a chance to speak with him in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, and we saw the same thing on that 
front — no long-term plan. 
 
And this is disconcerting for the people of this province, that we 
have a government in place that doesn’t have that type of vision 
and isn’t able to carry us forward consistently, on a year-to-year 
basis so that we know what to expect from our government in 
this province. So these are some of the concerns that I’m 
hearing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve seen this trying to tinker with personal income tax, 
all while our debt is increasing. We have record debt. We have 
the highest net debt per capita that we have ever had in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that is reflective of how the 
population has moved as well. So when we’re talking about per 
capita, it does in fact reflect that the population has increased. 
And so we’re seeing all of this sort of tinkering around while 
people’s lives are being impacted. 
 
And the PST increase has significantly hurt folks and I know 
that this will be another piece that will impact them as well. It 
was supposed to be the shining light of last year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, which we know there was a ton of opposition to — 
people out protesting in the streets due to a number of decisions 
that were made in that budget that directly impacted them on a 
personal level and on a family level. 
 
This income tax change, this reduction was supposed to be the 
shining light of last year’s budget and now of course, we’re 
seeing that it’s being put on hold. So it begs the question of, 
what do folks have to look forward to in this province and how 
is our province being run? What is the long-term plan? If we’re 
going to see this flip-flopping, what the long-term plan is 
overall for this province. And folks want to be able to expect 
that. It impacts their overall standard of living and cost of 
living. And I know it is something we’re going to have a lot 
more questions about, and more of my colleagues will have 
questions about and of course, the critic will have questions 
about as we move into committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So overall I want to say that this particular piece of legislation 
demonstrates a lack of long-term planning on behalf of the 
government and really a loss of what was supposed to be the 
bright spot of last year’s budget being a lost year with life 
getting less affordable for everyday people. And with that I will 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 127, An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act for today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 127, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of the 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4101 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 128 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 128 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s always a pleasure 
to enter into debate with regards to our bill debates. On Bill No. 
128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act is the remarks 
that I’m going to put forward. Mr. Deputy Speaker, changes 
within this Act are due to the fact that there was a lot of changes 
within the 2018-19 provincial budget with regards to provincial 
sales tax initiatives. And so a lot of the amendments within this 
bill will reflect that. 
 
First of all, one that is a very contentious issue right now that 
I’ve been hearing a lot about, and I’m sure many members of 
this legislature have also heard complaints about, is the fact of 
the removal of the PST exemption for used light vehicles. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a lot of people will be impacted on that. 
Businesses are really unhappy and customers are as well, and I 
would say that it impacts a majority of the families within the 
province.  
 
And so this was also a promise, an election promise that this 
government made in 2007 when they formed government. And 
they indicated that this was something that was really 
important, and they felt that it was not a smart tax. Well 
actually the previous leader of the Saskatchewan Party, 
previous premier was quoted as saying, “In my view, 
government should avoid doing dumb things, and charging the 
PST on the same vehicle over and over again seems pretty 
dumb.” And so, I have to agree with that. Not often do I 
necessarily agree with Mr. Wall, but I agree with that. And 
apparently once he is no longer here in office, this government 
has been doing some dumb things. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one example that was brought to my 
attention was the fact that you could purchase a vehicle for a 
certain price, but you’re going to be charged the PST on what 
they call the red book value, so what the book value of the car is 
according to SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. And 
that’s not necessarily what you can sell the car for. It’s a value 
that they have in their book. It doesn’t include the mileage or a 
lot of the other stuff. 
 
But an individual indicated that they bought a car for $6,200. It 
was an agreed price with the seller and the buyer, and they felt 
that that was a fair price. But because it was over $5,000 then 
he needed to pay the PST on that. So when he went to register 
his vehicle, the individual said, you have to pay the PST on the 
book value which the book value for that car was over $9,800. 
So that’s quite substantially . . . That’s over 3,000 more than 

what he actually paid for that car, but he has to pay the PST on 
what the book value is. So he ended up paying almost $600 in 
taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because he had to pay on that 
almost $10,000 price when he only paid $6,000 for his car. 
 
So I don’t know why you would pay PST on a value that you 
didn’t even purchase for your car. You’re paying more on that, 
which doesn’t seem very fair, and I think that’s something that 
this government really needs to look at. We’re making people 
pay more taxes on even something that wasn’t even the 
purchase price. So he indicated, if he was in an accident today, 
the day that he bought the car, would he get that $9,800 price 
for that car? And SGI said not necessarily. So that seems to be 
very unfair that we’re penalizing individuals. We’re making 
them pay PST on things that already have been paid on. And 
it’s just a tax grab. But we know that this government isn’t 
afraid to be taxing our taxpayers within the province. They 
continuously show that. 
 
I’m going to talk about some of the increases, but right now I’m 
going to highlight some of the exemptions of PST that were 
included in this budget, which . . . This one I’m really happy to 
see, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the exemption of PST on 
naloxone and other non-prescription drugs that are used to treat 
life-threatening conditions. So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s really important. We need to recognize that some 
medication that individuals use, that they need to use for their 
conditions, aren’t necessarily prescription medication and 
allowing them to have an exemption of PST on those is really 
important. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The exemption of PST on prepared food and beverages sold by 
charitable or non-profit organizations at concessions, that’s 
going to help a lot of people when they do their fundraising, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know a lot of community groups have 
concession stands and they use that to help provide for funding 
for other things. And even in schools and such, they do that. So 
having that exemption is really important. 
 
Then also within this bill there is a little bit of housekeeping, 
which is really important, especially when you’re reviewing 
bills. I think that’s something that needs to be done on a regular 
basis. So the housekeeping is to strengthen and modernize the 
legislation. One of the changes was a definition change to 
“lease.” It’s to clarify that a lease also includes a supply of 
equipment or tools with an operator. And the clarification that 
the application of PST on equipment based on use or 
consumption using a prescribed formula, that will help 
determine how much PST the individual will maybe get back. 
 
There’s also definition changes, so a definition change of 
“vendor” to provide additional clarity around the retail sales, 
which includes retail sales of taxable services. That’s something 
that’s . . . And then an amendment to clarify that engineering 
services that are included in the retail sale of real property 
services will include an exemption of PST. So that’s another 
amendment. There’s a new section, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
that will help clarify the process around refunds for 
overpayments of tax. 
 
I always say that taxation is sometimes a complicated process 



4102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

and individuals who dedicate their time in discovering these 
formulas and finding a way to make it a more simpler process is 
wonderful. And we had a civil servant that was here today 
that’s retiring, 41 years of service — John Edwards — and like 
I said before, he had a way to be able to explain taxation in an 
easy format which takes some skill sets and knowledge. And we 
appreciate the individuals who do that. And so in this legislation 
here, they’re going to have a new section that will help with that 
process. So that’s wonderful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also some amendments are being made to clarify the security 
requirements and the responsibility of contractors and principals 
in regard to the real property service contracts. So there is quite 
a bit of change within this legislation that I know our critic will 
do their due diligence with regards to talking with stakeholders. 
It’s real important that we get their opinions on some of the 
changes of this legislation and hear from them directly. So I 
know the critic will do that. 
 
I think though it’s also important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to also 
indicate how there was some other PST exemptions that were 
eliminated from this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one of 
them being the energy-efficient appliances. I think this is a 
completely backwards approach from this government to be 
doing this, to be reversing this exemption because we should be 
encouraging people to have energy-efficient appliances and 
potentially even expanding that into having more green 
available options and encouraging people to go that direction. 
 
Also we’ve got to be mindful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the last 
budget had a lot of changes to the PST as well and a lot of them 
were harmful for residents of Saskatchewan. I think about the 
PST exemption on children’s clothing being eliminated. That’s 
impacted many families and especially families who are 
struggling the most because now they’re paying even more for 
children’s clothing. And we need to be making sure that 
children are being well cared for. I often say that when you’re 
raising your children, most families, you’re struggling day to 
day and paycheque to paycheque, and you’re wondering how to 
make ends meet. And so those are the individuals that we 
shouldn’t be penalizing even further. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, also the PST exemption that was 
eliminated last budget with regards to restaurant meals, I know 
a lot of restaurant owners indicating that that’s created a 
reduction of customers coming in. People are maybe, instead of 
eating out, you know, twice a week, they’re only eating out 
once a week, and that’s shown to be a reduction there. And 
that’s not going to help our economy when we know that these 
business owners are losing out of that valuable services. 
 
And also the PST exemption that was eliminated on 
construction materials, and we know how that’s impacted our 
construction companies and those good jobs that individuals 
have had, like that are now no longer available because of 
companies that are struggling. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on about provincial 
sales tax. It’s not a popular tax. People don’t like it. They prefer 
not to have one. And so it’s often one that we will hear 
regularly on the doorsteps when we’re talking to residents of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

So like I said, I know my colleagues are going to have a lot 
more that they’ll want to say with regards to this piece of 
legislation. And I know the critic will do their due diligence 
with talking to the stakeholders and will present a lot of 
questions when she has an opportunity to at committee. 
 
So at this time though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to 
adjourn debate for Bill No. 128. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 128, The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise in the House today and enter some thoughts into 
the debate around Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a relatively small 
bill but it does have some important consequences to a family’s 
pocketbooks that I think is important and we think is important 
for us to talk about today. 
 
So this bill, what it does is it increases the fees for 
environmental handling charges for all beverage containers by 2 
cents, and it is also making the fee change retroactive to April 
1st, 2018. Mr. Speaker, this means all beverage containers, 
anything that you can think of that has an environmental 
handling charge, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s important that 
we remember that, Mr. Speaker, when we’re discussing this 
bill. 
 
I’m just moving over to the definition portion of The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, 
because the definition in section 39 of that Act: 
 

“beverage container” means a container that is within a 
category of prescribed containers [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So you have to move to the regulations to see the exact list of 
what is in the regulations. But it is quite lengthy, Mr. Speaker, 
and because it’s in the regulations it’s easy for the government 
to add to that list, Mr. Speaker. But one of those beverage 
containers that will be subject to this increase is juice boxes, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’s important for us to remember the impacts 
of the decisions that are made on families by members of this 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4103 

And I think our Finance critic has talked about this very 
eloquently, Mr. Speaker, about how this hike in fee is yet 
another burden to families on top of all of the other fees we’ve 
seen, on top of the increase to PST, on top of the expansion to 
things such as restaurant food and children’s clothes, Mr. 
Speaker, and diapers at one point, which the government 
thankfully rolled back but weren’t going to and had every 
intention of expanding PST onto such a necessary item as 
diapers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important for us to remember what’s happened to 
families over the past year as a result of this government’s 
failure to properly save, their failure to properly spend, and the 
utter mismanagement that we’ve seen from this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and how that’s rolled down to the pocketbooks of 
everyday families. And we’re seeing it again today, Mr. 
Speaker, in this bill with the increase to the environmental 
handling fee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This increase will add, from what I understand, $18 million to 
the GRF [General Revenue Fund] in 2018-2019, which includes 
the $10.2 million from upping the deposit on recyclable 
beverage containers by 2 cents. So I guess the $18 million 
includes some other initiatives as well, but the $10.2 million is 
what they’re anticipating they’ll receive into the GRF from this, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we’ve seen the Minister of Finance and other folks 
on the government side talk about this increase, they talk about 
Sarcan and what great work Sarcan does. And frankly we 
couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very important 
program. Recycling is a very important service, and Sarcan 
does a very good job of that. They also employ many folks 
across the province, and some of the folks that they employ are 
folks that are a bit harder to employ in other sectors, Mr. 
Speaker. So they do really good work. 
 
But the problem with this bill, Mr. Speaker, is that although the 
Finance minister is saying that this is necessary to ensure that 
Sarcan remains viable into the future, this money is not being 
earmarked for Sarcan and this money is not flowing directly 
into Sarcan. In fact this money is flowing into the government’s 
General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that we 
would . . . If it was flowing directly and it was targeted funding 
for a program, for a recycling program, for something like 
Sarcan, it’s possible that we would be taking a less critical 
stance on this increase. But in fact it’s just a money grab from 
the Sask Party, yet another money grab that’s going to impact 
Saskatchewan families’ pocketbooks. 
 
And forgive us if we have some concerns when some money 
flows directly, money like this flows directly to the GRF. 
We’ve seen some movement of funds that were originally, and 
were once and rightly so, targeted funds, Mr. Speaker. For 
example the education property tax, Mr. Speaker, was a targeted 
fund, so that the government couldn’t take that money and use 
it for other things, anything other than education. Now that 
money flows directly into the GRF, and what we saw last year 
was more money come in for education property tax than was 
provided to education, Mr. Speaker. So yet another way the 
government makes Saskatchewan people pay for their 
mismanagement. Mr. Speaker, another example of this was in 
Justice when you saw some money that was targeted for Justice 

programs . . . Now that flows through the GRF as well, which is 
always very concerning. 
 
So when the government likes to tout Sarcan and hide behind 
Sarcan, when they talk about this price increase, what they fail 
to mention is that this money isn’t being targeted for Sarcan; 
this money isn’t flowing directly to Sarcan. This money is 
going to the General Revenue Fund. And they expect us to just 
trust them that this increase in money received by government 
through this environmental handling charge will result in an 
increase of money to Sarcan. So they’ll see if that happens. And 
it’ll be interesting if that actually happens because based on 
what we’ve seen is that at least half of that money will be going 
directly into the GRF, Mr. Speaker. So it’s quite concerning, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s some other interesting things with respect to this bill 
that I want to read into the record. So although the bill is a bit 
small, Mr. Speaker, it’s still important that we really take a look 
at the bill and see what it says. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So what it does in this bill, Mr. Speaker, is it’s repealing section 
40(2) of the original legislation and replacing it with a new 
40(2). So in 40(2), it’s detailing the environmental handling 
charge that’s going to be required to be remitted to the minister. 
And like I said, it’s a 2 cent increase across the board, but it’s 
important to look at all of them. So it says that: 
 

with respect to a designated container that is a metal can, 
[the environmental handling charge will be] 7 ¢; 
with respect to a designated container that is a plastic 
bottle, [the environmental handling charge will be] 8 ¢; 
with respect to a designated container that is a 
non-refillable glass bottle, [the environmental handling 
charge will be] 9¢; 
with respect to a designated container that is a 
multi-material, shelf stable container, [the environmental 
handling charge will be] 5 ¢; [and] 
with respect to a designated container that is a paper-based 
polycoat gable top container, [the environmental handling 
charge will be] 5 ¢. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know . . . I’m not an expert in this area, so 
I don’t really know what examples of all of those are, but 
there’s a multitude of examples that would fit under all of those 
definitions. Mr. Speaker, I know the critic has a bit of a better 
understanding of what all of those mean than I do. 
 
And then included in this bill, Mr. Speaker, is some transitional 
provisions where it describes what the Crown is, what the 
Crown agent is, talks about some terms and expressions. And 
they want to ensure that there’s continual meaning in the terms 
of expressions in the original Act as well as in the parent Act, 
which is what they describe as The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2010. 
 
And then it also talks about how it’s retroactive. So that’s 
something that I already mentioned, but I think it’s important to 
read it into the record. So this is something that’s already had an 
impact on families and it was having an impact on families . . . 
It’s going to have an impact on families even prior to when the 



4104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

budget was announced at the beginning . . . or April 10th, I 
think it was. So in the bill it says, under section 4(3), which is a 
transitional provision, it states that: 
 

a person who, on or after April 1, 2018 and before the day 
on which this Act is assented to, paid or remitted to the 
Crown money as an environmental handling charge in the 
amounts imposed pursuant to the new provisions is not 
entitled to a refund from the general revenue fund of the 
money so paid. 

 
And then it says: 
 

A consumer from whom, on or after April 1st, 2018 and 
before the day on which this Act is assented to, an 
environmental handling charge was recovered in the 
amounts imposed pursuant to the new provisions is not 
entitled to a refund from the general revenue fund of the 
money so paid. 

 
And then in subsection (c) it says, “All money mentioned in 
[those two clauses I just mentioned] is deemed to have been 
properly remitted or recovered.” 
 
And then as we often see in legislation, there’s an immunity — 
I think probably the best way to describe it — is an immunity 
clause that’s in subsection (4), Mr. Speaker, and it says that: 
 

No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 
continued against the Crown, a Crown agent or any other 
person who is obligated to remit an environmental 
handling charge to the Crown to recover moneys 
mentioned in subsection (3), and no action or proceeding 
lies or shall be instituted or continued against the Crown or 
a Crown agent based on any cause of action arising from, 
resulting from, or incidental to the enactment or 
application of this Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so it’s important that we fully understand the bill. 
Again, like I said, this is yet another example of the Sask 
Party’s mismanagement moving to the backs and the 
pocketbooks of everyday families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know I have other colleagues who are eager to enter into the 
debate on this bill, so at this time I am prepared to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 124, The Environmental Management and 
Protection (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 124. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 125 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon as it relates 
to Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act. Certainly adding value to agriculture within 
Saskatchewan is something that really provides opportunity and 
strength for today and for the future. So positive initiatives on 
this front are something that we’ve been calling for, something 
that we will certainly embrace and support. But we want to 
make sure that the measure that’s being brought forward in this 
bill is as effective as it can be in driving the important 
investment that’s needed across our province. The opportunity 
that exists to create jobs all across our province is real, but it 
requires a government that’s willing to step up to the plate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I read this bill here, and of course we’ll go 
through greater scrutiny at committee and certainly be in full 
conversation with agricultural stakeholders throughout our 
province to make sure that this bill addresses the needs and 
opportunities that exist across our province. But when I look 
here, it would appear that the bill creates a 15 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit for value-added agriculture facilities 
on new capital investment. And it will also, I understand, then 
have a certificate that a company would then apply for and 
receive from government which would allow them to exercise 
that tax credit over a number of years, sort of a graduated staged 
process to make that happen. 
 
We want to make sure that the way that that’s being organized 
is in line with the realities of the types of investment, the types 
of projects that are a real opportunity across our province, and 
so that’s the important work that we’ll engage in as we move 
forward. 
 
Certainly we’re a province that is very proud of not just our 
agricultural history, but what we have to offer the future of our 
province, but the world. The world is demanding the 
high-quality agricultural products that we can provide. They’re 
demanding and wanting the high-quality plant-based proteins, 
the high-quality livestock proteins, that Saskatchewan 
producers produce year after year. 
 
And we have a tremendous opportunity as well to respond to 
our growing world and a growing demand and a growing 
population with feeding that world, Mr. Speaker. And in so 
doing creating greater investment, greater value within our 
province, and adding jobs. You know we have, we only have 
. . . We have a lot of land in our province, Mr. Speaker, great 
agricultural land, but that’s limited. So what we should be 
looking at is every opportunity to add value to the land that we 
have and the creation of jobs, Mr. Speaker, in communities 
across our province. 
 
In so many cases those are going to be rural communities, 
smaller communities, Mr. Speaker, but they’ll also be located in 
our cities as well and at our university. We have a culture in our 
province of innovation when it comes to agriculture. We have 
the finest producers in the world, Mr. Speaker, who have 
always been willing to certainly do the hard work that comes 
with an agricultural operation, but also to innovate and to 
provide a leading practice that changes practice around the 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4105 

world. And we have a real cluster of innovation within this 
province as well. 
 
And I think through our universities and through our 
agribusiness that exists, we’ve got something that’s unique to 
the world and something that we’re definitely world leaders in, 
and that’s agriculture. We have certainly an opportunity through 
things like through pea processing and fractionation, Mr. 
Speaker, to create a greater number of jobs within our province, 
to grow our economic activity, and to then share these products 
with the world. 
 
As I’ve said, what we produce — incredibly high-quality, 
plant-based proteins, livestock proteins — are in demand to the 
world. And we have the ability to not just ship that raw product 
to the world, but to ship it what it needs and wants when it 
comes to fibre and protein and starches, as well as having the 
by-products of energy, Mr. Speaker, maximizing value for 
producers, maximizing value for entrepreneurs across our 
province, and creating some much needed jobs within our 
province. 
 
Certainly we see many pea processing operations that are being 
developed across the province. We see the Cameron project, 
which is a fairly large one; Verdient’s project, Mr. Speaker, 
which will create a lot of jobs and will be a leader on this front. 
But we see this happening in Clavet; we see it happening in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
But the potential is so much more than what we see right now, 
so we need to make sure that government understands the 
opportunity that exists when it comes to value-added agriculture 
in Saskatchewan, and that this policy that’s being brought 
forward, that it’ll be as effective as it should be in maximizing 
that investment and creating the important jobs in value-added 
agriculture. 
 
I also want to recognize that there are so many leaders within 
our province that have been pioneers on this front and 
innovators for so long, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank those 
individuals that have been involved in the supercluster funding 
project over the last couple years, Mr. Speaker, this successful 
project that has landed our province and the prairies the 
opportunity to really leverage those dollars and grow 
investment within our province. 
 
So I’m thankful to all the players that were involved in that 
project and I’m encouraged by the engagement of so many 
throughout our province from our universities, through our 
agribusiness, through to producer operations, and producers 
across our province who are ready to chart that really bright 
course forward for agriculture within our province. 
 
Importantly as we grow our exports, as we grow our . . . add 
value to our products that we’re going to ship to the world, we 
need to be able to get those products to the world. So it’s one 
thing to bring forward a tax credit, and we’ll certainly make 
sure that this system, this credit, is as effective as it should be to 
stimulate the investment and the jobs that we need across our 
province to support the value-adding to agriculture across our 
province, but we need to make sure that we can get that product 
to market. And that’s going to be pretty critical when we’re 
looking to recruit capital to these projects and to ensure that 

there’s confidence in our entrepreneurs and in our business 
operations across the province. They’re going to be looking for 
certainty that they’re going to be able to get that product to the 
world. 
 
And it’s a concern to me and I know a concern to many across 
our province, a concern to this official opposition, that we 
continue to have an underperforming rail system at the same 
time as we have a provincial government who seems 
disinterested in leaning into this very important issue, time and 
time again dealing with those rail companies, that duopoly, with 
kid gloves at a time where we need to give these companies a 
push and make our rail system actually perform. 
 
We have a time right now where we have a refinery that wasn’t 
operating at full capacity because they couldn’t get that product 
to market because of the underperforming rail system. We have 
a time right now where we have over 1,000 workers being laid 
off in our potash sector, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t get 
their product to market. We have a time right now where 
producers across Saskatchewan have done their part and put an 
incredible crop into the bin but can’t get that product to market. 
And while vessels sit out off the coast of British Columbia, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s producers that are paying the bill. It’s producers 
that are paying the demurrage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have, you know, backbench members heckle from the 
government side, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the Sask Party who have 
failed to make the system perform. And it should be a concern 
to all within our province that at a time where our economy is 
not as strong as it should be, where we don’t have the kind of 
product that we should be getting to market from so many 
industries, that this system can’t even support our exports today. 
 
[15:30] 
 
This is the time to fix our rail system. This would be the 
message that would go very well along with measures around 
tax credits for value-added agriculture, to say to the world and 
say to people across Saskatchewan that, we need you and want 
you to invest in our province. And it gives them the kind of 
certainty that they need and deserve, to look at making that 
investment. 
 
It can’t be just a one-off sort of announcement as we see far too 
often with this government, grandstanding with this 
government. We have a broken transportation system within 
Saskatchewan and the costs are something that we all feel. But 
many within this province who are subjected to layoffs and job 
loss, they know the cost better than most, Mr. Speaker. Or a 
producer who has a fine crop in the bin but can’t get that 
product to market and is paying demurrage because of the 
failure of the rail companies to perform, they know those costs 
all too well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s time for this government to, you know, toughen up with 
their position on the rail companies. It’s time to push for things 
like a full costing review. It’s time to make sure that we have 
interswitching actually enforced across the province. It’s time 
where we push to make sure that we can actually put some 
competition onto those railbeds by way of joint running rights, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s simply wrong and not right. And it’s 
not fair that we have Saskatchewan people, businesses, farmers, 



4106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

producers, exporters across the province stymied by a broken 
rail system. So if we want an economy that will thrive in the 
future, if we want to grow our exports as I hope we do, if we 
want value-added agriculture to grow within our province, we 
need to make our rail system actually perform. 
 
And of course we need to get pipelines, well-regulated, 
well-managed pipelines established as well, built to tidewater, 
Mr. Speaker. These things certainly are important and go hand 
and hand. 
 
So as I say, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan New Democrats have 
always and long championed value-added agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan producers and agri-business and 
academics through the College of Agriculture have been leaders 
on this front for many, many years. And we have a tremendous 
opportunity that exists in the here and now for our province to 
provide to the world what they want, to serve the world that’s 
growing and the demand that’s growing for those exceptionally 
high-quality plant-based proteins and livestock proteins that we 
can produce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To do that, we need effective measures when it comes to 
incentives around value-added agriculture, but we need a rail 
system that’s going to perform for the people of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see they’ve brought forward this measure here, Mr. Speaker, a 
credit. I find it interesting though that they continue to sit on 
their hands and not fix the damage that they caused a few years 
ago when they eliminated the film industry in Saskatchewan, 
when they attacked the investment and the jobs that exist within 
our film industry, where they took a world-class sound stage 
that’s just across the lake, Mr. Speaker, and at the time was 
demanded and wanted by producers and filmmakers from 
around the world, and have left it not nearly as active as it 
should be. 
 
So while we’re on the topic of credits that would incent 
economic activity, create growth, give us something that we can 
all be proud of, I think it’s incumbent on this government, this 
Sask Party government to fix the damage that they did just a 
few years ago to the film industry and to reinstate the film tax 
credit and build back that industry. Send a message to the 
people all across North America that Saskatchewan is open for 
business, that we want their investment, that we want them to 
come and to film here, and that we will be a partner to work 
together in the creation of jobs and that important industry that 
of course didn’t just make us proud but made us millions of 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So far too often what we see with this government is, you 
know, sort of the grandstanding and the bits of an 
announcement but not the substantive actions that will allow 
our province to realize its full potential. And we see that once 
again with this measure here. And we’re strong advocates of 
enabling value-added agriculture across Saskatchewan, inviting 
that capital, supporting entrepreneurs across our province, 
supporting our world-class producers on this front in 
recognition that the world wants what we produce and in 
recognition that we have the ability to create so many more jobs 
on this front. 
 

But what the Sask Party is missing on this front is that if those 
making those investments, if producers across Saskatchewan, if 
companies that are looking to make this investment don’t have 
certainty that they can get their product to market, that weakens 
our pitch, Mr. Speaker. It weakens our economy, and it prevents 
rural communities across our province from maximizing the 
economic opportunity that exists with value-added agriculture. 
 
At this point in time I don’t have a whole lot more to say on this 
bill. Certainly we look forward to continued consultation with 
agricultural stakeholders across the province, an incredible 
community of stakeholders. And to all those leaders within 
agriculture throughout our province, I say thank you. Keep 
leading. We need your support. 
 
Also to make sure that we’ll be reaching out, but for an 
invitation for anyone to reach out to us and share how we could 
strengthen this legislation right here to make sure that we 
maximize the value of the value-added agricultural opportunity 
that exists for our province. 
 
And then very importantly, just to all the people of the province 
— the workers who have been subjected to layoffs, the 
companies who have been shut out because of an 
underperforming rail system, producers who haven’t been able 
to get their fine crops to market and are stuck with the 
demurrage cost — I want those folks to know that we’re there 
to work with them to build a rail system and transportation 
system that actually works for the people of the province. 
 
And we’ve pressed this government to of course look at putting 
competition actually onto those railbeds, Mr. Speaker, to 
enforce interswitching, to do a full costing review, but also to 
do things like making sure that it’s the rail companies 
themselves who are subjected to the demurrage cost when a 
vessel’s sitting at port or out at sea off the coast of BC [British 
Columbia] awaiting shipment, Mr. Speaker. It’s not right and 
it’s not fair that it’s producers across Saskatchewan, farmers 
across Saskatchewan who are paying that bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And there’s no incentive for the underperforming rail 
companies, the duopoly, when those fees are simply paid by 
producers across Saskatchewan. 
 
So if the members opposite really took this issue seriously, the 
opportunity that exists in value-added agriculture, then they 
would step up to the plate and stop treating the rail companies 
with the kid gloves that they do time and time again. Make that 
rail system actually perform and build on the incredible 
opportunity that exists within our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look forward to time in committee. And at this 
point in time for Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added 
Agriculture Incentive Act, I’ll adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 125, The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4107 

Bill No. 83 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to stand here today to add my remarks with regards to 
Bill No. 83, The Environmental Management and Protection 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this piece of legislation I believe was 
tabled at the last session. So that was last year, and so we’ve 
had some opportunity to take advantage of time to review it a 
little bit closer. So there’s a lot of information that’s being 
presented within the amendments of this Act. Some of it is 
housekeeping in nature, and there’s some legal clarity also with 
regards to this piece of legislation. 
 
And the minister, when he was giving his remarks, indicated 
that some of the changes here were to ensure environmental 
resources are sustainable and the environment remains 
protected. He wants it to become “. . . consistent with other 
provincial resource management legislation . . .” I think 
sometimes when we’re reviewing these legislations, we realize 
that there’s other pieces that might have areas that need to be 
adjusted as well and include those in the one that you’re looking 
through. And we need to regularly look through them. 
 
He wants it to be in line with environmental regulations and so 
there was a lot of different changes that were put forward in 
order to go along with some of those expectations. So one area, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to “. . . expand the definition of 
‘person’ to allow the ministry to issue permits to certain 
associations and organizations . . .” And in order to do that, they 
had to add that definition of what a person is, and so that was a 
piece that was changed. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes within this legislation 
allows the minister to appoint the new members to the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory committee instead 
of having them appointed by an order in council. So this 
provides a lot more power to the minister in order to do those 
changes. He indicated in his remarks that the members 
frequently change due to organizations and associations having 
a change as well. And so this was to be able to make that in a 
more quickly manner. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also in his remarks he indicated that 
since the committee has been formed in 2015, they have met a 
total of six times. So in the three years they haven’t met very 
often. And I don’t know exactly the reasoning for that or when 
meetings are determined or who calls those meetings. 
 
And also I’m hoping when there maybe are some changes . . . I 
noticed with the current members there was nobody north of 
Saskatoon, and I think having a whole half of a province not 
being represented is unfortunate because we know the 
environmental concerns of the northern part of the province 

should be acknowledged as well. 
 
I have concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the minister 
receives this level of power how this will potentially decrease 
accountability. We know through orders in council everybody 
gets a chance to review those, and if this is going to be done on 
the side then . . . And how will the accountability be allowed? 
So I hope those are things that’ll be considered. 
 
They’re hoping that by having this committee then, having the 
ability to change the members more quickly and having regular 
members on the board, that this will allow members to be able 
to move forward with the recommendations in a more timely 
manner. So that was some of the rationale of this. 
 
Another portion of this bill, Mr. Speaker, includes the ability to 
enforce legislation around out-of-province beverage containers 
that are being inappropriately brought into the province, and 
indicating that individuals are taking advantage of the recycling 
program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not quite sure if maybe this 
is an issue. Maybe it’s been some of our border communities? I 
could see that could be a confusing time. 
 
I know I’ve gone on vacation to Alberta or Manitoba and 
oftentimes you buy pop or water from there too and then you 
come home and realize, oh, I can’t bring these bottles to our 
recycling program. But usually I put them in a separate one and 
just let them know because it would be nice to have them 
recycled. That’s the whole purpose. Oftentimes it’s not needing 
to get that recycling money back because you know you hadn’t 
paid it when you went there, but being able to recycle those 
products is important too. So I hope there’s an ability to do that 
as well.  
 
[15:45] 
 
I didn’t realize that there was supposed to be an enforcement 
aspect to it. I guess there was challenges before. I would think 
that this would be a really hard thing to enforce and potentially 
timely as well. And I don’t know what the enforcement looks 
like. It would probably take some reviewing that, but I’m sure 
the critic will do that. 
 
And where there is maybe potentially more of an issue, maybe 
those areas could have more of an enforcement aspect to it 
because I do realize that we don’t want people to be collecting a 
refund when they hadn’t paid the Saskatchewan tax, and that 
that’s the purpose of why we get that refund. But we also don’t 
want to add more pressure and responsibilities that we won’t be 
able to actually enforce on employees that are doing a really 
good job. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Sarcan, who is our 
primary recycling organization in Saskatchewan, they do an 
excellent job. I went to an event the other day . . . well it feels 
like the other day, but it was probably quite a few months ago, 
actually. But it was the grand opening of the Sarcan depot in 
Prince Albert, and they have a new facility. And it’s way bigger 
than what the other one was, and it has a much better 
atmosphere there. And they have so many different new 
programs that are being implemented there which are really 
exciting. And there’s the drop-off program. And I know my 
partner used it the other day when he just dropped off our cans 



4108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

and bottles, and then they put the funds right into our bank 
account, which is . . . We don’t have to stand in line or do any 
of that work, and it’s wonderful. So for people who have 
unpredictable work schedules like we do, that’s kind of a nice 
option to have as well. 
 
And so they say that they’re getting 80 per cent of the returns 
coming back in. And I think that’s wonderful, like that’s an 
incredible return on recyclables. And they’re doing a lot of 
advertising, especially since the last budget. There was some 
changes to recyclables. Now you can recycle your milk jugs and 
everything like that. And so they’ve been providing a lot of 
advertisements so that individuals are aware of the benefits that 
they can get with regards to recycling. And we know that they 
do such an excellent job with not only protecting our 
environment, but providing employment and supporting the 
economy. And they sometimes hire individuals that might not 
be receiving employment in other agencies, but they’re 
incredible employees and they do such a wonderful job. So I 
have to give a shout-out to Sarcan. 
 
So like I said before, I hope that we’re not creating any 
legislation that is going to be difficult for them to manage and 
not very able to enforce because it just makes things much more 
confusing. 
 
Another change within this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
the changes here will allow . . . It provides the authority so that 
the minister . . . to operate a product stewardship program. So 
this is for them to have the ability to appoint a program operator 
for waste stewardship programs. And I’m not quite sure who is 
currently running these programs or how they’re being 
managed. That was a question I had when I was reviewing this. 
 
So I guess the purpose of doing this is — to have the authority 
to the minister — it would be to be able to have these programs 
updated and take over when the stewardship program is not 
meeting its goal. So then the ministry has a little bit more 
authority to be able to manage that. So that could be some good 
questions to ask within committee about how is it currently 
being run and what is the purpose of this. 
 
Another change in here is with regards to the water advisories. 
And they also wanted to add “human health,” so then they need 
to have a term of reference for “human health” when referring 
to the adverse effects from water supplied by a waterworks. So 
they’re changing that terminology so that “human health” and 
“environment” will be included. 
 
We know there’s been, it seems like, a lot more water 
advisories. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know it seems like there’s 
always water advisories going forward, but I know that it’s also 
because there was a change of legislation with regards to how to 
make that go forward. And when talking to some municipal 
leaders they say, like, if the power goes out even for a short 
period of time they have to have a water advisory because they 
can’t guarantee the water safety, even though the chances of the 
water being safe is probably great. But they can’t take their 
chances. So that’s why there’s oftentimes quite a bit of water 
advisories, is because there’s different things like that. We’d 
rather err on the side of caution than otherwise. So that is good. 
So I think that’s really positive to add the human health aspect 
because I think there would be a huge human health aspect to 

that. 
 
Also there’s the abandonment of waste. There’s some language 
changes to help with enforcement with that, so the health 
enforcement officers to be able to determine that. There’s some 
amendments and clarity with regard to language for audits and 
inspections and investigations to ensure that environment 
officers have the appropriate powers to carry out their duties. So 
the clarity for when judges may have to issue a warrant or when 
environment officers may seize items. So there was some 
changes with regards to that. That’s really important to ensure 
that environment officers have the authority so that they can 
conduct inspections and audits. So that’s an important aspect. 
 
Also there is a possibility to extend the five-year confidentiality 
window of environmental records that are of commercial, 
financial, scientific, or technical nature. So the amendment 
would also add an appeal process should the minister deny a 
request to keep information confidential. So I guess there’ll be a 
lot of questions with regards to the purposes of needing to keep 
that information confidential and what examples that would be. 
 
And then there is also some amendments to further clarify what 
activities require permits for water and sewage works, so that’s 
also being considered here as well. And so like I said before, a 
lot of it is housekeeping items, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a lot of 
it is ensuring better enforcement abilities. 
 
It’s really important that we need to ensure that we have a 
sustainable environmental management and a commitment to 
protect our environment. So a lot of the changes within this 
piece of legislation are very important. We’ve got to ensure that 
we have a strong piece of legislation in order to protect our 
environment, and that’s very important. We want to ensure 
that’s available for our grandkids, our great-grandkids, and 
everybody coming forward after us. So there’s a huge 
responsibility for us to ensure that that’s being kept. 
 
So with saying that, we have an obligation also to work with 
some stakeholders and ensure that we get their opinion on some 
of the changes with regards to this and see what their opinions 
of what we need to have forward to have an environmental 
legislative framework. 
 
I know our critic will do the due diligence that he’ll need to do 
to ensure that this piece of legislation is going to protect our 
environment like it should, and I know I have other colleagues 
that would love to add some of their remarks with regard to this 
bill. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 83. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4109 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter into the debate around Bill No. 107, 
An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act. I 
know several of my colleagues have already had the 
opportunity to speak about this bill. I know they’ve really 
enjoyed having the opportunity to speak about this bill. I have 
been looking forward to having the opportunity to speak about 
this bill simply because my colleagues have really told me how 
exciting it was and what a great time they had. 
 
I know in light of some of the introductions we heard prior to 
question period today, there is a lot of jokes that I could make 
about this bill and about, you know, the provincial fossil and 
fossils in the House and fossils in Saskatchewan and that sort of 
thing. But I’m not going to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 
several of my colleagues have already talked about that and 
colleagues on the other side have talked a lot about, you know, 
who’s older than dirt and who is a fossil. But I’ll leave that for 
everyone else to make those sorts of references, and I’ll 
encourage anyone who’s reviewing this to ensure that they take 
a look at some of the introductions that we saw today because 
they were quite humorous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this bill is naming our provincial fossil, which I believe is 
going to be . . . or the emblem, the fossil emblem of 
Saskatchewan, which I did not realize we had a fossil emblem 
of Saskatchewan. And now it’s going to be the Tyrannosaurus 
rex, but they’re also making sure in this . . . And I thank the 
drafters for making sure that they also put in the shortened 
version of Tyrannosaurus rex in the bill as T. rex, just in case, 
you know, we don’t want to say tyrannosaurus and we want to 
make sure everyone still knows who we’re talking about. 
 
And I was talking to my colleague from Regina Elphinstone 
prior to standing up because I forgot the name of the lovable 
Regina fossil. No, I’m not talking about, you know, insert joke 
here that I don’t feel like saying right now, but I’m talking 
about Scotty, everyone’s lovable Regina T. rex who you can 
often find roaming around the . . . well he’s not roaming too 
much, but he’s around . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, 
Megamunch. It’s the same one, isn’t it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s Megamunch at the RSM [Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum], Scotty down at . . . 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Oh geez. Oh I was also thinking about 
Megamunch. Actually I was thinking about Megamunch when I 
was talking to my colleague about this. Now I’m not sure. Now 
I don’t even know what to think anymore. I didn’t realize that 
there were two Regina honourable T. rexes to discuss. So 
Megamunch was the one that I was thinking about who I quite 
. . . I’m always excited to bump into when I’m hanging out at 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s 
often found hiding in the bush around the theatre area, 
sometimes decorated in appropriate costume of the day, 
whatever holiday is closest. 

My member sitting next to me wants to know if perhaps the 
minister responsible for this bill and Megamunch have ever had 
some sort of, you know, celebrity duel. Some sort of celebrity 
cage match. Or as I spent my Sunday afternoon listening to the 
podcast that the minister was on, “On the Ledge,” I believe it’s 
called. The minister at the time suggested some sort of a 
football-related matchup between the minister of the file and a 
member opposite. 
 
So I think if we can’t tag in Megamunch . . . because I think if 
Megamunch is anything, he’s probably a New Democrat. If not, 
then I’m thinking maybe the member from Regina Elphinstone 
is actually quite actively volunteering himself for the role and 
he’s quite excited about that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, and so I 
think there’s a few different . . . The other Regina stalwart that 
is also a T. rex is Scotty? So Scotty and Megamunch are two 
different . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Okay. 
Interesting . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Scotty’s Eastend. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Scotty’s Eastend. Okay. Megamunch was the 
one that I was thinking about. I blame my colleague from 
Regina Elphinstone for giving me inaccurate information, but I 
now know that Megamunch was the one that I was thinking 
about. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Megamunch also, back when I was younger, was making a 
guest appearance at the airport, which was always exciting. 
When we’d roll into the airport, you’d wait for the baggage 
carousel to start up. And then when the baggage carousel would 
start up, then Megamunch would give a little roar and then your 
baggage would come out. That was always a really enjoyable 
experience. 
 
It’s actually too bad that Megamunch couldn’t still make guest 
appearances at the Regina airport every now and then, although 
it is great to see him at the museum whenever you stop by. But I 
always like a little excitement when you’re waiting for your 
luggage. And sometimes it takes a while, and you want to . . . 
The Megamunch roar was always an exciting thing to see, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, I understand from colleagues opposite there were several 
options, and I’m trying to find them. I understand that there are 
some interesting things around this bill, and this Act. I frankly 
didn’t know that The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act 
existed prior to having the opportunity to debate this in the 
House, Mr. Speaker. But I do know now that there are several 
interesting things that are provided for in this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the other emblems that exist for Saskatchewan, I think 
we should also, you know, pay them mention. I don’t want 
them to feel left out because we’re so focused on the T. rex and 
how fun talking about a T. rex is. There’s also the saskatoon 
berry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is Saskatchewan’s fruit 
emblem. I had no idea that we had a fruit emblem, but I’m 
happy to hear that it is the saskatoon berry. I think that makes 



4110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

sense. 
 
Saskatchewan’s fish emblem is the walleye. And if anybody is 
. . . In particular, I would say that the northern walleye is 
probably the best freshwater fish you’ll eat. And the member 
from Cumberland knows this, I think, better than anybody else. 
And I encourage anyone who thinks differently to have a 
conversation with him about that. 
 
Although we catch fish at the lake in the summer — we go 
fishing as often as we can — unfortunately we get a lot of jack, 
which aren’t quite as good as walleye. And my dad always says, 
stop catching slimy jack because he hates gutting them. He 
hates filleting them, Mr. Speaker. I tend to not . . . I don’t do the 
filleting. I do the fishing. I do the catching. And I am quite 
comfortable getting the fish off the hook, but everything after 
that is not my cup of tea, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I will echo 
his sentiment though that walleye is much tastier than a slimy 
jack, as my dad would say. 
 
Sylvite, well potash is also, I believe, is the provincial mineral, 
Mr. Speaker, which makes sense again for Saskatchewan, 
considering how much potash we have in the province and how 
important it is to our economy. 
 
The white-tailed deer is not only Saskatchewan’s most popular 
game animal, or one of Saskatchewan’s most popular game 
animals, it’s also another provincial emblem that we have, Mr. 
Speaker. Another emblem we have, which I think most folks 
already know, is our provincial floral emblem, the western red 
lily. I did know about that, but I did not know about all of the 
other emblems. 
 
So the nice thing about entering into these adjourned debates is 
it allows you the opportunity to learn more about your province 
than you did prior to standing up. Again it’s exciting to see that 
we’re adding a fossil as our provincial emblem. And I think 
with that I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park and other members have moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 107. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill No. 111, the municipal tax sharing potash amendment, 
2017. I guess they’re amending some of the legislation. The Act 
was first introduced in 1968, I believe, is what they refer to 
when it came in. And at some point it was because of the potash 
companies. It was for municipalities to share in, I guess, some 

of the benefits of having the potash mine around certain 
municipalities.  
 
I’m no expert on this. I know my colleague . . . And as I was 
going through some of the information just to try to understand, 
there are the benefits. It’s a sharing of, I guess, the revenue 
generated, municipal revenue generated from the potash mine 
for certain municipalities that are impacted, is what my 
understanding of what it was initially to share. 
 
Having said that, I guess we have a number of potash 
companies. And I guess there’s other communities where the 
mining industry has . . . there’s impact to communities. 
Sometimes there’s agreements signed in different areas. In this 
one here, it talks strictly about the municipal taxes that are 
shared about municipalities, coming in from the potash.  
 
But I think about some of the mining industry and the deals that 
are there, and I just want to reflect on it because sometimes 
some of the northern communities and other communities that 
are impacted by the mining industry, there are incentives. There 
are agreements that are signed with the mining companies to 
support certain impacted communities. And it might be 
employment opportunities that a municipality or a northern 
community has an opportunity. When I think about up north, 
the criteria there is making sure your percentage, I believe it’s 
50 per cent northern people are employed in that industry. They 
try to achieve that mark with the industry, and there’s ways that 
it’s monitored and, you know, they try to make sure people are 
there. 
 
So that’s just one incentive. That’s an incentive. But when I go 
back to this, I just wanted to show that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
an example of different agreements. This one here deals strictly 
with the sharing of revenue collected from the potash mine, 
which they generate. And actually, I don’t know what kind of 
dollars those would be. I don’t have a potash . . . up north we 
don’t have a potash company, so I wouldn’t know it. But I’m 
curious and probably some of that information will come. I 
don’t know how much revenue that it generates for those 
municipalities that are impacted. And it talks about that, and 
I’m going to go a little bit into this. They’re making some 
changes to some areas and giving certain changes.  
 
And here’s one area where it was interesting. There used to be, 
from my understanding, a board, might have been three board 
members, but they’re now moving it to the area to five. And in 
that now includes representatives from SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] and the potash industry. So it 
gives them a chance to have some input in developing. And I 
guess at the end of the day it’s to try to work together to how 
they’re going to share those taxes, the municipal taxes, that are 
collected from the potash with certain impact communities. 
 
But that’s interesting. And I know some impact communities, 
some they talk about, I believe it’s 20 kilometres or 20 miles 
and they’re changing it to 20 kilometres. Like it’s back and 
forth. And I know as we go through this, we’re going to ask the 
minister and the officials to clarify. And we will get that 
clarified, exactly understanding the changes, and there must be 
a reason why. 
 
But overall I guess what they’re trying to do is they’re coming 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4111 

up with, I guess, a mill rate and a formula that will work for 
those communities impacted. But when I think about that and I 
think about some . . . My colleagues referred to this in some of 
the cities. We know the cities, I believe some of them do not 
take part and share in the potash if they’re not in the kilometres 
of 20 or whatever it is. And I think about some of the people 
and residents that live in a community like Humboldt. I think 
Yorkton is another one, that that community is being impacted 
in the sense of they have people who provide service to those 
individuals who work at the potash company. So they might 
reside there. So there are some of that. 
 
And I’m not sure how they’re going to work that out when you 
say impacted, if it’s strictly on that or is it where the residents 
reside. And of course there’s a lot of spinoff. And you think 
about jobs, when it comes to jobs, and it comes to supplying 
supplies to potash. I realize this talks about the mill rate and 
setting a mill rate and setting a formula and having a board that 
shares and splits those dollars. And again I’m no expert on it, 
but I’m curious when I start seeing this. It’s like, you know, 
they’re taking part of sharing of revenue. 
 
And that’s interesting because, like I said, there’s different 
companies out there and different mining companies that have a 
different way of doing this. This is just one more example of 
what our province does and some of the agreements that we’re 
willing to do as a province and some of the agreements that 
we’ve had since, like this one, like I said, was 1968 where it 
originally came from. It was to, as the potash came in, to share 
some of that resource with those impacted. 
 
So having said that, going through this, you know, there will be, 
I guess, those communities that are impacted and will get . . . 
And I don’t know how that determines on what kind of 
services, like, and I don’t know some of those examples of 
those communities and what kind of . . . Does that change the 
mill rate on what they collect from residents? Because like, I 
don’t know what type of dollars we’re talking about, revenue 
that would come in from a potash mine, as far as to some of 
those municipalities. 
 
So it’s more questions, I guess, for myself and I’m just curious. 
It’s interesting when you talk about it. I know we’re going to 
get a chance to ask some of this stuff in committee. But exactly 
which communities get impacted by a potash, and how is the 
formula figured out? And is that, those dollars, are they inject 
dollars where they have, you know, they’re getting quite a bit of 
revenue coming in with that sharing of those resources? So is it 
bringing quite a bit of income into the municipality? Or is it 
strictly . . . But like, I am curious. So it’s going to be seen. And 
maybe some of them are doing really well with the potash there, 
and I don’t know what they’re collecting. But I know in 
committee we can ask some of that and maybe there’s that 
information. Some of the ministry officials will have some of 
that information. 
 
And maybe, I guess, just reaching out to some of the 
municipalities, and maybe there’s a way to find out, when you 
do a little bit of research, that here’s what the revenue is. And 
you know, maybe some communities do well and they’re 
providing much better services for their residents which is a 
good thing. I mean, if you’re an impacted community and you 
share, you know, you share in that. And like I said, they’ve set 

up . . . they have made some changes in here for a reason. 
 
And I think it’s a good thing to put the potash industry at the 
table, to put the, you know, SUMA at the table, to give some 
input and direction which . . . These are changes that were 
probably requested and those individuals within different areas 
probably have said it’s time for some changes. And if you’re 
going to change legislation, maybe these . . . And maybe there 
was some work done and ideas brought forward to change it, 
and that could be why it is. 
 
And I guess the other thing is with municipalities. They’ve got 
to be able to plan their budgets, and so this may help them with 
the formula, seeing what kind of dollars are coming in and help 
them, you know, better predict what revenue is coming in and 
what they can do as far as planning for residents, to provide a 
better service. So that could be overall could be in there. 
 
You know, it also talks about that board will set a mill rate for 
the year. So there are certain powers that that board will have 
the power. Now I don’t really understand exactly how that will 
work, and I know my colleagues in committee will ask the 
minister and the officials again to clarify that, how that actually 
will work. And we’ll get to go through some of that. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So you know, again I talked about some of those cities that 
aren’t impacted right now and don’t get it. And I said Yorkton, 
Humboldt, Saskatoon. I don’t believe there is the bigger cities 
are involved in that. And maybe at some point, even though like 
I said, some of the employees live in that community, so it is 
. . . In some ways some might say, well it should be looked at 
differently. I don’t know, you know, if that’s the case or not 
because, if it is about the 20 kilometres, then I guess they meet 
the criteria that is. I don’t know if they’re proposing any 
changes. And I know we’ll have a chance to ask some of those 
questions, get clarification on this, and see where we go from 
here. 
 
So really, thinking about overall the work that needs to be done 
and continue to be done, and I guess ourselves as our critics and 
our role to ask the ministry, its officials, exactly who requested 
this. And maybe it’s, like I said, maybe it’s a good reason why 
it’s been requested, but to understand it.  
 
And I know my colleague will get a chance to ask the minister 
and officials and clarify many of the areas we’re unsure of. And 
maybe we have to do a little bit of research to get that 
information. 
 
So really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point I have no further 
comments and I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 111. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 



4112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

Bill No. 112 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Good to rise in my place and join debate this afternoon on Bill 
No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes 
(Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Now one of the things that is often a bit of a challenge in 
opposition, considering various of the pieces of legislation and 
various of the initiatives brought forward by members opposite, 
is trying to determine what the balance is between what appears 
to be a communications exercise on the part of the government, 
and you know, there are communications that attach to any 
political initiative. And certainly governments are well expected 
to communicate with the citizen, Mr. Speaker, to let them know 
what the priorities are, let them know what the details of 
legislation, of policies are and how they affect their particular 
life. 
 
And in terms of the . . . So on the one hand, communications. 
That’s part and parcel of the life in a provincial government 
anywhere, Mr. Speaker. But as regards to this particular 
government, Mr. Speaker, it’s oftentimes interesting to try and 
measure up what is being communicated and the desired effect 
of those communications, and the policy that is being offered on 
the other side of the coin. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this government’s desire, you 
know . . . And if you’ll cast your mind back, the second reading 
speech of the minister introducing this legislation was delivered 
on November 29th, 2017. It was in the midst of a leadership 
contest on the part of members opposite. It was in the midst of 
the ongoing and evolving debate around cannabis legalization 
in the country, Mr. Speaker, and the different federal-provincial 
jurisdictional questions that that raises. And then to add further 
complexity to the situation, you have the matter of the Sask 
Party leadership contest into the bargain, Mr. Speaker, and you 
had different sort of postures on the part of various of those 
camps. 
 
Some of them wanted to communicate that they were very, very 
tough on all these things, and you know, were contemplating 
ages of majority for being able to consume cannabis, Mr. 
Speaker, of, I think 25 was being contemplated by one 
contestant over there; others that said, you know, 19 is what it is 
for alcohol and that’s what it should be for cannabis. And again, 
that’s fair enough. But there was a fair amount of mediating and 
navigating and negotiating these differences over there. 
 
And again you see this more typically in federal politics, Mr. 
Speaker, as regards the Conservative Party and the sort of 
tensions that exist between the libertarian branch of the federal 
Conservative Party and the social conservative branch of the 
federal Conservative Party. But I would submit that this 

particular issue is caught up in some of those kind of posturings 
and the way that different camps approached this issue, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, in terms of how the different camps were 
putting forward their position.  
 
But above all of that . . . So that’s one of the things that that 
required was a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, and time in absence of 
a full decision made on the part of the government. So they 
needed to get something in the window in the meantime, Mr. 
Speaker. Because as regards impaired driving more broadly 
construed, Saskatchewan is terribly well known, has a big 
problem when it comes to impaired driving. And the desire of 
imputing the situation around cannabis or other controlled 
substances alongside that of alcohol, Mr. Speaker, and the 
discussion that we’ve been having as a province . . . And the 
different sort of initiatives and engagement exercises that have 
gone along with that as well as some heartbreaking and terrible 
places where this has gone horribly wrong, and Saskatchewan 
has earned this standing, this terrible standing as one that leads 
the nation in terms of impaired driving. 
 
So there’s a desire in that circumstance on the part of 
government . . . And certainly one of the things that the Wall 
government was well known for was a pretty ready and capable 
communications machine. And in terms of looking to get out 
something to the broader public around zero tolerance on 
impaired driving as that extends to cannabis, in absence of all 
these other decisions that were yet to be made on the part of the 
government, but to have something to say in the interim as all 
these other jurisdictions were making their decisions, this was 
something that the government wanted to apparently get out on 
the public record that the main message received that when it 
came to impaired driving as related to cannabis that there would 
be zero tolerance. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, between that headline and then in 
terms of how this comes down to the street level, how this will 
be enforced on the street, again one of those interesting things 
to consider in terms of laws being proposed, legislation being 
proposed, one of the critical questions always to be asked is, 
what is the enforcement regime? And again, Mr. Speaker, as 
you know, they’re looking to get the zero-tolerance message out 
there. Fair enough. That’s certainly within the government’s 
purview. But the question of how you’re going to enforce zero 
tolerance, Mr. Speaker, is one that remains and one that is not 
convincingly answered in this particular piece of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, and again is as different from . . . 
 
You know, once you get beyond a field sobriety test and the 
particulars of that, I’m sure we’ll be interested to further 
investigate in committee, Mr. Speaker, and how that regime is 
being changed in light of one that promotes zero tolerance as 
regards having any cannabis in your system, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, or the way that the definitions of drugs have been 
changed under the piece of legislation. There are a number of 
questions that arise that demand an answer if this is indeed 
going to be something that moves beyond a communications 
exercise and provides meaningful gains in terms of public 
safety for the people of Saskatchewan on our highways and 
byways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of what can be contemplated under the changes of 
definitions to drugs in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, you know, 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4113 

where does that leave something like Sudafed? Where does that 
leave . . . One of my colleagues has got a great head cold going 
on and I know is taking different medication for that, 
over-the-counter provided medication, Mr. Speaker. I know I’m 
doing my best not to catch that selfsame cold, Mr. Speaker. But 
in terms of that individual, if they are pulled over for whatever 
reason by a duly authorized police force, what happens then? 
And if the pseudoephedrine or whatever that is there in trace 
elements, if there is indeed to be zero tolerance, then what 
you’re taking in a two-pill format from, I don’t know, Dimetapp 
or NyQuil or whatever the prescribed amount is, Mr. Speaker, 
where does that leave you under the law? So that’s one question 
we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the field sobriety test and again in terms of a 
Breathalyzer, which ascertains very precisely how much blood 
alcohol you have, in terms of the way that THC 
[tetrahydrocannabinol] or cannabinoids are processed by your 
system, Mr. Speaker, you know, you don’t have to be Ross 
Rebagliati to know that if you’re in a room and you happen to 
inhale — someone’s smoking marijuana in the same room — 
and then it’s going to show up in your blood. It’s going to take 
you a while to get that out of your system, Mr. Speaker. And it 
doesn’t have to have anything to do with impairment levels, it 
has to do whether or not it’s present in your blood — as 
different from alcohol, Mr. Speaker. So is that an appropriate 
test to ascertain sobriety or impairment levels, Mr. Speaker? It 
is not. 
 
And if you talk to the police, Mr. Speaker, one of the things 
they are mightily interested in is this very aspect of it, of this 
change in legislation, Mr. Speaker, is how do they enforce the 
law? How do they enforce the law if the tests that are there in 
ready supply for alcohol don’t work on a comparable basis as 
regards cannabis, Mr. Speaker? And you know, that’s a pretty 
critical aspect of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and one that 
needs a firm answer before something like this can go forward. 
 
So I get that, you know, there was a moment when this 
legislation was brought forward at the end of November 2017 
where the government wanted to have something to say about 
what they thought was the right way to go on cannabis, as they 
themselves were in a fair amount of indecision and conflict 
around what the go-forward plan would be for cannabis in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I know that they wanted to be able to 
say, we’re going to be zero tolerance on drugs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again though, how you are going to enforce that 
legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s one thing to change the terms 
in the legislation. So how do you enforce that? What is the test? 
What is the test when, you know, what I understand of how 
cannabis is processed or the impairing qualities of cannabis are 
processed by the human body, Mr. Speaker, that it’s in terms of 
what is fat soluble versus, you know, impairs you through your 
blood system? You know, what are the differences that are 
accounted for there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[16:30] 
 
And you know, I have read the minister’s second reading 
speech as I am wont to do, and again there’s no good answer to 
that. There’s some talk about, you know, upping capacity in 
terms of training. But in terms of what that test is, Mr. Speaker, 

there are more questions than solid answers. So I would submit 
that that’s something, you know, regardless the 
federal-provincial jurisdictional complexity of this particular 
policy issue, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that needs to be 
sorted out. Otherwise it’s bad law. 
 
And in terms of how this gets enforced on the streets of Regina 
or, you know, pick your place in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
you’re going to be setting for our men and women in blue, Mr. 
Speaker, a very difficult challenge. 
 
And in terms of how that then in turn comes to the, you know 
. . . Is this yet another issue that’s going to get sorted out by the 
courts because the desire to proceed on a communications basis 
outweighed the ability to put forward solid law? Is that what’s 
going to happen yet again in this case, Mr. Chair of 
Committees? 
 
So we have a lot of questions about the legislation. We have a 
lot of questions about the enforcement aspect of it. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for answers to those 
questions in the days and weeks ahead. But for the time being, I 
would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. I recognize the 
member from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’m requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce a couple of friends, a couple of guests that 
are in your gallery here today, Mr. Speaker. Gloria Patrick is 
here today and Jennifer Morin is here today. 
 
Gloria Patrick has served as the constituency assistant in our 
office in Regina Rosemont since 2011 and has provided an 
incredible service to so many throughout our community, has 
provided me with incredible support, Mr. Speaker, and I’m so 
thankful for her service. She dealt with people at times of crisis 
with such a responsiveness, but also care and common sense. 
She comes by that in a very natural way, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
known Gloria through most of her life, more than half of her 
life. She’s a remarkable woman. She’s also recently concluded 
her master’s degree in Social Work and she’s taken on really 
valuable employment, supporting families at risk within our 
community. I know she’ll be an incredible asset to those 



4114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

families. 
 
But to Gloria I say, thank you so much for the service to our 
constituents. Thank you for the friendship. I will miss her. She’s 
been my personal counsellor for a good seven years, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m hopeful that she’ll continue to offer me those 
counselling sessions, maybe not at the office now, but maybe 
over at Juliana’s or somewhere else in the riding, Mr. Speaker. 
But to Gloria I say thank you, as well to her family, her 
daughter Kaitlyn who’s an incredible young woman, a student 
leader as well, who’s been fully involved in Gloria’s service. 
 
I also want to introduce and welcome to her legislature Jennifer 
Morin who has started her first day, officially, in the 
constituency office here today as the constituency assistant. I’m 
so pleased that Jennifer has taken on this important work. She’s 
been working for many years in justice, working with those that 
are dealing with domestic violence. She’s somebody who brings 
a lot of skills and a lot of compassion to her work. 
 
I’m lucky to know the family very well. Her boys, Jax and 
Ethan, skate at the Rosemont Outdoor Hockey League as well. 
They’re two fine skaters, which is good because, you know, 
their dad, Trevor, is a terrible hockey player, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s an honour to introduce Jennifer to her Assembly, to thank 
her in advance for the service that she’ll provide, and ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming and thanking Jennifer 
Morin and Gloria Patrick to their Assembly. Thanks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to rise 
today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 113, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017. It’s a 
pleasure to be up again today in adjourned debates. And I’ll be 
looking at some of the recommended changes in this particular 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as some considerations, as we 
move forward, to add to the discussion here. 
 
In the minister’s second reading speech for Bill No. 113, he 
talked about the fact that: 
 

The Planning and Development Act . . . provides the 
legislative framework for municipalities to manage and 
facilitate development of their communities. This 
framework supports municipalities with the tools to 
achieve economic growth, environmental stewardship, and 
social and cultural well-being for their communities. 

 
And we certainly hope this is the case and that all changes that 

are being made to this piece of legislation do reflect that 
intended purpose, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister goes on to say: 
 

This bill will incrementally improve Saskatchewan’s land 
use planning framework and save [Saskatchewan] 
taxpayers money. The bill strengthens existing legislation 
to help municipalities plan regionally, support 
opportunities for municipal and provincial infrastructure to 
service department, clarify a planning process for the use 
of municipal reserves for school purposes, and address 
miscellaneous items. 

 
The minister talks about the fact that the ministry has consulted 
with a number of internal and external stakeholders in preparing 
this bill and the amendments within. Some of these 
organizations that they identify are SARM, SUMA, the cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina, Saskatoon & Region Home Builders’ 
Association and the Regina & Region Home Builders’ 
Association, public and Catholic school divisions, the ministries 
of Highways and Infrastructure, Education, and Agriculture. 
 
Some of the changes that are being made in this bill are that 
regional partnerships can exist a little bit more easily to help 
municipalities grow and partner with other municipalities in the 
future. To ensure clarity for all stakeholders in involving and 
planning future schools, and is something that I will speak more 
about in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But the minister is talking 
about the fact that “The bill supports collaboration between 
municipalities, school divisions, and the Ministry of Education 
. . . [in order to] develop policies to ensure municipal reserve 
lands are available for school purposes.” So there’s definitely 
some questions that we have here around transparency in 
public-private partnerships, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What this piece of legislation does, there are some amendments 
that ensure that conflict of interest provisions apply to members 
of a district development appeals board and members of any 
regional planning authorities, which certainly seems prudent if 
these folks are involved in the planning process, that they 
should be subject to the conflict of interest provisions. 
 
Currently 10 cities in Saskatchewan have been granted 
approving authority status. An amendment allows the minister 
to modify the terms of an order granting authority status to 
achieve a provincial interest, for example in land use for P3 
schools. And any order a minister issues under this new section 
must be published in the Gazette. 
 
So we have some concern about the ability of the ministry to 
impose what could be a potentially very politically motivated 
agenda on municipalities as it relates to this, in particular with 
the location of public-private partnership schools and the ability 
of the ministry to impose that on municipalities. That is a 
question that we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Currently the ability to apply policies for site plan control is 
limited to commercial and industrial land, and it now expands 
to include institutional and mixed-use development. Municipal 
planning bylaws are now submitted to the director of 
community planning instead of the Minister of Government 
Relations. The minister’s had and still continues to have the 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4115 

ability to require municipalities to amend their official 
community plan to achieve consistency with provincial interest. 
 
A new section adds some flexibility for timelines that the 
municipalities have to abide by in the minister’s orders. A new 
section requires “. . . municipalities to develop their school site 
policies collaboratively with the Minister of Education, any 
local school divisions, and any municipality(s) that the Ministry 
of Education determines is necessary . . . ” 
 
So again this makes sense on paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
when you start to think about what this actually means for folks 
that are looking at developing new schools, the good people 
who are working in municipalities, many of them have been 
working away for several years, have a lot of experience with 
development at the municipal level, and I would want to ensure 
that those folks are being valued and heard in the development 
process. So it’s a little bit concerning when there’s these 
mandates being put forward about who they need to be working 
with and what that looks like. 
 
There are many changes throughout the bill that will impact 
municipalities, how they can plan, develop, and address 
regional issues. We’ve also heard some concerns already from 
developers about this bill. We’ll certainly be having discussions 
with municipalities and our other stakeholders about how this 
bill will impact them and following up with the minister in 
committee. Overall we definitely appreciate the consultations 
that have taken place, want to ensure that those consultations 
were meaningful consultations. Sometimes there can be fear 
within organizations that you don’t want to bite the hand that 
feeds you. So we’ll definitely be following up as well with 
some of those groups to see what their input was and whether 
their input was considered in the creation of these amendments, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then there are some concerns about how municipalities 
plan and how, whether they will be given the authority to plan 
moving forward. There’s questions we have about the 
transparency of the P3 process, whether municipalities are 
going to be sort of hooped into some of these schools. And 
we’ll have concerns about what that looks like long term, the 
abilities of municipalities to shape their own plan, and the 
apparent grip of the ministry on these plans to be able to impose 
a political agenda and influence. Presumably a lot of the folks 
who represent municipalities would want to go on a cost-benefit 
analysis and make sure that these are the smartest decisions for 
them to be involved in. And I’m not sure that we’ve seen that 
level of transparency. 
 
So these are questions we’ll continue to ask, and certainly 
hoping that there has been meaningful consultation and that 
these changes will have a positive effect. But we’ll have more 
to question as we go forward into committee. And I know my 
colleagues will have more that they’ll want to say about this 
particular bill as well, but with that, I will move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 113, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to join in on the debate on Bill No. 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act. Now this bill is an interesting bill. It will 
allow for municipalities to license and create bylaws for what 
might be a new industry. But ultimately, Mr. Speaker, it will be 
up to the provinces to ensure the safety of communities, 
consumers, and drivers. 
 
And when we speak to bills, it’s important that we present some 
of the concerns that we’ve been hearing from people in the 
province with respect to legislative changes. So one of the main 
concerns we’ve been hearing with respect to Bill 114 is around 
proper regulations. So we want to ensure that when we’re 
creating a new industry in the province, in particular this new 
industry, we want to ensure that the province is doing its duty to 
ensure that safety of communities, drivers, and consumers, Mr. 
Speaker, are protected. So it’ll be up to the province to wear 
that mandate, and we’ll be watching closely to ensure that they 
do live up to that need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to summarize a bit about this bill, the transportation network 
companies will require a licence, which will be issued by the 
municipality. Municipalities can make bylaws then around 
licensing standards, fees, and records that are required. So I 
believe that if my understanding of the bill is correct, it will be 
up to municipalities — including Lloydminster, I see; 
Lloydminster’s also included as a municipality — can decide if 
they want to allow for this type of licence issuing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think section 3 of the bill is pertinent. I’m going to read it 
into the record. So it says: 
 

Subject to section 5, a transportation network company 
may only operate or provide vehicle-for-hire services in a 
municipality if it holds a valid and subsisting licence 
issued by the municipality. 

 
And then the further section, of section 4, provides for the 
bylaw making authority and grants that authority, Mr. Speaker, 
to municipalities. It’s also allowing for municipalities to 
determine “. . . the manner in which licences . . . [will] be 
allocated to transportation network companies, including 
limiting the . . . number of licences that are to be issued.” So 
it’ll allow for municipalities to determine how many licences 
they feel are appropriate for their community. 
 
It also provides municipalities with the power to prohibit, 
control, or limit the transfer of licences and allows for: 



4116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2018 

authorizing the conditions or requirements for obtaining, 
holding or renewing a licence or a class of licences to 
operate a transportation network company . . . [which also 
includes] the character and fitness of an applicant or 
licence holder. 

 
It provides for the duration of . . . It allows for municipalities to 
provide for the duration of licences, and also allows 
municipalities to have the power to suspend or cancel licences 
for failing to comply with a term or condition of the bylaws that 
the municipalities now, with this legislation, have the authority 
to enact, Mr. Speaker. It also gives municipalities the authority 
to regulate the manner in which vehicle-for-hire services from a 
transportation network company may be obtained or purchased 
by the public, and also allows for authorizing conditions to be 
imposed at any time during the term of a licence as a 
requirement of continuing to hold a licence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So another thing that this bill talks about is what happens when 
there are trips between municipalities. So based on the bill, to 
my understanding, the bylaws of the municipality in which the 
trip originated in will apply for the duration of the entire trip 
unless municipalities have agreed otherwise, Mr. Speaker. So I 
suppose the instance would be if someone was asking for a ride 
from, or is in Regina, they hired a service to take them to 
Moose Jaw as an example, then the bylaws in Regina would 
apply in that particular instance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s also a requirement in the bill that the drivers must 
have a driver’s licence. Makes logical sense, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Also requires that the vehicles that are used must also 
be registered as required to by The Traffic Safety Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The transportation network company that will be subject to 
these provisions must also prove that they have adequate 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. I think we should read “transportation 
network” and “transportation network company” into the record 
because it is being defined in the bill as it should be defined, or 
it’s being defined as it definitely needs to be defined, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the “transportation network company,” as defined in the bill, 
it means, “a person or other prescribed entity that operates a 
transportation network.” And then “transportation network” 
which also needs to be read into the record as the definition for 
that serves the definition that I just spoke about: 
 

“transportation network” means, subject to the regulations, 
an online enabled application, a digital platform, a 
software program, a website or other system or technology 
platform offered, used or operated by a transportation 
network company to enable a person to obtain a vehicle 
using its vehicle-for-hire service.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, so it’s left pretty open, but we do know that this is 
talking about, just from hearing from the minister and seeing 
some of the stakeholders that have been paraded into the 
Chamber throughout this session and last session, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are talking about Uber and companies like Uber, Mr. 
Speaker. But it is important to note that the definition in the bill 
does leave it open for many different types of companies to 
enter into this type of service. 

The information that is to be provided to the insurance includes 
things like name and place of business, name and address of 
drivers, list of vehicles providing service, geographic area for 
service, and proof of licence, that they have the licence they 
need to be able to operate the service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Government will have the power to suspend or cancel a 
registration permit to a transportation network company if they 
fail to comply with the Act or the regulations that correspond, 
Mr. Speaker. Again that ties into what I’ve already said earlier, 
is the government’s mandate and responsibility pursuant to this 
legislation, to this change. And also what we’ve been hearing as 
a concern from stakeholders is that an assurance is needed for 
ensuring that there is proper safety and regulations so that we’re 
ensuring protection for consumers and employees, Mr. Speaker, 
those who will be driving these vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in that light, government will also have regulating powers 
on defining what vehicles are, prescribing the classes of drivers’ 
licences, prescribing a special feature indicating that a vehicle 
may be used for vehicle-for-hire services, prescribing insurance 
premiums, and procedures for suspending or cancelling a 
licence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And like I said already, it is the municipalities that will have the 
power to license and create the bylaws for this industry, but 
ultimately it will be up to the province to ensure the safety of 
communities, consumers, and drivers. 
 
I know we are taking the bill to committee, and our critic will 
be doing a fantastic job looking for further clarification from 
the minister, as well as asking questions around consultation, 
what sort of consultation has gone on with respect to this bill. 
We’re seeking, and I know the critic has been doing a very 
good job seeking input from all stakeholders that are involved. 
 
We also want to ensure that the regulations are in place that 
have been regulating taxi companies for a very long time, for 
decades, Mr. Speaker, and that are there to ensure safety for 
those who use that service, as well as for the employees. So 
regulations that are there to protect both the public and the 
drivers are also being utilized for, or similarly, at least in some 
similar form, are being utilized for this new service, Mr. 
Speaker, because safety should be the number one thing that 
we’re ensuring. We need to ensure that both consumers are safe, 
the customers are safe, as well as the employees, Mr. Speaker. 
We need to ensure that the regulations are in place that will 
ensure safety of consumers and drivers, and then again, that is 
the role of the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also think it’s impertinent to look a little bit further into some 
of the provisions in this bill because it will be something that’s 
new for Saskatchewan. We’re seeing how the ride-sharing 
program, the ride-sharing companies, expand into other 
locations. I know you can find them in Ontario, BC, and 
Alberta, just to name a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to count 
all the other locations around the world, but there has been 
some mixed reaction depending on where the location is. Some 
steps backwards, Mr. Speaker, I suppose is one way of 
describing it. 
 
We also want to ensure that when we’re looking at this as an 
alternative, or as a prevention to address the problem we have 



April 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4117 

in Saskatchewan of our high rates of driving while impaired, 
Mr. Speaker, that we are not just using this as a solution, that 
there are other solutions we need to be looking into as well, Mr. 
Speaker. This can’t be the only thing that we’re doing, that we 
are addressing it in many other ways, including education 
campaigns in the schools and wider education campaigns, Mr. 
Speaker, just to name a few. 
 
Also there is, like I said, there’s a few other provisions that are 
a bit interesting in the bill that I know that the critic is going to 
have the opportunity to ask questions about at committee. Like I 
said, she’s been doing some pretty good work on this file, as 
she does in all of her files, reaching out to stakeholders, 
speaking with stakeholders and community leaders about their 
respective thoughts on the bill, positive or negative, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I know she’s going to have a lot to ask for the minister at 
committee, Mr. Speaker. But I do know, prior to that, that I do 
have other colleagues who are interested in joining in on the 
debate around this bill. So I know, although I know that the 
critic is quite eager to enter into committee on the bill, I do 
know, like I said, that there are other colleagues who are 
interested in joining the debate. 
 
So I’m prepared at this time to move Bill No. 114, The Vehicles 
for Hire Act, move adjournment on that debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 114, The Vehicles for 
Hire Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so the committees may sit 
tonight, I do now adjourn the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this Assembly does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4087 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4088 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4088 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4088 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4088 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4089 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4113 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4089 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4089 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4089 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4089 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Well-Known Author Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4090 
 Missing Persons Week 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4090 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4090 
 Opening of Royal University Hospital’s Mental Health Assessment Unit 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4091 
 Volunteer Receives Lieutenant Governor’s Award 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4091 
 Under-18 Women’s Curling Team Recognized 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4091 
 Tribute Concert Supports Humboldt Broncos and Their Families 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4091 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Wage Rates in Saskatchewan 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4092 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4092 
 Rail Transportation Issues 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4093 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4093 
 Highway Intersection Safety Review 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4093 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4093 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4094 
 Funding Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4094 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4094 
 Rental Housing Supplement 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4095 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4095 
 Administrative Segregation in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4096 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4096 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4096 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4097 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4099 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4099 
  Brkich  (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ........................................................................... 4099 



 

 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4101 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4104 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4107 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4109 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4110 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4112 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4114 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4115 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


