


















































May 23, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 63A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 23, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4353 
 May 23, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday immediately after question period, 
the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order pursuant to 
rule 52, requesting the tabling of documents referenced by the 
Deputy Premier in relation to policy development documents of 
previous legislative secretaries.  
 
I have reviewed the transcript on page 4348 of Hansard. The 
Deputy Premier in his comments referred to recommendations 
made by the previous legislative secretaries, but did not quote 
from specific documents. Therefore the point of order is not 
well taken and the minister is not required to table any 
documents. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — With leave for an extended introduction, 
please. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has asked for leave 
for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — To you and through you and all members 
of the Assembly, seated in your gallery is a very special guest. 
It is my pleasure to introduce to the Legislative Assembly today 
Mr. Anil Bora İnan, consul general of the Republic of Turkey in 
Vancouver, British Columbia. 
 
Accompanying him is Mr. Ömer Al-Katib, honorary consul 
general of the Republic of Turkey for Saskatchewan. Also 
present is Melinda Carter, senior international officer and Mr. 
Ferhat Celik, vice-consul, consulate general of the Republic of 
Turkey in Vancouver. 
 
This is the first Turkish consul general visit by Mr. İnan to 
Western Canada. He is responsible for the provinces of British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan, as well as the Northwest 
Territories and Yukon. Before taking on his new role as Turkish 
Consul General, Mr. İnan held a number of positions for 
Turkey’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He has lived in many 
places around the world, including the United Kingdom, the 
United States, and Syria. We are happy Mr. İnan is now adding 
Canada to his list of homes away from home and hope he has 
the chance to take in all the amazing experiences and sights of 
our country in Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 
While in Saskatoon, Mr. İnan met with the mayor and 

representatives of Saskatchewan Polytechnic, visited the 
University of Saskatchewan, and met with Turkish citizens. In 
Regina he has met with a number of elected officials and the 
Lieutenant Governor and has visited AGT Food and 
Ingredients. He will also meet with the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership and more elected officials this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Turkey is an important trading partner for 
Saskatchewan with agri-foods such as lentils, chick peas, and 
durum wheat representing 97 per cent of our exports. We also 
imported over 10 million in goods from Turkey in 2017. 
Saskatchewan has welcomed 113 Turkish citizens as permanent 
residents between 2007 and 2016. Turkey remains an important 
partner for our province, and we are honoured to have the 
consul general with us today to discuss our business and trade 
ties and to explore the opportunities for collaboration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have learned the Turkish word for welcome 
translates to “your arrival is wonderful.” With this in mind, I 
ask that all members of the Assembly please join me in 
welcoming Mr. İnan to Saskatchewan’s legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
member opposite in saying merhaba and hoşgeldiniz to the 
visitors, Mr. Bora İnan, Mr. Al-Katib, and Mr. Celik. Thank 
you very much for your visit today. As consul general for 
Western Canada, it’s great to have you visit our province and 
our legislature. Thank you for taking the time to come and see 
us and for furthering this important trading relationship and 
growing friendship. And I ask the members to join me in adding 
our welcome to these visitors. Thanks so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all the members of the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce a group of 34 students, grade 5 students from 
Langham Elementary School seated in the west gallery. Give us 
a wave, please. 
 
They’re accompanied by teachers Ben Dunville, Lisa Lester, 
Lora Prefontaine, and chaperones Susan Thompson, Tim 
Prosser, Fiona Lang, Noelle Hubbard, and Dorianne Clapper. 
 
I look forward to having a photo with you later and a meeting 
together. I hope to get real interesting questions from you. And 
so please join me in welcoming this group of grade 5 students 
from Langham. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce nine grade 7, 8, and 9 students from 
the Wheatland Christian School in Neilburg, seated in the west 
gallery. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Kristi-Jo Dueck; their 
chaperones Wes and Eileen Schmidt, Evan and Bonita 



4354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

Loektman, Kendal Dueck, Angela Toews, Lorne and Sonya 
Wiebe. 
 
I will be meeting with them after question period for a picture 
and words of wisdom, and I look forward to that. Would you 
please welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I ask for extended 
leave for introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for extended 
introduction. Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery here today, it’s an honour to have some friends and 
some community leaders from Moose Jaw with us here today. 
 
Jody Oakes is with us here. She’s a business leader in Moose 
Jaw, well established in multiple businesses within the 
community. She’s also someone that gives back to her 
community as a tireless volunteer, as somebody who’s worked 
as a leader to establish mental health and addictions counselling 
and a community centre within the region. She’s somebody that 
gives back in many, many ways. She’s here today with her 
husband, Rick Oakes, who’s here as well.  
 
Rick is a leader in agriculture. He works with cattle operations 
all across the prairies. He’s also a hockey scout in both the SJ 
[Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] and the Dub [Western 
Hockey League]. He played for both the Millionaires and the 
Huskies and is an Agriculture grad and all around good guy. 
 
And I’m really pleased to welcome Kayleigh Olson here today, 
a grade 11 student who’s here today from Central Collegiate, an 
incredible powwow dancer, a fancy shawl dancer, and a real 
community leader. I’ll be identifying some of her leadership in 
a member’s statement very shortly, but I ask all members to 
welcome these leaders from Moose Jaw to their Assembly here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — And I have a group, I’ve got a student 
group to introduce today as well. So joining us today in my 
gallery are 59 grade 7 and 8 students from St. Gregory School 
in Regina. They’re accompanied by teachers Mr. Brett Matlock 
and Ms. Diana Shuba. I had the opportunity to meet with them 
in my office earlier today, 59 of them jammed in there for a 
photo opportunity. It heated up the office; it was awesome. 
 
Mr. Matlock volunteers with the UnderstandUs, a 
Saskatchewan-based mental health foundation that was founded 
and is chaired by Mr. Jim Demeray, a University of Regina 
graduate. UnderstandUs is a volunteer initiative that combats 
the stigma of mental health. They create a new awareness 
campaign each year to focus on mental health and to educate 
youth through the use of their classroom web shop and website 
resources. 
 

The UnderstandUs initiatives are meant to spark a conversation 
and promote a better understanding of mental health. Some of 
UnderstandUs initiatives are Take a Minute, ChooseU, 
Vulnerable is Beautiful, Share Your Recipe, and Letters to No 
One. 
 
This year Mr. Matlock worked with the grade 7 and 8 students 
from St. Gregory and they created the Me To You movement to 
celebrate individuals’ vulnerabilities to support them in their 
growth. Please join me in welcoming the teachers and students 
from St. Gregory School to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties; and that the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all 
voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that Brad Wall, the Sask Party 
leader, was the only premier in the country who collected a 
special cash bonus paid for by taxpayer-funded subsidies and 
portions of the millions in dollars they collected from 
corporations and big money donors, including some from 
outside this province; and that over the past 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party has collected $12.61 million in 
corporate donations and, of that, $2.87 million came from 
companies outside this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people. And the federal government and the 
province of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and 
British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level 
the playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 



May 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4355 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws, to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the Sask Party government to restore the 
rental housing supplement. These citizens wish to bring to your 
attention that the rental housing supplement helps people living 
with disabilities, and low-income families, pay their rent; that 
the Sask Party’s elimination of the rental housing supplement 
hurts low-income families and people with disabilities; and that 
rents remain unaffordably high for many, since the cost of 
living has increased significantly since the last decade, while 
social services benefits have remained unchanged. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have pages and pages of this that are signed by 
individuals from Saskatoon today. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
domestic violence amongst all of the provinces in Canada. And 
we know that we should all do everything we can to protect 
survivors of interpersonal violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many who experience this domestic violence, 
that violence will follow them to their workplace, which is why 
the signatories to this petition are calling for five days of paid 
leave and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made available to 
workers who are survivors of domestic violence, and that 
critical workplace supports made available to survivors of 
domestic violence be also made available to workers living with 
PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of domestic 
violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front line of this 
crisis are calling for, the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] of Regina and PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan] to name a 
few organizations. They recognize the importance of ensuring 
that those who are fleeing interpersonal violence are able to 
maintain their employment while they’re going through that 
transition. It’s very important for their sense of security and 

stability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what we’re calling for in our private member’s bill, Bill 
No. 609. It’s the fourth time we’ve tabled these provisions in 
this House in the last two years. It’s time for the Sask Party to 
finally do the right thing, step up to the plate, and pass these 
provisions. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party to pass legislation to ensure critical supports 
in the workplace, including reasonable accommodation and 
paid and unpaid leave for survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have pages of this petition to submit today. 
The signatories for today’s petition come from Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Emerald Park. I do so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition around the drug 
Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic 
defect in the largest population of Canadians living with cystic 
fibrosis. Mr. Speaker, Orkambi can slow disease progression, 
allowing patients to live longer, healthier lives. 
 

We, in the prayer reads as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan urge the 
Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price for Orkambi 
and to make it available through the Saskatchewan drug 
plan for those who meet the conditions set out by Health 
Canada and the clinical criteria established by the 
Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we present this petition day after day in 
this Assembly, from town after town and city after city and 
page after page, the page I wish to present today are all people 
that have signed from Maidstone, Saskatchewan. And I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Silver Sage Rental Project Under Construction in Regina 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise in the House and inform members about a new 
rental housing project that’s under way here in Regina. Once 
completed, six families will be able to live in safety and 
comfort as they work towards building a brighter future. 
 
Silver Sage Holdings is taking a leadership role by recognizing 
a need for this type of housing and acting on it. Our government 
values the work that they do each day to support people in 
greatest housing need. 
 



4356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, this project is not just about the construction of 
homes. It’s also about partners working together to make a 
difference in the lives of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to commend the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation along 
with the federal housing partner, Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation. Jointly, they’re contributing more than $900,000 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Investment in Affordable 
Housing Agreement to support this worthwhile initiative. 
 
Since November 2007, 296 affordable renting units for 
households with complex needs or those at risk of homelessness 
have been completed in Regina. This includes the Silver Sage 
six-unit family project and an additional 35 rental units which 
are currently under construction. 
 
This project supports our government’s housing strategy, 
poverty reduction strategy, disability strategy, and mental health 
addictions plan by developing homes for those considered hard 
to home. It is an honour for us to work with various partners to 
carry out this commitment throughout the communities in our 
province.  
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Moose Jaw Youth Seek Heritage Site Recognition 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a movement taking 
place in Moose Jaw and it’s being led in part by an incredible 
young woman who inspires me and gives me hope for the 
future, Kayleigh Olson, who’s joined us here today in the 
legislature. 
 
On May 24, 1929, the space that’s currently referred to as the 
Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park was officially named Sitting Bull 
Park. Eighty-eight years later to the day, Kayleigh and her 
friends are working to restore a rich indigenous history that has 
fallen victim to time and colonization. 
 
The valley in which the city of Moose Jaw now sits served as a 
hub that connected trails that stretched far into what are now the 
parts of the United States and Canada. Many artifacts and 
burials are left over from those times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about protecting sacred land which has not 
been fully studied or catalogued, and telling its story. This is 
exactly what Kayleigh Olson and her friends are attempting to 
do, and it’s an important part of reconciliation. They want to see 
the site officially recognized as a heritage site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue has been brought forward by citizens in 
the past. I urge the government to work with these young, 
incredible leaders, indigenous peoples, and leaders and 
community members to properly protect the land and to tell the 
rich history of the valley. 
 
And I ask all members to join with me in recognizing Kayleigh 
and her friends and community leaders for their leadership on 
this very important file. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 

Dress for Success Shoe Drive 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m proud to stand in the House today to acknowledge a 
successful donation drive held here at the Legislative Building 
last week. I was honoured to host a Dress for Success shoe 
drive, and I’m happy to report that over 100 pairs of shoes were 
donated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dress for Success Regina is an affiliate of the 
global organization that envisions a world where women do not 
live in poverty. Last week, Dress for Success reached out 
because the organization here in Regina was short of shoes. 
 
Now this organization has a vision of a world where all women 
are financially independent, are treated with dignity and respect, 
and are directly impacting their lives and their families’ lives. 
Dress for Success tries to accomplish this by providing women 
professional attire, employment counselling, and interview help. 
Mr. Speaker, Dress for Success is about more than outfits, but 
it’s about equipping women to break the poverty cycle. 
 
On behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to thank Dress 
for Success Regina and those involved in the successful 
donation drive last week. I encourage all members and people 
across the entire province to continue to donate business attire 
to Dress for Success. Mr. Speaker, when women succeed, we 
all succeed. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Walk in Honour of Happy Charles 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Family and friends of Happy Charles 
organized a walk to help bring awareness for their missing 
loved one. The walk from Prince Albert to La Ronge started 
Sunday, May 6th. The idea for the walk came from Happy 
Charles’s daughter, Marcia Bird, who was inspired while she 
was attending a missing and murdered indigenous women and 
girls youth conference in Prince Albert. 
 
The family and friends finished the 246-kilometre walk on 
Sunday, May 13th, on Mother’s Day, at the urban reserve in La 
Ronge, where they were greeted by many loved ones and 
community members. Happy Charles’s mother, Regina Poitras, 
said they walked 30 kilometres every day before stopping to 
camp beside the road and to do a nightly round dance. 
 
The walk was meant to raise awareness that Charles is still 
missing and to bring healing to her family. Regina has been a 
strong advocate for her missing daughter and feels more needs 
to be done to help families of missing and murdered indigenous 
women, with more supports to assist families of missing 
persons and more resources for searches. 
 
Charles was last seen in Prince Albert near PACI [Prince Albert 
Collegiate Institute] high school April 3rd, 2017, and her family 
has been searching for her ever since. I ask all members to join 
me in recognizing everyone who took part in this walk or 
donated, and in keeping Happy Charles’s family in our thoughts 
and prayers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 



May 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4357 

Pharmacy Association of Saskatchewan Awards 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 12th the 
Pharmacy Association of Saskatchewan Awards were held here 
in Regina. The award ceremony is an annual celebration of 
exceptional service by pharmacists in our province and 
recognizes many members of the association who are providing 
exemplary care to their patients and communities. 
 
This year there were seven categories recognized, which 
include 17 individuals being recognized in areas such as 
Professional Services Awards, Award of Merit, and Pharmacist 
of the Year. For the first time this year, the Lifetime 
Achievement Award was handed out. Rod Amaya was the 
inaugural recipient, as he was recognized for his leadership and 
professionalism in his career and for his long-term service in 
pharmacy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The award ceremony was one of the many events held in 
Regina this weekend by the Pharmacy Association, as it was a 
part of their annual conference. It was a chance for the members 
of the association to come together, to network, discuss 
important topics within the profession, as well as celebrate their 
colleagues on their success and impact they have had on their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask all the members, please join me in 
congratulating the winners of Pharmacy of Saskatchewan’s 
annual award ceremony. As well, ask thanks to many volunteers 
and association members for putting on this great event. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Appreciation Barbeques for First Responders  
in Nipawin and Tisdale 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This month I had 
the pleasure of attending two events supporting our volunteer 
first responders from my constituency. On the weekend of May 
12th a barbeque was held in Nipawin to show appreciation to 
the volunteer first responders, firefighters, medical personnel, 
and anyone who assisted those impacted by the Humboldt 
Broncos bus accident. The barbeque attendees included the 
member from Melfort; our member from parliament, Randy 
Hoback; and the mayor of Nipawin, Rennie Harper. 
 
This past weekend, the second barbeque was held in Tisdale, 
again to support the volunteer first responders. This event was 
attended by our Premier; the member from Humboldt; Tisdale 
mayor, Al Jellicoe; and again, by myself and MP [Member of 
Parliament] Randy Hoback. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tremendous support shown at both of these 
events indicates a level of appreciation and gratitude we have 
for our volunteer first responders. Saskatchewan is known for 
having the best volunteers in all of Canada. These first 
responders and firefighters are integral to the safety and 
well-being of those who live in the rural areas of our province. 
Their dedication to their work through continuous training and 
education provides a sense of safety that rural residents can rely 
on. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to commend 
both communities of Nipawin and Tisdale for hosting these 
barbeques to acknowledge the important work of those who 
volunteer their lives, ensuring the people of this province are 
safe and well taken care of. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

New Museum for Fort Pelly-Livingstone Area 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 2015 
the residents of Fort Pelly-Livingstone area were devastated by 
the news that a local museum had burned down. For decades 
local residents had contributed to the historic displays and 
worked at the museum, which housed artifacts of the colonial 
and the pioneer era of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community gathered and a new board of 
directors committed to rebuilding. The community faced 
numerous obstacles, including a lack of funding due to the 
building not being insured, and recovery issues as the old site 
had asbestos, so nothing recovered in the rubble could be used. 
Fundraising efforts began with the goal of attaining a new 
building to house the new museum. Community members and 
local businesses contributed generously to the fundraising 
events, and volunteer committees were formed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community eventually raised enough money to 
purchase the former RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
barracks building. The board worked with First Nations 
population and three local reserves, giving the museum a new 
voice to their history. Despite having lost many historic 
artifacts, the museum has done well to provide more recent 
history displays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in commending the 
Fort Pelly-Livingstone area on their hard work and community 
spirit. Congratulations to the new museum which celebrated the 
grand opening this past Saturday, which I attended. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it seems 
like each passing day in this Assembly we learn more about the 
millions lost at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. As we 
learn more about the shady deals at the GTH, we also learn 
more about the cost to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And you know, it wasn’t that long ago during the Sask Party 
leadership race the members of this cabinet were speaking up 
about the need for more transparency. Back then the Minister of 
Central Services, for example, had quite a lot to say. On his 
leadership campaign website he said, and I quote: 
 

I believe that we owe the people of Saskatchewan answers 
to questions around the Global Transportation Hub, 
therefore I would not rule out an inquiry after the police 
investigation. Of course this decision lies with the new 
Premier, cabinet, and caucus. 



4358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

The minister wouldn’t rule out an inquiry when he was running 
to lead the Sask Party. Would he rule one out today, or does he 
support a judicial inquiry to get to the bottom of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we thank the member 
opposite for the question. The process is ongoing. I don’t think 
anybody on this side of the House wants to make a comment on 
anything while the matter is still being under review by the 
Manitoba prosecutions. To try and say yes or no to a specific 
course of action that may take place afterwards would be 
inappropriate for anybody on this side of the House, and I think 
should be inappropriate on that side of the House to try and 
make any comments, make any particular inferences, or would 
interfere with the processes that are taking place in Manitoba. 
 
[14:00] 
 
We support the work that the RCMP has done. We support the 
work that was done by the Provincial Auditor. And we’ll look 
carefully what the outcome of that is, and we won’t be 
commenting on it until after that time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a great deal of work to be 
done to understand the full scope of the problems at the GTH, 
work that we could start now. During his truncated run for 
leadership, the Minister for Trade and Export Development 
made some pretty clear statements to that same effect about the 
GTH. 
 
Besides promising to sell the whole thing off and saying he 
would have fired Bill Boyd because of how bad things were at 
the time, he also rolled out a 10-point transparency and 
accountability plan to make things more clear in government. 
You know, it’s hard to imagine how things could be any more 
transparent and accountable than having a judicial inquiry into 
the GTH. 
 
Does the Minister for Trade and Export Development support a 
judicial inquiry, or does he still maintain, as he said so many 
times before seeking the leadership, that there was no 
wrongdoing, no conflict of interest? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
reviewed the matter. The Provincial Auditor has people on her 
staff that were forensic auditors and indicated that there were no 
red flags. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve indicated and 
will continue to take the position that as long as the matter is 
under active investigation by the RCMP or under review by the 
prosecutions, it would be inappropriate for us to talk about any 
future steps after that work was done, before that. 
 
I would like to say to the members opposite that we have 1,871 
acres at the Global Transportation Hub. Common-use roads, 
etc. took out 405 acres. CP [Canadian Pacific Railway] and 
Loblaw, 413 acres. We’ve also sold an additional 339, which 
means we have left for sale 714 acres, and would love to have 
the support of the opposition in marketing that and would love 

to hear a positive endorsement from them that would bring jobs 
and economic activity into Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we’d love to give 
a ringing endorsement to the GTH and see it succeed. However, 
with the cloud of scandal that hangs over it, it’s so hard for that 
to proceed, so hard for the public to get their minds around that 
very idea. You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s another member of 
the cabinet who had a lot to say about the GTH during the Sask 
Party leadership race, and she’s now the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Now she wasn’t shy about her statement. In fact, in a statement 
on September 6th, in bold, underlined, and all caps, she said, 
and I quote, “I support the call for a judicial inquiry into the 
Global Transportation Hub land transactions.” 
 
She left no room for interpretation, Mr. Speaker. She made it 
crystal clear that she thinks, as we do on this side of the House, 
that there needs to be a judicial inquiry into the GTH. Does she 
still believe what she said back then? Does she still believe that 
we need a judicial inquiry into the land transactions at the 
GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
got at least two of his caucus members that have been or are 
members of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. He ought to sit 
down with those people and have a discussion with them about 
how things work, that it’s inappropriate to comment on things 
that are under active investigation. It’s inappropriate for our 
government to take a position on something that is before a 
criminal investigation, something that’s being reviewed by the 
prosecutions office in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not prepared to have any discussion on what 
future steps are. And if future steps were taken, they would be 
put on hold until the investigation was complete. So the 
members opposite might as well just cool their jets. 
 
I’d ask the member opposite to sit down with the people that are 
in his caucus that are members of the Law Society and get some 
advice from them, Mr. Speaker. The advice that he gets should 
be that he should just wait patiently, see what happens. We’re 
all waiting patiently on this side of the House and would 
encourage him to do the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s probably worth noting that this 
matter was already before the court during the Sask Party 
leadership race, during which a number of the members 
opposite — including a member of the Law Society, it’s worth 
pointing out — felt it was a reasonable time to make a big deal 
about their support for an inquiry into the GTH. And I’m 
speaking now of course about the now Deputy Premier who had 
great things to say. 
 
The Deputy Premier said, and I quote, “It’s unacceptable to me 
and to the people of Saskatchewan that after all this time, there 



May 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4359 

are still more questions than answers when it comes to the 
GTH.” And I’ll quote again: “I believe the only way to lift the 
cloud over the GTH is to shine a very bright — and very public 
— light on the entire matter.” 
 
Does the Deputy Premier still believe what he said just a few 
months ago? Does he still support a judicial inquiry into what 
went down at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The member opposite is asking for a 
very bright light. We agree that we want to resolve this matter, 
but the bright light would be premature to have done at this 
point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a time sequence that must be followed. 
We are a government, Mr. Speaker, and we will ensure that due 
process is followed, that while things are in investigation by the 
RCMP, while things are being reviewed by the prosecution, as a 
government we will have no comment on those kind of things. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
urge the members opposite to give us some support on trying to 
sell some land at the GTH. Mr. Speaker . . . Well the members 
opposite laugh. Maybe it’s not important to them. Maybe they 
don’t care about the people that are working there. Maybe those 
people don’t care if that’s a success or not. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we undertook that project and we want to 
see it succeed, and we’d like to have some support from them in 
marketing. We’ve got 1,800 jobs that were in place in the time 
of construction, and we have more work to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite 
mentioned perhaps a future bright light that might be shone on 
this. I think it would be a perfectly apt time to commit to a 
judicial inquiry in the future. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it is 
disappointing when we’ve canvassed several ministers over 
there and they couldn’t find their feet during question period 
today to repeat the calls that they made so few months ago. 
 
You know, it’s becoming abundantly clear that there were 
serious problems with how Bill Boyd and the GTH bought land 
and that taxpayers have lost millions, millions that could be 
going towards improving health care, towards fixing our 
crumbling schools, towards helping the most vulnerable. 
 
But instead of calling for an inquiry to get to the bottom of this 
mess, all of these ministers have turned their backs on the 
commitments that they made to transparency and 
accountability. They said one thing when they were running to 
replace Brad Wall, but now they’re doing another.  
 
So why won’t the Minister of Justice do the right thing, shine 
that bright light? Why won’t he commit to transparency? Why 
won’t he join us in calling for a judicial inquiry into the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the process is being 

conducted right now by the prosecutions unit in the province of 
Manitoba. So they’re the ones that are controlling what happens 
with the light. Those are the ones that are controlling the 
process that are there. It is not appropriate for this government 
or the members on this side of the House as a government to 
have anything further to say on this. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, and I think I started before: at 
the time of construction, 1,800 jobs; $485 million in private 
investment, nearly a half a billion dollars; 860 full-time 
permanent jobs; 4,800 trucks in and out of the GTH every 
week. Of the 1,800 acres that are there, 700 acres have already 
been sold. There are currently 12 clients that are there, Mr. 
Speaker. This is truly a facility that we should be proud of, and 
want to look forward to make sure that it does everything it can 
to boost the economy and boost the resources of our province. 
And in time, Mr. Speaker, it will. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must admit I find 
myself baffled at times trying to understand exactly what the 
strategy is over there, where you’ve got every week, every week 
a new story revealing more that’s going wrong over at the GTH. 
And the members opposite must be hearing that as they’re out 
in the community. This is a problem that’s not going away. 
 
And I expect the members opposite are wondering what the 
strategy is as well, why the Sask Party doesn’t want to get out 
in front of this, actually bring out that bright light and shine it 
now to fully understand what’s going on. Why wouldn’t they 
want to bring an end to this endless stream of scandalous stories 
and answer what’s going on once and for all? Do they not care 
what the public thinks? Do they not want the GTH to succeed? 
Or are they afraid of what an inquiry would reveal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine a more 
damaging strategy than what the members are doing in this 
House every day, where they criticize the nearly thousand 
people that are working there, a thousand voters that are 
working out there; the thousands and thousands of dollars every 
day that are pumped into the economy; the thousands of trucks 
every week that go in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know what the strategy is from those 
members. I’d like to know what their strategy is with regard to 
pipelines. I’d like to know what their strategy is with regard to 
carbon tax. I’d like to know what their strategy is with regard to 
a balanced budget. I’d like to know where some of those 
members stand on some of those issues because, Mr. Speaker, 
their stand isn’t very clear on much of anything going forward, 
and it’s high time they did stand up on something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know what their policy is with regard to 
debt . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



4360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, our 
members were happy to take a tour of the site, but now we need 
a tour of the books.  
 
The issues and the lack of accountability at the GTH run deep. 
The GTH has known that a drainage ditch within their footprint 
has required approval, an existing drainage ditch has required 
approval from the Water Security Agency since 2014. And 
although we’ve seen approvals from the Water Security Agency 
move pretty quickly for other projects, like the one that Bill 
Boyd was involved in, Mr. Speaker, this drainage ditch at the 
GTH is still unapproved. 
 
The GTH isn’t following the rules, and it’s impacting local 
farmers. So for this drainage ditch, shouldn’t the GTH have to 
abide by the law just like everyone else? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the plan is for the Global Transportation Hub to take 
ownership of that ditch, but currently it’s actually owned by the 
city of Regina. And so if the members opposite want us to levy 
fines and charges to the city of Regina, they should maybe 
stand up and say that. 
 
The point, Mr. Speaker, is to bring all of the landowners 
together — the city of Regina, the RM [rural municipality], the 
Global Transportation Hub, and the local farmers that have their 
own drainage ditches that are not approved at this point — all 
together, hopefully, preferably in a watershed authority, Mr. 
Speaker, so that the entire network of drainage can be managed 
in a very responsible way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would urge the member that it’s not just the city of 
Regina. It’s not just the Global Transportation Hub. There are 
also local farmers, local landowners, who they themselves are 
not in compliance with their drainage ditch, Mr. Speaker. Does 
the member opposite believe we should treat all of them equal, 
or should we work in collaboration with the entire group to 
bring them all in compliance at the same time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That land was 
expropriated by the GTH, and this ditch is impeding the very 
watershed that the member states that local landowners want. 
And then after it was expropriated, taxpayers’ money was used 
to create the drainage ditch within the footprint of the GTH, one 
of which has been unauthorized for years, just sitting there 
without being authorized by the WSA [Water Security Agency]. 
 
We’re talking about an entity, highly funded by taxpayers, that 
isn’t following the law, Mr. Speaker. Seems to be a pattern. But 
the Sask Party seems to have no interest in draining the slough 
at the GTH and coming into compliance with these laws. Why 
is it okay that the GTH has this drainage ditch without proper 
authorization? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again this is the city of Regina. The Global 
Transportation Hub will eventually be the owner of the drainage 
ditch, but currently it is the city of Regina that owns it. The 
Global Transportation Hub, the city of Regina, the RM, and the 
adjacent landowners who have their own unapproved drainage 
ditches are working together with the Water Security Agency to 
form an organization to manage all of these drainage projects in 
the area and to bring them all in compliance. 
 
We’re working in collaboration with all of these entities, Mr. 
Speaker, and treating them all the same because what we intend 
to do is bring them all in compliance so that there’s not a few 
that are out of compliance while one is in compliance. They’re 
all going to be in compliance, and our hope is that all under one 
entity to operate that drainage works. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Status of SaskTel 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Brad Wall wanted to sell 
SaskTel, but even the most popular premier in the country was 
able to eventually figure out that people just didn’t want that to 
happen. But we’ve heard very little from the new Premier or the 
minister on what their plans are for SaskTel other than his plan 
to hire fewer Crown corporation employees to help balance the 
books. 
 
Can the minister tell us, or is he still shopping around SaskTel 
or looking to sell shares of the company? Or perhaps are there 
any wind-downs in the future for SaskTel? Can the minister 
inform the House as to what their plans are? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is a Crown 
corporation in our province, provides valuable services to the 
citizens in our province. It competes in every aspect of the 
business that it conducts, whether it’d be providing security 
systems, cellular, SaskTel Max, land lines. Every one of the 
services it provides, there are private sector competition. It 
provides the province with dividends each and every year, 
usually in excess of $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have seen legislation that has been introduced 
that withdraws largely the position that may be taken on what 
the definition of privatization is. The reason that was put 
forward, Mr. Speaker, was to give the citizens of this province 
comfort that that corporation is not for sale without coming 
back to the province and making it an election issue or 
whatever. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is not on the market. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it took him a lot of games to be 
played till he got back around to that very statement. But we 
agree, SaskTel does tremendous work for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s valued very much by the 



May 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4361 

people of Saskatchewan in return. And I guess what we’re 
looking for is some assurance from the minister in terms of, oh I 
think of the new ads that SaskTel’s running where SaskTel 
highlights how they can improve service and efficiency for 
small and large businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know the good work that SaskTel does in that regard. 
They’ve won awards for it, certainly. But we also know that 
Telus has been and still is lobbying the Minister for Health and 
the Minister for Rural and Remote Health on 
telecommunications files. What role does the minister see 
SaskTel playing in the overhaul of the new provincial Health 
Authority, or will the government be handing over this valuable 
work to a private company like Telus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a pretty 
long bow. The so-called lobbying that Telus has done, Mr. 
Speaker, is there’s some work being done nationally by 
Infoway, which is under the federal government, Mr. Speaker, 
to provide possible funding for it’s called the CHIP [citizen 
health information portal] program, Mr. Speaker. It’s new 
technology that could provide health information. It’s a health 
information file, Mr. Speaker. There’s been no final decisions 
made on that, Mr. Speaker. My understanding is it was an RFP 
[request for proposal] that was done nationally with Telus. And 
it was no advocacy for any sales, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very long 
bow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Condition of Pioneer Village and Placement of Residents 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I look forward to our conversation in an hour 
from now, Mr. Speaker, in committee. A lot of uncertainty 
remains at Pioneer Village and yesterday, instead of providing 
answers, the minister still spun lines, talking about the ’90s yet 
again. The Canadian Mental Health Association has said that 
moving these 94 residents could increase anxiety levels and 
trigger serious problems. This issue shouldn’t be taken lightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government often boasts about 
their tours of long-term care facilities across the province. But 
in the 2017 report for Pioneer Village there wasn’t a single 
mention of infrastructure issues, of asbestos, of mould, or of 
repairs needed. Can this minister explain why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t spinning any lines. 
We take this very seriously. We’re very concerned for the 
residents. Officials in Saskatchewan Health Authority have 
done good work already. I understand that some of the residents 
have already been placed.  
 
Mr. Speaker, to the issue of the residents with mental health 
concerns, the SHA [Saskatchewan Health Authority] officials 
are well aware of that. They’re very concerned about that. 
They’re going to do everything possible and appropriate to 
make sure that any of those residents that require to be moved 
because their rooms are affected by this, that they’ll be moved 

appropriately into a proper facility. Mr. Speaker, our officials 
do a very good job of managing these situations, and I’ve no 
reason to believe that’ll change. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — I didn’t hear in that answer any mention of 
the CEO [chief executive officer] tour reports and why there 
wasn’t anything mentioned at Pioneer Village in 2017, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The goal of the CEO tour reports is to “Find out what’s working 
well, what can be improved, and how the funds have benefitted 
long-term care residents.” Well, Mr. Speaker, a clear issue at 
Pioneer Village is that there hasn’t been funds to address this 
problem, and it’s gotten worse and worse as a result of this Sask 
Party government’s inaction. And the reports that are supposed 
to increase transparency are clearly whitewashed. 
 
What is the minister’s plan to fix this and ensure proper 
oversight for long-term care facilities and that seniors are 
getting the care they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what she’s 
referring to as being whitewashed. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
well-known for many years that there are some significant 
maintenance and capital issues with Regina Pioneer Village. I 
mentioned yesterday we inherited that facility from the city in 
2009. It was known at that time. Mr. Speaker, since then we’ve 
spent over $12 million to remediate the facility, to make repairs, 
to mitigate any of the potential problems, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
still a huge, huge problem. We’ve never hid that. It’s been well 
known. It’s been documented. There’s been news stories over a 
number of years. 
 
I’ve asked ministry officials and SHA officials, Mr. Speaker, in 
light of the most recent situation, to make recommendations to 
us. That’ll be coming up probably this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll make some decisions moving forward. 
 
And back to the previous question, I should also mention, Mr. 
Speaker, mental health therapists are also working and are 
available to the families and the residents that are affected by 
this with mental health issues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

State of the Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — In January, this government assured the 
Saskatchewan construction industry that they would work to 
ensure a successful year. But there’s continued to be a decrease 
in construction, leaving Saskatchewan lagging behind most 
other provinces in this country, and there’s been no real 
leadership or plan revealed to halt this decline. 
 
Investment in new housing is down 15 per cent since last year, a 
loss of more than twelve and a half million dollars. This 
decrease is related to demand, Mr. Speaker, as more and more 



4362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

people are leaving the province looking for work. 
 
While other provinces continue to grow, what steps will this 
government take to keep people in the province and to create 
stability for the construction industry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. We are very proud of our record on the economy. And 
I would point to a couple of stats, Mr. Speaker, some facts. 
Over the past decade from 2008 to 2017, there have been an 
average of almost 6,500 new housing starts annually. This 
compares to the last 10 years of the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government, Mr. Speaker, when there were 3,400 
housing starts annually, Mr. Speaker. Obviously significantly 
more in the current, in the last decade of growth under this 
party. 
 
In March 2018, the value of building permits — these are recent 
statistics, Mr. Speaker — in Saskatchewan increased by 22 per 
cent from February 2018, which is second in growth amongst 
all of the provinces. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you and I can tell this House how, 
if you want to have a plan to decrease the number of housing 
starts, to decrease the amount of building permits in this 
province, how would you do that, Mr. Speaker? A carbon tax, 
Mr. Speaker, the only economic policy advocated by the 
members opposite. The only policy that we have heard from 
them on the economy is a massive new tax.  
 
The Leader of the Opposition wants to wave the white flag. He 
wants to surrender to Justin Trudeau. He wants to impose a 
carbon tax on this province. We won’t let it happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Still no mention of a plan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government has a responsibility to let the people 
of Saskatchewan know the state of the economy, that they have 
not addressed the decline in jobs, nor have they mentioned the 
decline in housing builds reported this month. Both have a 
negative impact on our economic growth, Mr. Speaker. With 
fewer and fewer jobs in Saskatchewan and less demand for 
newly constructed homes, this government continues to paint 
their economic sense as sound, but that is not reflected in these 
numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the government ignored these numbers? 
And do they have a plan to support recovery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the economic record of 
this government is one of the most significantly positive in the 
history of this province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen job growth 
unparalleled in the course of the last 10 years, compared to 
other previous periods of history. We’ve seen population 
growth that has not been seen in this province in nearly 80 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We’ve also seen a plan from the NDP. We’ve seen a plan from 
the Leader of the Opposition. And we’re going to have a very 
clear choice in the next election, Mr. Speaker: a Leader of the 
Opposition that wants to surrender to Justin Trudeau, that wants 
to impose a massive new carbon tax on the people of this 
province, versus a strong Premier who will stand up and fight 
for the people of this province every day of the week. 
 
A Leader of the Opposition on that side who wants to spend 
$2.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, on all manner of things in addition to, 
in addition to saying he wants to see a balanced budget. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not going to happen with two and a half billion 
dollars in new spending, Mr. Speaker. A very clear choice: a 
weak position from the Leader of the Opposition, a strong 
position from this Premier and this government. I think I know 
what the people are going to pick. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 125 . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. This is, you know, this is kind of 
important work, you know. It’s bills. I’m not sure . . . let’s 
actually pay attention. I recognize the . . . Actually it’s me. 
 
The minister has requested leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 125 and that the bill and 
its amendments be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? Oh, sorry. Without amendment. The minister may 
proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added  
Agriculture Incentive Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 



May 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4363 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 125 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 126, The Energy 
Export Act, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 126 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 126 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 
No. 89, The School Choice Protection Act, a bilingual bill, with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, Mr. Speaker, and that the 
bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 89, and 
that the bill and its amendments be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act 
Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act 
Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 



4364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2018 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 89 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So that 
committees may continue their good work, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the Assembly be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned 
until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4353 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4353 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4353 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4353 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4353 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4354 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4354 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4354 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4354 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4355 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4355 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4355 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Silver Sage Rental Project Under Construction in Regina 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4355 
 Moose Jaw Youth Seek Heritage Site Recognition 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4356 
 Dress for Success Shoe Drive 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4356 
 Walk in Honour of Happy Charles 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4356 
 Pharmacy Association of Saskatchewan Awards 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 
 Appreciation Barbeques for First Responders in Nipawin and Tisdale 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4357 
 New Museum for Fort Pelly-Livingstone Area 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 
 Global Transportation Hub and Drainage Issues 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 
 Status of SaskTel 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 
 Condition of Pioneer Village and Placement of Residents 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 
 State of the Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4362 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4362 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4362 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


