


















































April 17, 2018 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 43B  TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2018, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3887 
 April 17, 2018 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, we will 
resume debate on the main motion and the amendment. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you. Thank you, colleagues, for that 
warm welcome. I appreciate that. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I begin tonight by paying homage to all those involved in the 
Humboldt tragedy. And tonight I want to pay particular 
attention to a few people that maybe are on the periphery of the 
story. 
 
Chris Beaudry, the assistant coach, who was early on the scene. 
Chris is from my constituency, and I spoke to him not that long 
ago. And I texted him after the accident and he was doing 
relatively well, but I can’t possibly imagine what he might be 
going through. 
 
I want to also mention the local farm families in that particular 
area and, particularly, the Shumlanski family who are originally 
from my area. Imagine what those farm families are dealing 
with day in and day out as they pass that site and they relive it 
every day. 
 
I’m concerned as well, obviously, for the bus drivers — the 
folks from Charlie’s Charters and all of the bus drivers across 
the province — who serve their communities so well by hauling 
the teams around; the volunteers from community to 
community, whether it’s hockey games, ball games, any of 
those kinds of events; and even the folks that move so many 
people around in the tourism industry. And I think we have a 
great deal of respect for those drivers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the truck drivers of this province are so 
professional, and each and every one of them is hurting by this 
incident. And I note in particular one of my friends at home 
who is a truck driver; he’s also a singer — Nino Hernandez. 
Some of you may have seen him sing at the Rider games. But 
he rewrote the lyrics to the song “Hallelujah” and has posted 
them online, and it is an amazing, beautiful tribute to the 
hockey players, to the families and to all those involved. And I 
would encourage anyone and everyone to seek that out. 

I also just want to touch briefly on what I think is probably 
going to be something that comes forward over time, and that is 
the resiliency of the players themselves. I think I know well 
enough from my own experience as a parent of hockey players 
that they are incredibly bonded in a team. And I’m quite sure 
that the hockey players will find solace amongst themselves, 
will find ways to give tribute to the players that have been lost 
and to those that have been severely injured, and they will bind 
together as a team and as a fraternity across the hockey world. 
And those players will never be forgotten, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to change just for a second. I’d like 
all of my colleagues to give some thought to something from a 
little different perspective on this incident. So I’ll ask my 
colleagues to imagine for a moment that they are the bus driver 
or the truck driver on that fateful day. It’s a bright, clear day. 
You’ve just completed preparing a load for the truck or you’ve 
just stopped in Tisdale with the team deeply engaged in game 
preparation. In any event, you’re about 20 minutes from the 
intersection of 35 and 335. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, imagine with me that either you, the 
driver of the truck, or you, the driver of the bus, had dropped 
your keys as you were approaching the door to leave. You reach 
over to pick up your keys and sort through them to get the right 
key in your hand as you approach your vehicle. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that act of picking up your keys would have taken 
about five seconds. You get in the vehicle, start up, and head 
down the road. Had either driver had that experience that day, 
either the bus or the truck would have been 440 feet away from 
that intersection at that fateful moment at normal speeds. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, despite everything, despite any laws or 
signs or training or any number of reviews that will be 
undertaken, let’s not lose sight of the fact that sometimes fate is 
the cruellest thing. It is in our nature to look for someone, some 
organization, the government, or our deity to blame. It’s our 
nature to speculate or opine on what could have or should have 
or might have been done differently. But we must ask all of our 
citizens to wait for all of the analysis to be completed before we 
make any judgments. 
 
It is of no comfort to those who are dealing with this tragic loss 
of life or those on the periphery to be second-guessing or to be 
speculating on the if-only scenarios. Let us give time to the 
appropriate agencies, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], Highways, first response teams, including support 
services, to do their analysis and debriefing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might quote German author Hermann Hesse: 
 

I have always believed, and I still believe, that whatever 
good or bad fortune may come our way, we can always 
give it meaning and transform it into something of value. 
 

Let us as legislatures be patient as we gather the evidence from 
these situations. We have an obligation to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan to be the level heads, to consider all factors, to 
reach out to the stakeholders, to reach out to communities, to 
reassure our friends and neighbours that we continue to have 
their safety in mind as they move people and goods across this 
great province. 



3888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I get into the budget, allow me to 
briefly thank a few folks. I want to acknowledge my 
constituency executive. We all know how important they are to 
our relationship with our constituents, and I am truly honoured 
by their support. Many in this House know that I lost my friend 
and constituency president to suicide a couple of months ago. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was a young, accomplished 
businessman, a former mayor and civic leader, a huge volunteer 
in the community and in sports, and a proud citizen of this 
province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the spectre of deeply buried 
mental health issues and its consequences is not limited to 
young or old, to the advantaged or disadvantaged, or to any 
segment of society, nor is it lost on any of us. This is a 
discussion whose time is long past and must continue in earnest. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank my constituents, who 
never hesitate to give me feedback, both positive and negative, 
on things we are doing as a government. I want to thank the 
Premier and congratulate him on his leadership win and the 
ministers of this government for always being open to 
discussion on any matters of importance. 
 
I also want to pay particular thanks to the chiefs of staff and the 
ministerial assistants and all of the people we work with every 
day. They have always been professional and responsive. Also 
we would not be able to do what we do without our 
constituency assistants, and despite what others have said, I 
think I have the best one in the province. Thanks, Chris, for all 
you do. 
 
Our families are incredibly important. I’m very lucky to have a 
brother and sister and their spouses who never hesitate to keep 
me grounded and provide me with the most unfettered 
feedback. And last and most important, my wife and family, 
who are incredibly supportive and interested in what I and we 
do in this place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank the Finance ministers and 
the members of treasury board for the hard work they put in to 
developing the 2018-19 budget. Much of what I would say 
about the budget has been said many times by my colleagues on 
this side of the House, but I would be remiss if I didn’t at very 
least comment on our good friends opposite view of the world 
and how things actually work in real life. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] Finance 
critic and most across the way cannot grasp that investment in 
the infrastructure is an investment in the future of the province. 
The NDP talk about no plan. I would argue that they have no 
idea what a plan is. The fundamental definition of a plan is an 
intention to achieve something. Nothing could be more evident. 
Since day one of our government, we have had a plan to grow 
the province of Saskatchewan, unlike members opposite whose 
plan was apparently to starve the province of its youth, its 
vigour, its talent, and its hope. 
 
We have a plan for employment growth and we have more than 
60,000 new jobs in the province. We have a plan to grow 
agriculture. Year after year, records being set and investments 
in new diversification and value-added programs. We have a 
plan to grow technology and we’ve had an exceptionally 
positive response from the tech sector to our focus on 
innovation, not only through current announcements but, year 

after year, to the innovation in ag, the economy, health 
technology, and other advancements. We have a plan to grow 
mining and investments in initiatives for diversification of the 
industry. 
 
We need to look no further than the record investments in 
infrastructure in health, in schools, in energy, in power, in 
highways, in long-term care facilities, in SaskTel, and 
municipal infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with growth comes challenges. Any of us 
who have been in business know the value of investing for the 
future. Sometimes the capital investment is well ahead of the 
operational cash flow. None of the members opposite seem to 
grasp the concepts that plans are a road map, not a tunnel. Some 
roads might have detours. Some might be under repair — and 
that’s more likely under our government than it ever was under 
theirs. 
 
Unlike our friends opposite, our road map is right side up. Plans 
go through various stages from concept to development to 
operationalization to fine tuning. Sometimes that process takes 
years. Plans must account for various scenarios, but those that 
are uncontrollable are by definition outside your ability to 
define. Fort McMurray or Brexit or the financial collapse of 
2008-09 might be examples. But sometimes we need to make 
adjustments. Forest fires, drought, flooding, and many other 
things affect the timing of expenditures. 
 
In fact, to put it in perspective, a few days ago in a news 
briefing budget day, the NDP finance critic said that as a 
government — listen to this, colleagues — as a government 
they knew how to balance a budget. What audacity. Sure we 
remember. May I quote from the 2007 budget: “The March 19th 
federal budget announced a $266 million equalization payment 
to Saskatchewan.” That is their badge of honour, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite go on and on 
about our debt. And here’s an interesting fact: their projected 
debt to GDP [gross domestic product] in their 2007 budget was, 
for the 2008 year, 23.8 per cent. Ours in the 2018-19 budget is 
22.5 per cent. Facts, ladies and gentlemen. It is the same old 
story. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to ask colleagues to 
respond to some questions. How many schools did they close to 
balance the budget? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 176. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — 176. How many hospitals did they close to 
balance the budget? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 52. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — 52. How many long-term care beds did they 
close? How many doctors left Saskatchewan? 173. How many 
nurses left? 450. How many highways did they paint black 
rather than repair, and then the second part of that question is, 
who was the minister of Highways with the paintbrush? The 
member from Athabasca was the minister of Highways with the 
big paintbrush. And they cut $500 million from municipal 
revenue sharing. 
 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3889 

[19:15] 
 
Colleagues, there are three ways governments have to deal with 
revenue and expense equations in a budget: they can raise taxes, 
they can reduce expenses, or they can increase debt. A plan 
does not include knee-jerk reactions to every issue that 
members opposite portray as apoplectic.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are on track. And I remind members 
opposite that a track is a road or a path-affording passage, 
especially a tough one. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where have we 
been and where are we now? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, West 
Texas Intermediate had a high of 107.95 USD [United States 
dollars] in 2014 and a low of 26.19 in 2016. This morning WTI 
[West Texas Intermediate] was at 65.83. Potash had a high of 
323 a tonne in 2014 and a low of 214 in ’17. The last close, I 
believe, was at 226. Uranium had a high of 44 USD a pound in 
’14 and a low of 18 in ’16. I believe uranium closed around 
$21. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are seeing a recovery, but it is 
modest at best. And our industries in this province should be 
congratulated and celebrated each and every day for their 
incredible resilience. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why our plan to diversify the 
economy through strategic investments in ag value, in science, 
in technology innovation, and in mining diversification and so 
many other innovations across government and, more 
importantly, supporting the private sector through lower taxes 
and, critically, a positive view of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 70 per cent of our budget is dedicated 
to health, education, and social services. I just want to highlight 
a couple from my particular constituency: revenue sharing in 
Kelvington, up 86 per cent since 2007; in Wadena, 90 per cent. 
 
This is education. And I know the member goes on and on 
about education funding, but I wanted to highlight just 
specifically the preventative maintenance renewal projects in 
my constituency: Horizon School Division budget allocation, 
up 15 per cent; Christ the Teacher Roman Catholic School 
Division preventative maintenance budget, up 16 per cent; 
Good Spirit School Division, up 11 per cent; North East School 
Division, up 15 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’re 
investing in the schools and the supports within those schools 
very handily. 
 
I do also want to thank the Minister of Highways for making an 
investment this year in a particularly challenging piece of 
highway in my constituency. And I want to point out from 2007 
to 2014 roughly $98 million was invested in highways across 
the constituency. But there is more to do, and I will remind the 
minister often of that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a call to action is empty without a 
commitment to personal responsibility and accountability. Far 
too often we are challenged by a call to action to fix something 
for somebody else. In context, there isn’t a single one of us in 
this room that isn’t heartbroken by a family struggle through no 
fault of their own, or concerned by a community challenged 
with budget issues due to some calamity or the incredible 
challenges in health care as we become so much better in 

identifying disease and the resultant challenges in treatment. 
 
The issue is about how we respond. My colleagues have 
outlined numerous ways we have responded. I will simply refer 
you back to the excellent speeches by each of the ministers 
about the important investments of their portfolios. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will comment very briefly on the 
pipeline issue. The federal Trudeau Liberals’ lack of action on 
Kinder Morgan is made more telling this morning when it was 
reported that Prime Minister Trudeau told the media in France 
that we can’t get out of the oil and gas industry soon enough. 
 
The BC [British Columbia] NDP government’s complete and 
utter disregard for Canadian law and national-provincial 
jurisdiction is nothing short of ludicrous. Further, and I’ll use 
the word ludicrous again, statements by the Minister of the 
Environment on not having any time for politicians that 
disagreed with her. 
 
The challenge of government is to not suffer the myopia of 
special interests or the cause of the moment, but to consider the 
broader long-term implications of regulatory and policy 
decisions. The latest announcement by Prime Minister Trudeau, 
Premier Notley, and Premier Horgan is simply another example 
of left-leaning governments throwing taxpayers’ money — our 
money — at a private project that private industry would well 
have accomplished had they not put every possible regulatory 
roadblock in place to stop it. 
 
Notley and Trudeau are going to fund the investment risk that is 
absolutely 100 per cent attributable to the three governments 
involved. It is nothing more than a socialist transfer of wealth 
among socialists to create a photo op and a feel-good moment at 
our expense. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are truly well served by a broad range 
of dedicated public servants in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They understand that the taxpayer is their customer. They 
understand that service delivery is about customer delivery. 
 
With rigorous attention to our taxpayer customers we, as the 
political component, and our broader public service will 
continue to work with the individuals, small, medium, and large 
businesses, CBOs [community based organizations], and 
numerous service organizations across the province to keep 
Saskatchewan on track. 
 
Let us never lose sight of the fact that it is the people of 
Saskatchewan, not the government, that drives the economy. If 
the Humboldt tragedy can teach us anything, it is so absolutely 
evident that the people of this province think about each other 
first. Our first responder teams, health care professionals, and 
everyone involved immediately responded with true altruism 
and dedication to humanity ahead of any other purpose. There is 
a great lesson in that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medals have 
on them the term nos ipsos dedimus, which means “We gave of 
ourselves.” Nothing speaks to Saskatchewan values better than 
this. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the budget put 
forward by the Minister of Finance, and I will not be supporting 
the opposition amendment. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, 



3890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

we are proud of our record, we are proud of our citizens, and we 
are Humboldt strong. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
stand up and support our budget tonight. But first I would also 
like to put my condolences through to the Humboldt Broncos 
because this is an unprecedented tragedy. And I want to thank 
the fire departments, the first responders, the volunteers from 
Nipawin, Carrot River, Zenon Park, Tisdale, Melfort. Of 
course, I’d like to thank STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] too for the work that they have done and the Alliance 
Church that did a great job over in Nipawin. I also have to 
thank all of the physicians in the cities too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an unprecedented tragedy, and I attended 
the funeral on Friday for Glen Doerksen, the bus driver from 
Carrot River. And I’ll tell you, I wasn’t counting . . . My wife 
and I went in there at a quarter after 1. The funeral was at 2, and 
we got some of the last seats in there. Somehow they managed 
to jam in about 1,300 people into our community centre. And 
that just shows how well-liked this person was. 
 
And I know we’ve all ridden on, I’ve ridden on the buses as a 
fan. My kids rode on the bus. They played hockey, they played 
football, so they rode the bus. And we always thought it was a 
great and a safe way to go, and I believe it still is. It’s just one 
of those tragedies that, I’ll tell you, we just never want to see 
happen again. And like I said, it was unprecedented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I’d like to continue on and thank the people 
from Carrot River Valley who have been supporting me over 
the past number of years. And you know, I really appreciate 
their support to work on their behalf. And even though some of 
them know me, they still keep on voting for me, so I can’t quite 
figure that one out. But, Mr. Speaker, this has been a real 
privilege to be able to sit in this House and represent them for 
the government. 
 
I also want to thank my CAs [constituency assistant], Shelley 
Meyer and Cindy Warner. They do a fantastic job back in our 
office. And to tell the truth, I think most people here know it, 
our CAs do the real hard part of the work. They’re the ones that 
answer the phones and talk to various different people. And I 
have to say that they are very, very, very professional in what 
they do. 
 
And, needless to say, any of us in here, we have to also think of 
our families. You know, my children, that was the reason I got 
into government — I’ve explained that quite a few times in this 
House; I don’t have to explain it again — because I wanted to 
see our children working in Saskatchewan. And both Morgan 
and Gina are working in Saskatchewan.  
 
Gina is teaching. And I think back to the old days back when 
the NDP were in power. You know, they were so busy chasing 
students and people out of the province that if she went into a 
teaching career, she probably wouldn’t have one in this 
province. She would probably have to go to Alberta or British 
Columbia or, heaven forbid, Ontario, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, it’s great to see them working in the province.  

Of course, Morgan is well known; quite a few people actually 
know him. He works in the building here, and he’s probably far 
more politically astute than what I am. He keeps on saying, 
Dad, you shouldn’t keep talking the way you do, and sooner or 
later it’s going to catch up. And he’s probably got a good point, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my wife, Terry. She is very 
happy to keep me busy in Regina. And I think that she enjoys it 
that I manage to get out of her hair for a while and she out of 
mine, although that’s just a figure of speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I also want to thank our Finance minister who did the 
yeoman work on putting this budget together. And you know, 
she’s from Humboldt and boy, I’ll tell you, that had to have 
been tough to be able to come in here just shortly after that 
tragic accident and do that. And I know that, you know, she 
knew some of those kids. That was a tough thing for her to do 
and I really, I really give her credit. And I give her credit also 
for having what we call in our budget as on track because, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what this budget is. It has kept it on track. 
 
I want to also thank our new Premier, or at least I want to say 
that our new Premier, I want to congratulate him on being 
elected and the new Opposition Leader. Been a lot of changes 
around here, but things just have to continue on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess I wanted to talk just a little bit about 
some of the things that have happened in Carrot River Valley 
with this budget. Now the Finance critic stood up and said, well 
you’re underfunding the municipalities. Well let me tell you, on 
revenue sharing, Tisdale has gone up 111 per cent since 2007 
on the money that they’ve received. Nipawin has gone up 111 
per cent from what they received in 2007. Hudson Bay has gone 
up 69 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Just exactly what is the Finance 
critic sitting there and complaining about? 
 
Then you go to the Education critic saying we’re underfunding 
our schools. Well it was just mentioned by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena about the PMR [preventative maintenance 
and renewal] increase from the last budget. This last budget is 
15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. How are we underfunding the 
schools? And also the other good part about it, I can remember 
going to that school when Morgan was playing basketball, and 
the roof was leaking. They had five-gallon pails all over the 
place in that school. Porcupine Plain now has a new school. 
Another one was Hudson Bay. Hudson Bay they had black 
mould, part of the school was condemned. Hudson Bay now has 
a new school. Just exactly how are we underfunding education, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also got record amounts going out in health 
again, health up two and a half per cent. We’ve got social 
services went up 4.8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, how can they say 
that we’re underfunding them? 
 
And we look at the highways. Another thing that’s going on up 
in my constituency, the Minister of Highways — although I had 
to drive him over, I had to put 50 pounds of air in my air shocks 
to make sure that my truck rode real well — but he is doing 21 
kilometres of upgrades on Highway 255 up by Tobin Lake, 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3891 

which is a great resort village, Mr. Speaker. So how can you say 
that we are just cutting out all of these things? Mr. Speaker, we 
are not. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the NDP. Here’s one of 
things about the NDP. And I want to quote the NDP leader that 
he said on April the 11th, 2018. And he said: 
 

We heard this morning at the Prayer Breakfast, the speaker 
said, when’s the best time to plant a tree? He said, it’s 30 
years ago. When’s the second-best time to plant a tree? 
That’s right now. Mr. Speaker, will this government show 
that they understand the need to think long term, that they 
will show they have a vision for the future . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, this budget does that. And let’s go back to what 
the NDP planted. The NDP, well due to the fact of, let’s face it, 
they don’t have any agriculture people over there, and they got 
a little mixed up on their seeds. Well all they planted, all they 
planted was a rose bush, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Now the flower looked pretty, but guess what? You know, it’s 
got those thorns all over it. And those thorns were chasing the 
people all out of Saskatchewan because every time they tried do 
something, they try and go up and smell a rose, they get 
pricked. And then that’s it, they go. And they would leave and 
they would go to Alberta. They would go to British Columbia, 
wherever. They got out of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
is the NDP’s record in this province. They had the worst record, 
the out-migration record because they kept on getting people 
with these rose thorns. Mr. Speaker, that just shows what 
they . . . 
 
And speaking of agriculture, I just have to get into agriculture a 
little bit, and I really don’t have that much time, Mr. Speaker. 
But you know, one of the promises that the new leader of the 
NDP made, he wanted to encourage agriculture practices that 
decrease carbon inputs through crop choices, fuel-efficient farm 
equipment, etc. Mr. Speaker, do you think farmers aren’t doing 
this on their own? Farmers are very innovative people. They 
know how to do these things. They don’t have to have the 
government sit back and tell them what to do. 
 
But they went even further. Apparently they wanted shut down 
the . . . to help us so we wouldn’t move so much grain. So they 
want to have an incentive out there for everybody to go organic, 
so we can produce about a quarter of as much grain, and that 
way, it’ll help out the shipments of grain out to the coast, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You can go through this thing, but . . . And I got a really good 
one here. I am going to run out of time real quick here, Mr. 
Speaker. But yes, this is one I noticed in here. Out of their $2.5 
billion per year promises that they made — that I don’t know 
how they were going to pay for; boy, they’d really have to put 
the carbon tax up since they’re in favour of that too — they had 
“. . . commission a study on the viability of producing generic 
drugs here in Saskatchewan through a new Crown corporation, 
SaskPharm.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] tried to run a box factory. They tried to run a shoe 
factory, Mr. Speaker. They tried to run a potato factory, Mr. 

Speaker. How well did that work for them? And now they want 
to start up pharmaceuticals and start making them right here in 
Saskatchewan. Good deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP truthfully doesn’t have a clue on how to 
run a province or how to run a business or how to run a farm, 
and it’s very evident. And all they can think about is supporting 
a carbon tax. They say, when they talked about it, when they 
were doing their reply to the budget, they said, well you have 
no plan to reduce emissions. Prairie resilience, Mr. Speaker, a 
plan put together by our Environment minister, which will work 
way better than any, any carbon tax, which we all know, which 
has been proven in other jurisdictions will not work. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess my time is up. I could go on for a long 
time, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to be supporting this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. And there’s absolutely no way I’ll support the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I once again mention the Humboldt Broncos. It is very close to 
my constituency. Humboldt is the town I do my business in. But 
I was able to speak on it the other day, so I won’t dwell on it. 
So I will just say let us all pray for the people affected by the 
tragic event. 
 
I would first, before I get into the budget speech, like to say 
thank you to my team Telfer, Don and Mary Anne, who run my 
office. And Mary Anne’s been there now 14 years, and she was 
constituency assistant for Arlene Julé before that. So she knows 
more about it than any of us here. But I appreciate the support 
that I get from both Don and Mary Anne, and above all I 
appreciate their friendship. 
 
I would also like to say thank you to my wife, Valerie. She’s 
been my best friend and partner, lady auctioneer. Anything we 
need, she’s there to support and build. So I thank her for being 
my Valerie. 
 
I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and her crew. It 
was quite a job, and they came through with amazing, amazing 
results. I would like to thank our new Premier. I’m impressed 
already, so thank you very much. I would also like to thank the 
people of my constituency, the historic constituency of Batoche. 
 
And now to the budget. This budget is the foundation for the 
return to a balanced budget. As the economy blossoms, 
Saskatchewan will be standing on a firm foundation as we go 
forward. When we look at other provinces and see them digging 
deeper, beyond their reach, we look at that and say, we don’t 
want to go that way. Mr. Speaker, the old adage goes, you can’t 
get out of a hole by digging it deeper. 
 
The comments coming in about this year’s budget are very 
strong and very supportive. They all think it’s a wonderful 
budget for the situation we’re in. People see this budget as a key 
move to keep Saskatchewan ahead of the pack. We 
unfortunately see our federal government digging deeper and 
deeper. We know it will take generations — yes, generations — 
to recover, and we in Saskatchewan won’t go that route. 



3892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to address interest rates, a factor 
of gigantic proportion that is often ignored. They have been at 
an all-time low. The interest rates were to the point that they 
were not a major factor in the decision made to purchase a 
house, a car, land. But, Mr. Speaker, the interest rates are 
starting to creep back up. I hope everyone here that’s old 
enough can remember interest rates at 18 per cent. 
 
I talked to a gentleman after the budget, and he told me that he 
and his wife at that time took out a mortgage to buy a new 
home at the rate of 18 per cent. The price tag was 90,000, and 
he said at times, he said they were sweating blood. By the end 
of the mortgage, they said they would never, ever do that again. 
So now a new house would be from 2 to 300,000 or more. If 
interest rates climb, how do you ever pay that off? The odds are 
stacked against you, and you could be facing the sad reality of 
losing your home. Saskatchewan is preparing for such a 
situation. High interest rates would cripple our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget stands with a plan and with a vision. 
The plan is to stay on track to get back to a balanced budget. 
The vision is to look well into the future so that we will be on a 
firm foundation, not standing in a hole that we can’t see out of. 
If we stay the course with this budget, we will be able to deal 
with the future with strength and confidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot move forward unless we 
address the federal Trudeau carbon tax. No matter how you try 
to sell it, it’s a tax grab. No matter what colour lens you look 
through, it’s still a federal tax grab. First off is the ridiculous 
statement that the money will go straight back to the provinces. 
There has never been and never will be a tax that is revenue 
neutral. Someone has to pay the federal bean counters, and they 
don’t come cheap. The cost of administration would be huge. 
 
The biggest factor for Saskatchewan is we are an exporting 
province. If we have another tax, how do we compete in 
markets around the world? We already have the extra cost of 
moving our product to market because we are a landlocked 
province and have the added cost of getting our product to the 
shipping ports on the coast. 
 
Our Finance minister delivered an exceptional budget, 
considering the financial situation and world markets. I was 
proud to hear our Finance minister’s statement on carbon tax. 
There will be no carbon tax. The response of the visitors in our 
legislature that day was very enthusiastic. I was disappointed to 
see no positive response from the NDP. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
say they support the economy and small business. How can you 
say that and yet are prepared to add another cost to our 
exporting province? 
 
The carbon tax only looks at how much carbon we produce. 
Would it not be correct to balance that with the amount of 
carbon we sequester? The truth is Saskatchewan sequesters 
more carbon than it produces, and that’s not counting Boundary 
dam 3 which sequesters over 2 million tonnes. It is our cropland 
and forest that sequester a vast amount of carbon, over 12 
million tonnes. Boundary dam is the first of its kind in the 
world and a leader, a world leader in carbon sequestration. But 
of course the NDP are against that also. 
 
The NDP are against Boundary dam. They are against pipelines. 

They are against uranium. So to spur on the economy, the NDP 
would support a carbon tax and things like the Leap manifesto. 
I don’t see how and I can’t see any way of making that 
connection. Those two items would have Saskatchewan back in 
the dark days of a have-not province. You cannot lift up 
Saskatchewan’s economy by dragging it down. 
 
I heard an NDP supporter say that Saskatchewan stands alone 
against the carbon tax. Well to quote an old farm saying, Mr. 
Speaker, hold your horses. We now see Manitoba coming 
onside. We can see two quick changes on the electoral horizon. 
There are soon to be two provincial elections: one in Alberta, 
one in Ontario. If I were a betting man, I would bet that when 
the new government of those provinces looks at what the cost of 
the carbon tax is, they will join the Saskatchewan team. You 
could see then the domino effect sweep across the country and 
they all fall down. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can anyone who truly wants to grow our 
economy support the carbon tax? The province of British 
Columbia has had a carbon tax for the past three years. The 
carbon tax, Trudeau says, is designed to reduce carbon outputs. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in reality what has happened in British 
Columbia is their carbon footprint has increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also told that former US [United States] 
president Bill Clinton kept a card in his pocket that said, “It’s 
the economy, stupid.” It does not matter which side of the 49th 
parallel you are on, this statement fits. Without a robust 
economy, how do you pay the bills — health care, education, 
highways? It all begins to fall apart if the economy fails. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of my agricultural background and family 
history, agriculture is very near and dear to me. Depending on 
the crop year, Saskatchewan has between 44 and 47 of all of 
Canada’s cropland. Agriculture is the foundation of this 
province. It is what we are. As a result, I am pleased with the 
budget as it relates to agriculture. The ag budget is 378 million. 
This recognized the importance of ag in a tough time. 
 
I must also comment on the 258 million to fully fund — fully 
fund — AgStability, AgriInvest, western livestock price 
insurance, and crop insurance. Agriculture needs to be strong in 
this province and with this budget, agriculture will remain 
strong and continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other members have commented on the leader of 
the opposition’s promises made during his leadership run. Of 
course, we’ve all heard the costed-out price tag on his promises, 
and this needs to be said over and over. The people of 
Saskatchewan need to know. The price is beyond two and a half 
billion a year. Talk about digging the hole deeper. Mr. Speaker, 
if those financial wizards on the other side of the House have 
their way, Saskatchewan will become a black hole. No escape, 
no bottom. Just deeper, deeper, deeper. 
 
I would now like to address pipelines. I agree there is a risk 
factor with pipelines. There’s also a risk factor with crossing the 
street. We take the risk to cross the street because it far 
outweighs the option of staying on this side of the street. We 
take risks like this every single day. This also applies to 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3893 

pipelines. The risk to pipelines is far, far less than using rail. 
The risk for pipelines is far less than the human rights abuses 
that are occurring in some of the countries we get oil from. The 
risk factor of damage to the environment is far greater with 
ships crossing an unprotected ocean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the standard practice for a ship bringing oil to 
North America is to pump off the cargo of oil when it gets here, 
and then they pump the cargo holds full of salt water, sea water 
for ballast. Otherwise the ship would bob around like a cork and 
they couldn’t control it on the trip back. Now the big factor is 
when they return to their home port, they pump off the sea 
water to reload again with oil. Unfortunately with the pumping 
off of the sea water, the sludge from the bottom of the oil tanks 
which floats on the water comes along with it and is put into our 
aquatic system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have our own oil — in fact more than we can 
use. We also have refineries. All we need is pipelines to 
complete the pattern. Canadians should be using Canadian oil. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the NDP to look at pipelines with 
both eyes open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all the above reasons and many, many more, I 
will enthusiastically be supporting this powerful budget and I 
totally reject the NDP’s amendment to the budget. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It really 
is a privilege for me to rise in this Assembly and speak in 
favour of the budget that was presented. And like many of my 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I have people I also want to thank and 
pay tribute to at this time, if I could, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course, we all want to thank our families and I also want to 
take this time to do the same. I want to acknowledge my wife 
Lois for all the times that she’s at home alone. She’s managing 
an insurance business in Assiniboia. Actually in the last few 
years, when I was with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities], she raised our kids pretty well when I 
was gone so much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to also thank my kids for the sacrifice they’ve made 
for letting me take this opportunity to represent the constituents 
of Wood River. Our daughter Katelyn is here in the city of 
Regina. Her and her husband Darrel have blessed us with two 
beautiful granddaughters, Lily and Olivia, ages six and two. 
And our son Jordan is finishing up. He’s got his last year to 
become a specialist in the medical field as a doctor and has high 
hopes of returning back to this province to practise, and we’re 
anxious to await that day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to take this opportunity if I could to thank, 
obviously, our staffs. At my constituency office, Sandy Kuffner 
is my CA. She’s a phenomenal woman that does a lot of work 
for me. And as a result of being here, the phone doesn’t stop 
ringing, and she answers a lot of questions and deals with 
issues, Mr. Speaker. And Wendie Yorga is our assistant who 
fills in when Sandy’s not there, and I want to recognize and also 
thank her for the work she does. 

And also in the ministry staff also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 
to take this opportunity to thank the entire team I have up there. 
There’s Brenda, of course, and Robin, Mark, and my chief of 
staff, David Cooper. I want to recognize them and thank them 
for all the work that they do on behalf of myself but also behalf 
of the ministry and the people of the province. 
 
And I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t take this 
opportunity to thank the Ministry of Highways’ senior 
administration over there. The deputy minister, Fred Antunes, 
does a great job and has put a great team together of assistant 
deputy ministers and looking after the highway network in this 
province and the tendering and all the process we go through. 
 
And also, I guess, in light of the situation today — when you 
look outside, you see the snow again, and it doesn’t look like 
winter’s quite over — I want to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to thank the highway employees, the winter 
employees that look after our highway network to the best of 
their ability to make sure that everybody has a safe journey 
home or to wherever they might be going, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think they’ve done a phenomenal job in recognition of the 
length of the winter that we’ve had this year, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t seem to be ending. There seems to be a lot of jokes that 
sooner or later we’re going to have a weekend of summer, and 
hopefully it comes much, much before that. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
thank the volunteers on my executive and the work that they do 
while I’m not back in the constituency, and also thank the 
citizens of Wood River constituency for giving me this honour 
and privilege to represent them in this Assembly, representing 
the citizens of Wood River constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to also obviously take this time to thank the Premier 
for giving me this honour and privilege to serve as the Minister 
of Highways and also as Minister of SaskBuilds and Priority 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I have said, I will be supporting this budget put forward by 
our Finance minister, the member from Humboldt-Watrous, Mr. 
Speaker. And like many that have stood up here on the 
Assembly floor through this process, Mr. Speaker, they’ve all 
recognized and paid their respects to the incident that happened 
on April 6th with the Humboldt hockey team. And of course 
our thoughts and prayers go out to all those who were greatly 
impacted by this tragedy that happened on April 6th, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I also want to take this opportunity to really thank all the 
first responders in the province, Mr. Speaker, that respond to 
tragedies like this and do their job in a very professional 
manner, Mr. Speaker, to the STARS and the entire first 
responders team in providing this fantastic volunteer service, 
Mr. Speaker, that they provide to the communities in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my little hometown of Fife Lake where I was born and 
raised, Mr. Speaker, I played hockey in our little local rink 
there, where we had natural ice, and played all my minor 
hockey there. They had a little tournament last weekend, Mr. 
Speaker. It was 10-and-under kids. They invited kids from all 
over just to come and play. They were going to have a little 



3894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

three-on-three tournament.  
 
The village of Fife Lake is about 30 or 35 people, and I think 
when I was growing up it might have peaked at about 100 or 
120. But even so, they had this little three-on-three tournament. 
It’s natural ice in this rink, and it’s put in totally voluntary by 
the families and parents, and the kitchen is run by them. They 
had over 40 kids attend this from other communities that came 
in, and they had a great day. But the thing that caught me, really 
hit home with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they had a picture of 
the 42 kids in a circle around centre ice. And they just wanted 
to make sure that these kids would never forget what happened 
on April 6th with the Humboldt Broncos hockey team, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I guess for someone like me, and I’m sure many in this 
province, I had the privilege of playing in the Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League for more than four years and did drive a 
bus or ride a bus all those times and played in Humboldt on 
many occasions and drove that highway many times. We were 
blessed that I met my wife through that process.  
 
I think the big thing that’s came for me out of that is you form 
friendships on that bus, not only on the ice but you form 
friendships on that bus, friendships that I still have today. I may 
not see some of the guys for 10 or 15 years, but we sure have a 
great respect for each other. And when we see each other, it’s 
just we’re good friends and that’s what it is. I think anybody 
that’s played team sport and ridden on a bus realizes just what 
that means to everybody, and I think it just emphasizes the 
sincereness that we all have and what happened on that tragic 
day. 
 
I want to get into the budget like many of my colleagues did. 
And I guess, first and foremost we have to say that we are on 
track to balance in 2020, and I think that’s got to be a key 
message here, Mr. Speaker. It’s a fiscally responsible budget, 
and the one thing that hasn’t been said that really should be said 
is that we’re even cutting government expenses. When you look 
at a 1.4 per cent reduction in government expenses and still 
reducing the debt, I think it’s showing that this government is 
on the right track to make sure the economy continues to grow 
and also not burdening our kids and our grandkids with debt 
down the road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk, as I said, about the budget and what it means to 
us. And obviously the big one is, it really has to be emphasized 
there’s no carbon tax in this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll speak 
more about that in a minute. But for an example, Ministry of 
Highways crews — just to give you some examples about that 
— burned between 6 and 8 million litres of fuel per year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. A carbon tax would cost the Ministry of 
Highways an additional $900,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also this last week we had the Saskatchewan highway 
construction had their AGM [annual general meeting] here in 
Regina. And I was at it and spoke to quite a few; actually they 
had done a little work for me. There was 13 contractors that had 
put together what they had spent, and these 13 companies spend 
about $20 million on fuel every year, Mr. Speaker. The carbon 
tax would have impacted them about $2 million a year which 
would have been just passed on back into the tendering process 
to the Ministry of Highways, which at the end costs taxpayers 

more money, Mr. Speaker. So just imagine what a carbon tax 
would do to the business community or to the farming 
community. 
 
This year’s highways budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a budget 
of $924 million. Including this year’s budget, we’ve invested 
more than 3 billion in our highways and the roads over the last 
three years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and our total transportation 
investment since 2008 now exceeds $8 billion. This includes a 
capital budget of 673 million that will be invested in 
improvements on 825 kilometres of highways and roads across 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue work on phase 
2 of the Regina bypass. The budget provides about 50 million to 
continue and complete our plan for interchanges, twinning and 
passing lanes on these key corridors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[20:00] 
 
We’re continuing work on the new interchanges at Warman and 
Martensville and they are ahead of schedule, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. On Highway 7 we’ll continue twinning between 
Vanscoy and Delisle, and we’ll start the planning work for 
passing lanes between Rosetown and the Alberta border, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re going to start the functional planning 
for passing lanes and some sections of twinning on Highway 6 
and 39 between Regina and Estevan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
two sets of passing lanes will be built this year between Regina 
and Highway 39 junction at Corinne. 
 
We’re also building two sets of passing lanes on Highway 4 
between North Battleford and Cochin, and last year we opened 
a couple of sets of passing lanes on Highway 5 between 
Humboldt and Highway No. 2, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This year 
we’re starting the planning work for what will likely be a 
multi-year project to widen, repave, build passing lanes 
between Highway 2 and Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
will also start the planning work for passing lanes on highways 
9 and 10 between Melville and Canora, and on Highway 2 
between Moose Jaw and Chamberlain. 
 
We will be investing about 118 million into 700 kilometres of 
repaving and preventative maintenance across the province. 
This includes 280 kilometres of full repaving of highways like 
— and I’ll give you some examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
Highway 2 south of Chamberlain, Highway 4 north of North 
Battleford, Highway 26 between Vawn and Mervin, and 
Highway 35 south of Weyburn. We will also complete 280 
kilometres of preventative pavement seals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and 140 kilometres of medium preservation treatment like 
microsurfacing. 
 
In this budget we will also take care of bridges and culverts. 
This year we’re investing 61 million into replacing and 
rehabbing bridges and culverts. This will provide for 
replacement and major repairs to 30 bridges, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It will also fund numerous culvert replacements across 
the provincial highway system. 
 
We are also earmarking 13 million to continue making 
permanent repairs from floods in previous years and to reduce 
the risk of flooding in the future. We will complete landslide 
and erosion repairs on Highway 11 near Lumsden and Highway 
9 north of North Battleford, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3895 

Speaker, those are some of the highlights that we have in the 
budget. 
 
I also want to talk about, if I could, some of our partnership 
programs that we have. When we look at what we call our 
municipal roads for the economy program that we partner with 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, we have 
committed 14 million to that program where we continue to 
work on clearing what we call our Clearing the Path corridors, 
which are primary-weight grid road systems in the RM [rural 
municipality] system where you can get from a primary 
highway to a primary highway using the RM grid road system. 
 
And over $6 million into the urban highway connector program 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there we’re looking at doing 
some work in Melfort and Prince Albert and looking at other 
communities also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted by the budget and the process when 
I look at the partnerships that we are working on with 
municipalities. We’ve had the privilege of signing two 
partnerships already and looking forward to growing that 
interest with municipalities, where we can share on refurbishing 
some of what we call our lower volume TMS [thin membrane 
surface] highway system and improve it, as what they want to 
do is improve it for local traffic and improve the safety around 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to talk if I could, Mr. Speaker, I still want to talk 
about the budget, about the Regina bypass if I could, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s a great project, one that we really should be 
embracing and really talking about, Mr. Speaker. When you 
look at the investment we’ve made on that, the capital 
investment of $1.2 billion with a 30-year maintenance contract, 
you look at over 11 bypasses, over 40 kilometres of twinned 
highway, 55 kilometres of access road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the biggest thing about this thing is safety. It is going to 
improve safety to a growing area, one of the fastest growing 
areas in this province on the east side of Regina. We’re proud of 
that and we should be proud of that. And I just want to 
recognize . . . I think the members opposite should really 
embrace this thing as a good news story for the province of 
Saskatchewan because, first and foremost, what we have to talk 
about is safety. And that’s what it does. But it also encourages 
industry to grow and to come to this province because it gives 
them direct access to obviously a national highway system 
across this country, but also gives them a pretty short link into 
the United States down 6 and 39 to that port. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting when the 
member from Athabasca goes on and on about how he thinks 
it’s a bad project and, you know, and the cost and all that. And 
as he said yesterday . . . But, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote the 
member from Athabasca in the Economy Committee in April 
29th in 2014, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I read his quote: 
 

And it should be stated right at the front that one of the 
things that’s really important to this side of the Assembly 
is that it is important that people out there understand, 
when it comes to the Regina bypass, the NDP are in full 
support of having the bypass built, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Quoted in saying that in the Economy Committee, and so I just 
wonder, you know I just wonder. You know, when they talk 
about the price at, they say at 400 million, 400 million was 
three bypasses on the east side of Regina, Mr. Speaker. That has 
grown to 11 bypasses, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it’s got, is 
interchanges. And we look at what they are and we’re . . . As I 
said earlier, over 40-some kilometres of twinning and 55 
kilometres of service road. 
 
This is going to be an excellent bypass around the city of 
Regina, and it’s going to actually help grow industry on the east 
side of Regina and on the west side of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve actually even had a discussion with a municipality on the 
east side of the city, the RM of Edenwold, Mr. Speaker, just a 
week or so ago. And they’re already starting to see more 
development come as a result of those interchanges put in at 
those communities, so it’s important. 
 
But one of the things they’ve also said is, they’ve always said, 
where did the money go? Where did the money go? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, and all you have to look at is what we have spent. You 
look at the highways. That’s spending over $8 billion, you 
know, in that time frame, but you look from 2007. I think our 
budget is about $8.4 billion that we have spent on highway 
infrastructure since 2007. 
 
You look at the schools that we built since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
Over 40 new schools have been built in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So you know, you talk about hospitals. You look 
at all the new hospitals built since 2007. And I hope I don’t 
forget any, Mr. Speaker, but you just have to look around the 
province. You look at Moose Jaw’s got a new hospital. Swift 
Current’s got a new hospital. Maple Creek’s got a new hospital. 
Shellbrook’s got a new hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Leader has a new hospital. Moose Jaw has 
a new hospital. Shellbrook has a new hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kipling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Kipling has a new hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Porcupine Plain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Porcupine Plain has a new hospital. Mr. 
Speaker, I mean you start looking at . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Radville. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Radville has a new hospital. It just goes on 
and the names are still coming out to me, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 
amazing. So if they want to know where the money went, all 
they have to do is ask. We’ll tell them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When you look at senior homes, look at the 15 new senior 
homes built across the province, and obviously probably going 
to be more built. I know there’s lots of communities that are 
looking at opportunities for seniors’ housing and things like 
that. 
 
But on the other side of the coin, we can’t forget what we got 



3896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

away from, Mr. Speaker, in 2007. We got away from a 
government that closed a hundred and . . . How many schools? 
176 schools, you know, and just thought nothing of doing it. 
Closed 52 hospitals. Never built, but never built anything, Mr. 
Speaker, just closed it. They just closed it. They went to 
communities and said, we’re closing your school. Figure out 
where you’re going to go, but we’re closing this school. They 
just did it, Mr. Speaker. There was no opportunity for growth. 
And now we have it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I think I’ve pretty well taken up my time. I 
probably went a little over again. I was just a bit over, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So with that, I will be supporting the motion 
put forward by my esteemed colleague, the member from 
Humboldt-Watrous, and I will not be supporting the amendment 
put forward by the member from Nutana, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on a little discussion here. And I guess facts, you know, back 
and forth everyone has their facts and their stories. But at the 
end of the day, you know, before I get into the facts and some 
of the comments and go back and forth, I just want to again, 
like many of the members in this Assembly, thinking about the 
families and those that, you know, need our prayers and our 
thoughts. And everybody has come together in this province 
and, you know, not only in Canada but there’s so many that 
have sent their prayers and best wishes to those injured and 
those that are grieving the loss of their loved one. So I just want 
to say to everyone, you know, that’s out there, we’re thinking 
about you and we’ll continue to pray. You’ll be in our prayers. 
 
So having said that, I know that the members, you know, like to 
talk about all the great things that are in the budget, and I know 
we have to get on to that. Before I talk about some of things in 
that budget and respond to that that people have shared with me 
. . . They’re not always my stories that I’m sharing. People tell 
me when I hear, talking to them and they tell you where things 
are working for them. You hear where things aren’t working for 
them, and I think government has an obligation to hear those 
things and the challenges that the citizens of this province are 
feeling and the struggles that being put on them. 
 
But having said that, before I get into that I just want to again, I 
want to thank my family, thank my CA and those individuals 
that help out in the constituency to help the good people who 
are struggling sometimes with many different issues, whether 
they’re dealing with the ministry — however, you know, we get 
to deal with them. I just want to thank my staff who do a great 
job of doing casework and working with the ministries to 
resolve those caseworks — and that’s what we want at the end 
of the day — in a positive way. And I have to be honest with 
you. Some of those situations get dealt with, and the ministry 
. . . Some of them work well and you can get things done and 
accomplish them. And I thank them for that. There are some 
that are a little slow on dealing with issues, and we’ll work on 
those areas. 
 
But having said that, I know I don’t have a lot of time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I want to I guess think about some of the 

comments people are talking about and some of the challenges 
that some are feeling. And my heart goes out to many when I 
think about back in the North. 
 
And I think about some of the crises that we’re having in our 
province. And I have been to so many funerals. I have attended 
funerals of mothers, fathers, mushoms, kohkoms, loved ones 
who have to say farewell and goodbye to a young person 
because of suicide, the mental health, the addictions that so 
many are troubled with. And it’s hard. I tell you, there’s nothing 
like it, going to funeral after funeral to pay your respects and to 
talk to the family and try to give them some type of comfort, 
and hope at the end of the day we can say, well hopefully the 
government hears that and they’ll respond with the need. It’s a 
crisis, and they’ll respond. 
 
Then we have the child advocate weighing in on it, his report 
come out. And I’ll be honest with you: he’s ringing alarm bells 
to the government that it is a crisis, that we have to respond. 
Whether it’s the North, rural, urban, you know, we need to deal 
with this. The government, I hope, hears this. And I mean this 
with the most sincere, that they will act. All citizens deserve to 
have the treatment — the addictions — that this province can 
put forward. 
 
When we look at, with the revenue we have, the government 
picks and chooses the priorities. And I understand that. The 
good people of this province make a decision on who’s going to 
govern. But again I’ll reach out, and on behalf of many, I’ll 
reach out to the government to say, you need to do more. You 
need to hear the child advocate. You need to hear the parents. 
You need to deal with the crisis. You cannot close your eyes 
and wish it away because it’s not going to go away. We have 
the addictions, and we see that. 
 
It’s affecting many in this province, and we hear our leaders 
calling for it. We hear families calling for it. We hear the 
front-line workers saying more needs to be done. It is a crisis 
and we’ve got to work together. And so be it, if it’s a task force 
they need to put on it. Whatever they need, I know our side 
would be willing to work with the government to do whatever 
we can with the front-line workers to say once and for all. 
 
I think about partnerships. And I know the ministers and 
colleagues on the other side and even on this side sometimes 
talk about partnerships, and partnerships in a meaningful way. 
And I think about the La Ronge Indian Band. They’re trying to 
partner. And I know they have reached out to the provincial 
government, the federal government, and to whoever else, to 
partner, to build a wellness centre, to try to deal with some of 
the issues I’ve raised and some of the challenges that many 
young people and the youth are dealing with. And it’s not only 
the young people. We have many people dealing with 
addictions. 
 
So I’m hoping the government will hear. We were hoping in 
this budget there would be some of that involvement, 
partnership with that. And I will encourage that and will 
continue to encourage the government and the new Premier. 
 
[20:15] 
 
I want again to say congratulations to the new Premier, and say 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3897 

I hope he will move forward in dealing with some of these 
while his citizens are dying and struggling with addictions, with 
mental health. I would encourage him, and I hope he will move 
forward. But having said that, and some of the other challenges 
that are facing northern residents, it’s not just, you know, not 
just that. 
 
And I think about the long-term care and I think about our 
seniors in the North. And we’ve seen different reports, and I 
think the government acknowledged. The Minister of Rural and 
Remote has acknowledged, you know, that yes, it is a priority. 
He says it’s going to be a priority. No citizen, a senior, should 
wait 165 days for a senior’s bed, and that’s what they’re waiting 
in the northern region. That is shameful. And I’m hoping that 
the government will say, it’s time. I was hoping that we would 
get an announcement for long-term care. 
 
I’ve said before, four budgets ago, we had about 500,000 for 
planning. I’ve sometime wondered, where did that money go? 
And they say, well it was for planning. Okay, well the 
planning’s done. You went through all . . . And I even went and 
took part and seen exactly what they’re going to do, and we 
were hoping maybe this time the North, northern Saskatchewan, 
would get a new long-term care. It is a priority. We were 
hoping that would happen. The government chose not to. I 
guess they picked priorities and I guess that La Ronge and the 
North is not a priority. The seniors that live there, 165 days is 
not a priority of a government. And that in itself, to the seniors 
that I represent, you know, and those families who are 
struggling, saying, Doyle, where do I . . . What do I do with 
mom? What do I do with dad? What do I do with my kohkom? 
She’s 80 years old. What do I do? Where do I take her? And 
some of those families are struggling. So I think about that. 
 
I think about the affordability. I’ve had seniors talk to me about 
their power bills and, you know, could this budget have had 
some priorities, some relief for seniors? But we see cost of 
living is just going, just being added on. And I know 
government likes to say, oh, no more; we didn’t raise taxes, you 
know. And they want to go behind that and cheerlead. That’s 
fine. Go ahead. I understand it. You want to play the politics. 
It’s the way it is, and you cheerlead that. That’s all right. Pat 
yourselves on the back. No, they didn’t raise taxes but 
everywhere else people are struggling with affordability, to put 
food on the table. Utilities are going out the roof. These are the 
challenges that many people are facing. They’re struggling. 
 
And I ask the government who has so much. And they look at 
the government saying, the government has so much; will you 
assist us and help us? We need you, now anyway. When it’s 
medications, you know, when you hear seniors talking about 
. . . And it is not something I want to talk about and play 
politics with. When they’re saying they’re struggling with 
getting their medications, paying their rent, or buying food, like 
where is it? Like I don’t have enough. 
 
Then you look at programs where the most vulnerable . . . And 
here’s a government would have, could have said, you know 
what; our last budget was terrible. We went after. So we have 
reversed some of that because of the pressure from the public. 
And I’ve got to give credit. When the pressure was put on . . . 
And I would say to those people who took a stand and say, 
we’re not accepting this when we’re going to move forward — 

they put the pressure on the government — it’s great to see that 
when the people of this province say enough is enough and 
we’ll put the pressure, that the government backed down. 
 
Now some of these other areas, maybe the government will 
back down. I think about PST [provincial sales tax]. Now they 
want to talk about PST on used vehicles. Here was a 
government in 2007 came in and said at the time, you know, 
there was PST on used vehicles. Well some of the comments 
were just ridiculous or whatever. You know, they were looking 
at that. It didn’t make sense and they were going to take care, 
and they did. 
 
But lo and behold, times have changed. Record revenue year 
after year. And some tough times, give it. Make some different 
choices. Don’t put no money away for the rainy day. You spent 
the rainy day fund we did have and it’s all gone. And now 
you’re saying, now these things need to come into play and 
we’re going to have PST on used vehicles. And they expect the 
business people, they expect the public to say, oh, well that’s 
okay. 
 
But government has picked priorities. And I think about the 
Regina bypass. They keep patting themselves on the back. But 
when you go back from 400 million and then you go to 800 and 
you keep going up and up and then you say, oh, but we added 
stuff. We added things. It’s going to be the greatest thing. Then 
you think about the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. That 
was a priority? That was a priority. Not seniors, not housing for 
the most vulnerable housing. You cancelled a program that 
would help the most vulnerable pay their rent, to pay their rent 
as they’re struggling to make ends meet because you have 
raised utilities, PST on kids’ clothes. There are so many things 
that have hurt the good people of this province, and they’re 
trying to do their part. 
 
And I think about students going to university. And I think 
about them and the part-time jobs that they . . . How many of 
them have to work extra? And they’re trying. Where do they get 
it? Every time the government says, well we’ve got to cut back, 
and then they put it onto the university. Well the university has 
their priorities. It’s their choice; it’s their decision. We give that 
to them. Well hold it here. If you’re going to impact them in 
any way, they have to either cut or they have to raise tuition. 
Well you know, tuition rates are going pretty high for students. 
They’re not happy. 
 
You know, at the end of the day if you think that they’re going 
to forget . . . And you know, that’s to the members over there, 
and I know sometimes there’s so many of you over there, and I 
know you mock us and you laugh and that’s okay. But being 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, to raise the issues of the 
people, that are truly hurting the people back home, that are 
truly hurting people in this province, I say I’m not somebody 
who is, I want to say, wants to be here in the sense of always 
criticizing. 
 
But I am going to give you credit because, you know, I’ve 
heard members say, well they never give us any credit. I have, 
and I’ll give you credit again. 
 
I think about a group home. You announced funding for a group 
home in La Ronge, $250,000 to build a group home. That’s 



3898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

really great for those individuals who lobbied and got that. I say 
to them, good work; way to go. Five individuals, adults with 
intellectual will have a group home, and that’s good. We’ll see 
about how they’re going to pay for that, and that will all roll 
out. But it looks like they’re going to build it and that’s good. 
 
I think about the community of Creighton. I think about the 
hard work that many of them done over there lobbying, 
petitions asking for a group home. They were not a priority. 
This government has decided that you in Creighton, your family 
members who need a group home, you are not going to get one. 
You’re not a priority of this government. Well I have talked to a 
few of them. They’re not so happy. But they’re happy for those 
individuals who got it. They understand that. You know, that’s 
the way it is. They wish them well. But when you have groups 
of area where you pick and choose . . . And there’s many 
challenges facing the Creighton residents when it comes to 
health care. 
 
You know, health care, they have many issues. And we’re 
going to get into some of those issues I guess in committee, and 
the challenges that are facing residents of Saskatchewan who 
live on the border of Manitoba who are not getting the health 
care that they deserve and want. Maybe this budget could have 
helped some of that, and maybe the government will prioritize 
some of that area. 
 
So having said that, I look at the classrooms, and when you talk 
to front-line teachers, and you talk to the teachers, the struggles 
that they’re having — the large classrooms, the challenges with 
disabilities. And then more and more the government has put 
more and more on the boards of education, more on the 
municipalities. You’re going to pay more as citizens but you’re 
going to get less. And this government has the nerve to say 
they’ve got a budget that they’re proud of. 
 
And I’ll talk about the amendment after, and why anybody 
would be opposed to what the amendment says, and we’ll get 
into that. But that’s up to them to discuss with the 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Now when I think about some of the challenges that are facing 
Saskatchewan families, we talked about, you know, the PST is 
hurting them, the budget. You talk about the debt. And when 
you say to people and you show them . . . Your own documents 
show what the debt is. How you can just kind of ignore that and 
think that it’s not going to be . . . You know, we’ve got a 
million-plus people. How our grandkids and kids are not going 
to . . . I don’t get how some of you make the comments you do. 
It’s your right to. But to make it like that $20 billion debt, and 
growing, isn’t a big deal, like I really find it hard. I don’t know 
how much interest we’re paying per year on the deficit, on that 
debt. 
 
So you’re taking money where it could be . . . Build a long-term 
care centre in La Ronge for seniors that are 165 days waiting for 
a bed. Adult group home in Creighton, you could build that. 
Some of the roads . . . The partnership you could do with First 
Nations. And I think about La Ronge band with the wellness 
centre. You could do that with those dollars that you’ve spent. 
 
But no, don’t put no money away for a rainy day. Spend 
everything and add to the debt. It’s a shame the amount of 

money you have added to the debt and then you try to spin it 
and say it’s all great. Well the people aren’t buying it and 
they’re starting to struggle, day in and day out, just to survive. 
 
So you know, having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I 
could go over all the different challenges that are facing the 
people that I represent. And people that I have seen in different 
places have shared with me some of the struggles, where 
they’re struggling, you know. But having said that, I want to 
talk a little bit about, you know, the government’s motion here 
on the budget. And as some will be a surprise, you know, I will 
not be supporting that. 
 
But you know what’s really amazing to me? What’s really 
amazing, a government that sits there and talks about certain 
areas. And let me just kind of . . . Exactly what did the amended 
motion read? What was it we were trying to ask the government 
to do? Well let’s see here, here: smarter investment to grow the 
economy. Wow, why would you guys want to support that? 
 
Hang on, hang on, hang on. Oh, create more jobs for 
Saskatchewan families. Why would you guys want to support 
that, right? You know, prioritize education for our kids and 
adults. Why would you guys want to, you know, why would 
you guys support that? Why would you? Why would you not 
support the most vulnerable? You know, at the end of the day 
you say, well you can’t support that. That’s fine. And you 
know, I’ve had my days of . . . I didn’t support your budget 
when you put out the 500,000, you ran little ads. It’s amazing 
what you guys were willing to do. Didn’t work for you. Mr. 
Chair, it did not work for them. Did not work for them, Mr. 
Chair. It did not, Mr. Speaker, work for them, you know. 
 
So having said that, the end of the day people decide, and we’ll 
come here and we’ll serve petitions. And I think about our 
seniors, and I think about our trappers who are seniors. I’ve 
talked to the Minister of Environment. I’m waiting for a phone 
call. I keep saying, ring those phones every morning, you know. 
But this is a serious matter I’m talking about. I’ve served a 
petition. I’ve talked to him. I know the trappers have asked. 
They’re hoping that the government of the day, the government 
of the day will say, seniors that fish can get a free fishing 
licence for angling at 65. The trappers are asking for that too, 
and I’m hoping that the minister, you know, will look upon 
himself and say, I’m going to have a serious look at it and deal 
with that. These are just something that maybe . . . and I know 
it’s going to cost, take a little money out of his budget, but 
maybe they could find that in that budget of, you know, 
billions. 
 
Sometimes residents aren’t asking for a lot — small amounts of 
money, and different priorities — and I realize the government 
has that option to do that. This is kind of why I wanted to have 
a little talk about how this budget was impacting many in this 
province. Many people in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
have been challenged and will be challenged. And this thing, as 
this rolls out and I think the news comes to the Saskatchewan 
people, and as people look at their budget and they find out, you 
know, community-based organizations and many others — 
we’ll see how it’s all going to come out, what challenges 
municipalities and everything else. 
 
I know they say initially, oh it’s all great, and that’s what 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3899 

they’re trying to spin. We’ll see, because we’ve seen 
sometimes, it rolls out over weeks, and as people understand 
exactly how the budget will impact them. We’ll find out, and 
we’ll get a chance to share more of that, but I guess I took my 
time. But I wanted to express some of the concerns that I’ve 
heard. Not my concerns, as it is for the people that I represent 
and the people I see in this province saying they’re struggling. 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will say thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for allowing me to join in debate on the budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think I’ll start 
off today by giving some congratulations, and I’d like to 
congratulate the new Speaker of the House. I think he’s doing 
an excellent job so far, and it’s Festivus all year round now that 
he’s in the Chair. And I’d also like to take this opportunity to 
thank our new Premier and congratulate him for the great job 
that he’s doing. He’s the most, I guess, steady, stalwart, stoic 
Premier that we have, and we’d really use what he’s offering 
right now in this time that we’ve had. He’s had quite a time of 
turmoil since he’s taken over the reins, and I think he’s just 
doing an exemplary job. 
 
I’d also like to take a moment to congratulate the Leader of the 
Opposition on his new appointment as the leader there. He’s got 
a big job ahead of him and I wish him well. 
 
I think I’ll start where I should, Mr. Speaker, by doing some 
thank yous. I’d like to thank, first and foremost, my wife, 
Candace, for keeping the home fires burning and for 
maintaining things at the farm. And it always amazes me how 
efficient and hard working that lady is. It’s amazing the amount 
of work she can get done in a day, and she does it with a smile 
and just keeps everything running very smoothly, and I 
wouldn’t say always happy at home, but she does keep it 
running smoothly. 
 
I’d like to also say a big thank you to my daughter, Emma. 
Emma is 14 years old now and she’s quite the little entrepreneur 
and very interested in politics, Mr. Speaker. I think she’s got a 
bright future ahead of her in whatever career she chooses, but 
right now she wants to be a veterinarian. But she also said she 
wants to be the prime minister one day, so we’ll see where that 
takes her. 
 
[20:30] 
 
I’d also like to take this opportunity to thank my parents, my 
father, Lorne, and my mother, Diane. They’re at home and they 
look after the farm and make sure that they have everything 
looked after there so I can be here, Mr. Speaker, representing 
the good people of Moosomin constituency. 
 
And along with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the good 
people of Moosomin constituency. I feel I am very blessed to 
have one of the very best constituencies in the whole province. 
They don’t ask that much of us. They want us to have a good 
road, a good hospital, good school, a nursing home, and then 
just get out of the way, let them do their work. And if we can 
provide that for them, they’ll keep voting our way forever, I 
think, and appreciate us for doing the job that we’re doing. 

One person I really do want to mention is my CA, Tim 
Hovdestad. Tim Hovdestad is someone who is doing that job, it 
looks like, effortlessly. He’s turned our constituency office into 
a bit of a coffee shop. He’s also turned it into an art gallery for 
local artists. There’s a rotating procession of artists that come 
through; once a month they switch. And it’s a great way to use 
publicly funded space to promote our local arts community. 
 
And I think Tim has just been just an excellent CA. One thing 
that Tim has always said, that when someone phones our office 
he wants it to be the very best call that they have had, and when 
they visit the office he wants it to be the very best visit that 
they’ve had. And I have to say, from the feedback that we’re 
getting, he’s doing his job very, very well. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency executive. I think we 
have a very young dynamic . . . Actually I think I’m the 
second-oldest person on our whole constituency team, and 
they’re a hard-working, good bunch of individuals. And one of 
our executive, Tyler Thomlinson, he actually won the Premier’s 
Award last fall for outstanding service to the Saskatchewan 
Party, so I’d like to give a special shout-out to Tyler. 
 
Last Friday I attended the funeral for Adam Herold in 
Montmartre. And I just want to make a mention of this tragedy 
that we’ve had in the province and how Saskatchewan 
definitely has become stronger. And our heart goes out to 
anyone who’s affected by that, particularly the Herold family. I 
know this family very well, particularly Raelene, who’s 
Raelene Englot, who was a neighbour of mine growing up. I 
was in 4-H with Raelene and I just know the family well: her 
parents, Lawrence and Carole, and all her brothers and sisters. 
And it’s just a very tough and a tragic thing to have to go 
through. 
 
I know this first-hand, Mr. Speaker. In 1998 I lost my 
brother-in-law and just before his 26th birthday. And my 
brother, who was 20 at the time, moved in with my sister to 
kind of help her through this. And I was living in Hungary. I got 
the phone call one day that my grandfather had died and I got 
the message. And my dad said, well please, please call home 
because, you know, your grandfather’s passed away. And he 
helped us farm. He was the patriarch of our family. And I made 
the call home and my dad said, I’ve got some other bad news: 
your brother passed away. So within a very short period of time 
I know what it’s like to have tremendous loss. So my heart goes 
out to that family, the Herold family, and all who are affected 
by this tragedy. 
 
I want to say one thing about the people, particularly in our area 
and I’m sure it goes for all across Saskatchewan. When my 
brother and my grandpa died, it was right at harvest time. And I 
remember being at home and it was a tough time for us. We 
didn’t really feel like getting out there and harvesting very 
much. And I remember the neighbours, all the neighbour guys 
who had come through our yard with swathers, combines, grain 
trucks. They weren’t the guys who would come in the house 
and say anything to you, but they were the ones who were there, 
who got it done just with . . . We didn’t have to worry about 
anything, and these are the people that . . . This is Saskatchewan 
people. This is why I’m so proud to be from this province. 
 
Last Friday there was also a hockey game that was put on in 



3900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Moosomin in honour of the . . . well not in honour but to pay 
respects to the tragedy that happened for the Broncos, and they 
raised $53,000 for the cause. And I want to give a big shout-out 
to the people in Moosomin who put that on because I think it’s 
something that just speaks to the heart of our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to speak now to the budget. I think 
that this budget is a budget that was very well crafted by our 
Finance minister who’s . . . We can’t imagine what she’s been 
through in the last two weeks, and I just think she’s done an 
exemplary job and all of us should commend her for the good 
work she’s done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget was done in consultation with the 
people of Saskatchewan. Last year if there was one thing we did 
hear from the people of Saskatchewan is they wished they 
could’ve had a little more involvement in the budgeting 
process. Well we’ve listened to them. We’ve talked to them. 
We’ve talked to our industry stakeholders. We’ve heard what 
they had to say and we’ve incorporated in this budget. 
 
If there’s one thing that we need in this province, it’s a stable, 
steady economy. And if you’re a private businessman, the last 
thing you want is unpredictability. We have tried to keep this 
budget as stable, predictable, and as business friendly as we 
could make it. Because if there’s one way we can pay for the 
services that we expect in this province, it’s by having a strong 
and robust economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done this by a few different things and one, 
I think, is a very important thing and one thing that we really 
had to work on and we’ve heard from our constituents is to 
control spending. Without controlling spending and fixing what 
some would consider a structural deficit by controlling 
spending and understanding where our money’s going, it’s the 
first step into bringing our budget back to balance. I can’t be 
overstated. This is something that’s so important. We’ve 
reduced our overall spending by 1.5 per cent in this budget and 
that has put us on track to balanced budget by next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also done this by keeping our corporate and 
personal income taxes low, and this is something that spurs 
investment. We know that. When people have money in their 
pocket, they’re apt to spend more. And it’s something that is a 
signal, an indicator, of how well our province’s economy is 
doing. Mr. Speaker, there has been no increases in educational 
property tax or the provincial sales tax. 
 
We’ve also had, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something I would really 
like to speak to, and that’s the export side of our province. I’ve 
had a long career in private business in exports and 
international trade, and one thing that we should be all very, 
very proud of in this province is the Saskatchewan Trade 
Export Partnership. The work that they’ve done has been just 
outstanding. They are the gold standard in Canada for . . . Well 
actually they’re the gold standard in the world for a 
sub-national organization that promotes trade. We’ve increased 
funding to STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] 
year over year, which increases our export activity. 
Saskatchewan is a province that exports about 98 per cent of 
what we produce. Without a strong marketing and global reach, 
it would be a huge disadvantage for our province, and I have to 
give STEP so much credit for what they’ve done and the good 

work that they continue to do. 
 
We’ve also increased . . . and something I’m very proud of is 
the Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive. And this is 
the, in my opinion, the next step in this province. We’ve got 
outstanding agricultural producers in Saskatchewan, world 
leaders. There’s no question. I think we’re seeing a slowdown a 
little bit in our capacity to have huge increases in production, 
but the next logical step for our province is value-added. This is 
the next thing we have to do to extract more value out of the 
products we produce. And this value-added tax incentive that 
we’ve created, I think will spur investment. 
 
We’re already seeing that. We’re already hearing from potential 
investors of how they find this very attractive, because as we 
know that capital is very mobile, Mr. Speaker. It can move 
anywhere in the world very quickly now, and it’s all about 
competitiveness. We have to maintain our competitive 
advantage, and we have world-class producers. We have 
world-class labour in this province. We just need to take that 
next step and add value to our products. And I know that the 
Minister of Agriculture, he’s been involved in many of these 
conversations with different value-added or secondary 
processors from all over the world. And Saskatchewan is the 
place that they want to be. There is investment out there looking 
for a home. And we hope that that home will be Saskatchewan. 
 
We also have a record investment in health, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’d just like to highlight some of the things that we’ve seen in 
Moosomin constituency specifically, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got in 
health, I’d like to especially highlight the Kipling integrated 
health facility. That was something that was long fought for by 
my predecessor, Don Toth. I think that the people of Kipling, 
Kennedy, Windthorst, I guess to some extent Broadview, owe 
him a lot of gratitude for the hard work that he put in to make 
sure that that became a reality. Because that is just one 
outstanding facility. It’s got the hospital. It’s got the long-term 
care portion of it, and it’s just, it’s been a great success. 
 
Also revenue sharing in Moosomin constituency has increased 
by 136 per cent, Mr. Speaker. I think that this is something that 
it’s almost unbelievable if we consider where we were at in 
2007 under the NDP government. Education in the Prairie 
Valley School Division, and that would include Wolseley, 
Grenfell, Broadview, Montmartre, and Kipling schools, and 
Kennedy school I guess. There used to be Glenavon school, 
Francis school and . . . but those were closed under the NDP. 
But anyways it’s a 14 per cent increase in the budget for those 
schools under this new budget. Southeast Cornerstone school, 
Moosomin and Rocanville, a 15 per cent increase in this budget. 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this is something that shows our 
commitment to education and how we take seriously the 
concerns of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the highways budget in our constituency, I 
remember what it was like in 2007. And what a difference now. 
There’s been just . . . I have a long list of the highway projects 
that have been done in our province, and there’s a lot more 
coming. And I just am so thankful for the good work that’s been 
done on our highways because, as we know, we’re talking 
about our agricultural production; we’re talking about potash 
production, oil production, manufacturing in our constituency. 
They all rely on road and rail, Mr. Speaker. 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3901 

There’s social services. Social services have . . . The budget’s 
been increased in our constituency as well. We have rental 
construction in Rocanville. We’ve got Whitewood. We’ve got 
also in Kipling. And, Mr. Speaker, these are sorely needed, and 
I know that because the residents of those communities are 
extremely happy that our government has stepped up and 
offered incentives to make sure that those projects are built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had a $750,000 credit to the Moosomin 
recreation facility. This is a world-class facility now, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got simulators for hockey, golf. It’s just an 
amazing . . . For baseball. We’ve got a rink. We’ve got a 
walking track. It’s just something that you don’t normally see 
outside of the two big centres in Saskatchewan. So I know that 
the residents are very thankful for that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that with this budget we 
know that we’ve kept things stable, consistent, and on track to a 
balance. This is our goal, Mr. Speaker. We will reach this goal. 
And to that end I will support the motion that’s put forward by 
the Minister of Finance and I will not support the amendment 
put forward by the opposition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And it is indeed an honour to enter into this 
budget debate and to have an opportunity to talk a little bit 
about my family, about my constituency, the constituency that I 
have the pleasure of representing in this legislature, Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. And to talk about Central Services, and a little bit 
about my ministerial capacity and what is an important and 
maybe overlooked ministry in Central Services and how it has 
the ability to help fund other ministries. We all know that in the 
Sask Party our top priorities are health care, education, and 
social services. And indeed we all work towards that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about my family. 
They are the ones that enable me to do my job. And certainly 
my children Carter and Paige, when I was first elected to the 
Legislative Assembly, they were 3 and 5 years old. So they 
were very young and didn’t really understand what Dad was 
doing and why Dad was away from home so much. 
 
But over the years, you know, now they’re 20 and 18. Carter is 
in third year university at University of Saskatchewan, a 
member of the Huskie track and field team and taking business 
in university. And really coming to understand, I think, the 
issues that are facing our province even at his young age, and 
certainly using that to help him with his studies and his 
learning. 
 
Paige is in grade 12 and so it’s an interesting time at our house 
with all the drama that comes with having a daughter in grade 
12 and in her final year of high school and looking forward to 
graduation. And she had an opportunity to go on a trip with her 
school to Italy over Easter, so she had an opportunity to see a 
little bit of the world and to understand and appreciate what we 
have here back in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
[20:45] 
 

Trish, my wife, had a chance to be here in the legislature just 
last week to watch the budget first-hand and to see the excellent 
job that our Finance minister has done. Trish is running her own 
business and things are working out very well. 
 
So I thank all of them for giving me the opportunity to serve the 
people of Saskatoon Willowgrove and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and to do a job that I love, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I certainly enjoy every day coming to work. No two days are 
the same, as all members know, and there certainly is a 
challenge each and every day what comes before you. 
 
Before I get too far into my speech, I want to talk about my 
constituency assistants, Barb and Jenny, and Jacquie who helps 
out as well. Barb and Jenny are located in the office and are 
certainly able to provide service to anyone who comes in or 
emails. They take great pride in getting back to constituents 
very quickly and working with ministers’ offices and ensuring 
that those questions get answered in a prompt and direct 
fashion. So I thank Barb and Jenny for that. Jacquie does my 
newsletter and it goes out to some 12,000 people not only here 
in Saskatchewan, not only constituents, but really people 
around the country and beyond. And they have an opportunity 
to learn a little bit about Saskatchewan through the newsletter, 
and I feel it’s a great way to communicate. So I thank Barb, 
Jenny, and Jacquie for that. 
 
The constituency of Saskatoon Willowgrove, it often mirrors 
what’s happening in our province. It’s a thriving, growing 
constituency. It’s one that has infrastructure needs and those 
needs are being met. In the last number of years we had four 
new schools into the Saskatoon Willowgrove constituency. And 
we’ve seen people from around the world, as they come and 
make Saskatchewan their home, settle in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Willowgrove. And that’s very exciting. 
 
When you meet people that have come to Saskatchewan, you 
learn their story of why they’ve come here to make a better 
future for their family. And what I really appreciate is the 
entrepreneurial spirit of those individuals. When they come to 
Saskatchewan they want to make a living. They want to thrive 
and they want to contribute to the economy of our province, and 
for that we say thank you to each and every one of those 
residents. 
 
Brand new neighbourhoods are sprouting up. Evergreen is one 
that is being populated very quickly and certainly one that I’m 
very proud to represent. Brand new neighbourhood of Brighton 
is one that in the last election, Mr. Speaker, there was a poll for 
Brighton but there was nobody that lived there. So at the end of 
the day, they had to combine that poll with another one. But 
over the last two years many, many dozens of houses have 
sprung up and there’s hundreds of individuals that live in that 
part of the thriving constituency of Saskatoon Willowgrove. 
 
You know, there’s a few challenges in the constituency right 
now. A new overpass is being built, and with that comes some 
of the challenges of commuting back and forth to work and 
some of the detours on the roadways. But that’s something that 
constituents will be certainly happy to live with. Because at the 
end of the day we’re going to see an infrastructure project, as 
many as we’re seeing around the province, certainly in 
Martensville and Warman and others in Saskatoon and Regina. 



3902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

We’re very, very fortunate. They don’t come without a cost. 
They’re very expensive, but we need that type of infrastructure 
to make sure that our growing population has an opportunity to 
continue to contribute. 
 
Not too long ago, I had the opportunity to stand in the 
legislature and pay tribute to the Humboldt Broncos on that 
very solemn day in the legislature, a very important day, and I 
think one that all of us as members will remember for quite 
some time. And you know, the tributes continue and the 
funerals are taking place and the celebrations of life continue to 
this day. Yesterday in my home city, Evan Thomas, they had 
the celebration of life for Evan and I saw . . . you know, 
SaskTel Centre was just filled with friends and neighbours and 
people who really care about those individuals. 
 
Xavier Labelle is a constituent of Saskatoon Willowgrove and a 
neighbour of mine just across the alley way, and I certainly 
wish him and his family all the best as I do for each and every 
one of the families and all those that are affected by the 
Humboldt Broncos tragedy. 
 
Certainly I want to comment on the Finance minister in 
representing the constituency of Humboldt and having the real 
fortitude to deliver the budget in very trying times. And she did 
a wonderful job in doing that, and for that I thank her very, very 
much. 
 
The budget as we all know is titled On Track, and that’s 
certainly what I’m hearing from people outside of this building. 
The Finance minister spoke to the chamber of commerce in 
Regina here very recently and certainly did a great job of 
talking about the highlights, and what I’m hearing back from 
that is that indeed this government and this Finance minister are 
on track. I know the Finance minister will be in Saskatoon very 
shortly and doing the same thing, talking to various 
stakeholders, and I hope they feel the same way about it. I know 
that they will. 
 
I know some highlights for me certainly are hearing . . . or in 
the legislature, the screening of young children and their 
hearing needs is something that I was very, very pleased to see, 
and I’ve received some emails about it. You know, the funding 
for autism, autism spectrum disorder came up in question 
period today and my seatmate had the opportunity to answer the 
opposition’s questions, and he stated the facts about autism in 
Saskatchewan. Under the NDP 2007, $500,000 went to autism 
funding. This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $8.55 million goes to 
autism, and that just shows the benefits of growth. 
 
You know, we always talk about why we want to grow this 
province, and certainly it is because we want to have more 
money to fund things like autism and autism spectrum disorder 
and other challenges that we have. And we are certainly leading 
the way in the country in many regards as I talk to people who 
are here to listen to the budget. 
 
I want to talk to you a little about, I made reference at the 
beginning about Central Services and the good work that 
Central Services does in ensuring that the government’s 
footprint is as small as possible, is as efficient as possible, and 
providing the opportunity for the private sector to do the work 
wherever they can.  

And when it comes to the CVA, central vehicle agency, the 
Finance minister had an opportunity in her speech to highlight 
some of the good work that’s being done in this ministry. The 
Ministry of Central Services entered into a pilot with the private 
sector, with Enterprise Rent-A-Car was the successful bidder. 
And certainly that pilot saved us $275,000, but not only that, 
they also provide the services in a better way, in a more creative 
way. So overall the reduction of the CVA fleet in the province 
has saved the government $5.155 million or a 14.7 per cent 
decrease across government CVA costs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I was minister, and certainly a 
credit to previous ministers, we looked at the cleaning services 
that were provided to government. And I know it was a 
somewhat contentious issue here and the opposition tried to 
make hay of it, but here’s the reality of it, Mr. Speaker. 
Taxpayers are now saving $3.5 million each and every year. 
Eleven companies are now supplying cleaning services to 
government buildings. New cleaning service contractors hired 
49 of the former employees. There were about 150 that were 
severed, and 49 of them came back as employees. Five of the 
13 contracted businesses are employee owned. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it shows that when you’re creative within 
government, when you look at, when you value each and every 
taxpayer’s dollar and you look for more creative ways of 
funding things, it can be a win-win situation. And that’s 
certainly what we’re seeing. Employees are now business 
owners and providing the same services, and certainly we’re 
seeing that. And the severances regarding that were paid in the 
’16-17 year. In the ’17-18 year we saved $3.5 million, and now 
in ’18-19 we’re going to save another $3.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on and on in this ministry. The executive 
air services, on March 16th, 2017 the decision was made — 
because of the drastic decline in use of our government air 
services, the executive air services — to sell the planes, to get 
away, to challenge ministers and all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to do without and to do things in a more efficient 
way. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re saving seven hundred to one 
million dollars each and every year. 
 
So it all adds up. When you talk about the $5 million from 
CVA, the 3.5 each year on cleaners, the executive air services 
— it goes up into the tens of millions of dollars. And that’s 
certainly a way that government can be responsible and help to 
fund health care and education and social services. The 
members opposite, they always, you know, they talk about 
wanting us to spend more and more and more, but we have to 
do it in a responsible way that’s responsible to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about investments in my home city of 
Saskatoon. And you know, very quickly, I know there’s many 
members that want to speak tonight: $331 million funding for 
the University of Saskatchewan; $18.3 million increase to 
support restructuring initiatives and implementation of a new 
strategic plan at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
College of Medicine; $6.8 million in operating and maintenance 
capital funding for St. Thomas More College; 148.6 in total 
operating and maintenance capital for Sask Polytech. 
 
When we look at highways and infrastructure, oftentimes you 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3903 

know, we talk about highways and we say how they benefit 
rural Saskatchewan, but they benefit urban Saskatchewan 
residents as well. When we look at highways, Highway 7, 
grading and twinning east of Vanscoy and west of Vanscoy; 
Highway 7, grading and twinning west of Vanscoy to Delisle; 
Highway 11, repaving south of Saskatoon; Highway 16, 
repaving east of Saskatoon, repaving west of Saskatoon, and 
rehabilitation near the Borden bridge and the North 
Saskatchewan River — that’s just a very few that impact on the 
residents of Saskatoon Willowgrove. And we’re very, very 
thankful and fortunate to see a record investment in highways in 
our province. 
 
You know, in my former ministry, I was minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport, so it’s an area that’s very dear to me. You 
know, we look at the Western Development Museum. We 
continue to fund museums across the province, and $4.2 
million. Wanuskewin Heritage Park continues to benefit from 
government investment of $600,000. 
 
And the Meewasin Valley Authority, you know, that’s one that 
. . . We’ve challenged the MVA [Meewasin Valley Authority] 
to see if they can become self-sufficient, if they can be creative 
and look at a way that they can not have to rely on government 
funding indefinitely. And they’ve asked for the time to be able 
to do that, and I’m pleased to say that our government, you 
know, along with Saskatoon City Council, the University of 
Saskatchewan, has said that we will partner with them to ensure 
that they are able to become self-sufficient in the near future. 
 
When we look at health care in Saskatchewan, $3.5 billion to 
the Saskatchewan Health Authority, some $5.3 billion overall. 
We’re very, very fortunate. And I know that there’s many 
health care workers that live in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Willowgrove, and I’m very, very pleased. 
 
You know, $20 million in this budget alone to fulfill the 
government’s commitment for the capital construction on the 
Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all 
members know that we’ve been waiting for so long, and this 
government, right from day one, was committed to the 
children’s hospital. We felt that it wasn’t right that just 
Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island are the only provinces 
that didn’t have a dedicated children’s hospital. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, soon that will change. And we continue to 
meet that challenge, not only for capital costs, but also for 
money to ensure that we have the specialists here. Dr. Laurence 
Givelichian is one that’s been committed for most of his career 
to see that this hospital is staffed up with the surgeons, the 
experts in the health care field that we need. And certainly this 
budget goes a long way to make sure that that’s been 
happening. 
 
[21:00] 
 
As the previous speaker before me, the member from 
Moosomin indicated STEP, increased investment in the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. I had an 
opportunity, again with previous responsibilities, to travel with 
individuals from STEP and to see them work first-hand and to 
hear from individuals and say, I wish we had a group like that 
in our province or in our country. So STEP continues to do a 
wonderful job for the people of Saskatchewan, and I’m very 

proud to see the increased investment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, I have an opportunity to talk in 
this legislature quite often, and I just want to, you know, 
highlight what I feel the highlights at the end of this budget are. 
A family of four in Saskatchewan pay no income tax on their 
first $50,495 of income. That’s the highest tax-free threshold in 
Canada. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s something that we 
should all be proud of, making sure that each and every dollar 
that Saskatchewan residents make and work so hard for, that 
they can keep as much of that as possible. And certainly a 
family of four keeping the first $50,000 is something that we’re 
very, very proud of. 
 
Over the last decade 62,000 new jobs were created in 
Saskatchewan, another thing that we can be very, very, very 
proud of. We removed 112,000 low-income people off the 
provincial income tax rolls. Now this is something that doesn’t 
come up in question period. It’s something that the opposition 
tends to ignore, and they don’t make this . . . But that’s 
something that we have an opportunity to celebrate here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan, residents have the second-lowest provincial 
tax and utility burden in the country at nearly every income 
level. Mr. Speaker, that’s something that we strive for as a 
government, to ensure that those taxes are as low as possible 
and they continue. Last year we enhanced our low-income tax 
credit by $100 per adult and $40 per child. Saskatchewan has 
the lowest sales tax of any province with a PST, and the PST is 
still exempt from basic groceries, prescription drugs, electricity, 
and natural gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to make sure that, you know, we’re committed to 
balance the budget, and we want to do that. And Saskatchewan 
people are telling me — and I know that they’re telling 
members on this side of the House, and I know they’re telling 
members on the opposite side of the House as well — that this 
government is on track. 
 
Average weekly earnings in January 2018 were $1,028.71, the 
third highest in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and above the 
national average of $995. Saskatchewan has the lowest sales tax 
of any province with a PST, and the PST is still exempt in many 
areas, as I’ve indicated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan under this government we will 
indeed . . . And I know that the Premier has talked about this 
and members of this side of the House have done it, and I think 
it’s so important. You know, you just need to take a trip outside 
the province and see what’s happening in the rest of the 
country. Saskatchewan will be the only province for now, 
because I think the support is going to be growing when we 
look at what’s happening in Alberta and Ontario and other 
places. I think that history will show that Saskatchewan led the 
way on this — we will not have a carbon tax, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that’s something I’m very, very proud of, and I 
know that members on this side of the House, certainly. 
 
So you know, with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve taken my 
time. I will certainly not be supporting the amendment that the 
individuals opposite have put forward, but I will be supporting 
the budget that was brought forward by the member from 



3904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Humboldt and seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly and 
eloquently debated by members on this side of the House. So, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you for this opportunity for me to 
enter into this debate, and I look forward to the vote very 
quickly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — I want to congratulate the Speaker on his new 
position, and I can honestly say that he’s the best one that I’ve 
ever had. Congratulations to our new Premier on the role that he 
has in this province. From all that I’ve seen of him, he’s an 
honourable man with a big heart, at the centre of which is his 
family and the people of this great province. 
 
I must admit it was a huge statement when he showed up the 
first day of his new position in Melfort to support us in our 
campaign and went to a Mustangs game. So he’s a Premier of 
the people. 
 
I want to congratulate the new Leader of the Opposition as well. 
He’s doing a good job there. Congratulations to the member 
from Swift Current. I can say for sure your aunt is very proud of 
you. And the new member at Kindersley, he set the bar high 
with a new record, 88 percent. A little bit of gloating going on, 
but that’s good. 
 
It’s a privilege to stand in this House today, Mr. Speaker, 
representing the people of my constituency. It’s a very sobering 
thought to think that the people that raised me and taught me 
have now sent me to represent them in Regina, and I am 
humbled by that. On their behalf, I’m going to tell you that I 
will be supporting the budget but not the amendment made by 
the NDP. But I will speak a bit to the budget and I want to, 
before I do that, just thank some very important people in my 
life, Mr. Speaker, some who have sacrificed a lot so that I could 
be here tonight. 
 
First of all though, I want to thank the people of my 
constituency and all the people from my hometown. I grew up 
in Melfort. That was where I went from K to 12 [kindergarten 
to grade 12] and yet it’s the people in the other communities 
around — Gronlid, St. Brieux, Lake Lenore, Quill Lake, all 
these kinds of places — I’m looking forward to the opportunity 
to get to know each and every one of them. 
 
You know, I want to thank Mr. Kevin Phillips and his wife, 
April. You know, I remember back in the days I lived in 
Albania and, you know, it was a strange country, Mr. Speaker. I 
was the first person that most people in any village had ever 
seen from outside of their own country. And I remember after 
the rainy season, the roads were all washed out. There were no 
maps, and so I had to look for footprints to find the villages, to 
find the people.  
 
And you know, everywhere I go in my constituency, I’m 
finding the footprints of the one who went before me, and that’s 
Kevin Phillips. And it always seems to lead to great places — to 
seniors’ homes, to fundraisers, to people in need. You know, he 
was the kind of guy who stood for the community, who stood 
for the people, and I’m looking forward to walking in his 
footsteps, Mr. Speaker. And April, I want to again thank her for 

her blessing. 
 
I want to mention one of the other MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] from our constituency too, Rod 
Gantefoer. I really appreciate he and Carole have moved back 
to our constituency and to our town. He is able to mentor me 
and teach me the things that he was strong in. I really appreciate 
his support. 
 
Peggy Gordon, our CA, you know, I don’t know what I would 
have done without her. Really we had no one left to show us 
what to do. Everything was in disarray, and Peggy really helped 
me find my feet. 
 
Six months ago, the last thing I thought I would be was the 
MLA for our constituency here standing in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I just want to mention some people who 
supported me through the campaign, and they basically just hit 
the ground running through the nomination into the campaign. 
Kevin and Jodi Graham, good friends of mine; they moved in; 
they built a house next door to my wife and I, and that was 
providence. You know, he’s one of the most organized, 
well-spoken people that I know. And we joked. I said you 
couldn’t run a donkey and win, and I guess he proved me 
wrong. 
 
So you know, Jodi and the kids, they did so much as well, 
coming along with my kids and my wife, and I appreciate them 
very much. Pattie and Tim Draude, kids of two past MLAs in 
this caucus, Rod Gantefoer and June Draude, they’re a great 
match and I appreciate them very much. When it came time, 
Pattie . . . She caved in. She told me she wouldn’t be my 
campaign manager but when she saw Kevin would co-lead with 
her, she submitted to it and I appreciate them very much. 
 
Zach and Brandi Moskal looked after all the finances. Rob and 
Tanya Moulton, they looked after everything else. Tim 
Highmoor from here, I just want to say that’s one of the 
toughest, most committed guys I’ve ever met. Kaitlin Blackmer, 
just crazy organized. All of the MLAs who came door to door, I 
thank them very much. I noticed even some of the ones from 
across the floor were in my town knocking on the doors, and 
I’m not sure what they said about me and my party, but I’m 
sure they were good things — guessing . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Good things about Kevin. There you go. So 
thank you for that. 
 
Darlene Campbell, the Swift Current MLA understands. There 
is a political junkie, I think we could say. If it wasn’t for her, I 
don’t think the last three MLAs from our constituency would 
have got in. Tom Healey, a great friend and a mentor for me. 
 
And you know, my mom and dad, what can I say about them 
other than you don’t realize how much your parents love you 
and how much sacrifice they have for you in your life until you 
have your own kids and become a parent yourself. I just want to 
thank them for all of their support for me in my whole life and 
especially through this process. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, others have done a lot but most of 
all I’d like to recognize my wife and my kids. They’ve put up a 
lot over the years and I am very thankful for them. My wife — I 
imported a beautiful girl from Manitoba, Mr. Speaker — and all 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3905 

my friends tell me that I married up and I agree with them 
wholeheartedly. I thank God for blinding her eyes momentarily. 
 
There’s a lot of talk here in the House, Mr. Speaker, about the 
population growth in Saskatchewan, and I just want to say that 
my wife and I have done our part to help out with those 
statistics. We’ve increased our family by 300 per cent in the 21 
years of our marriage and are very thankful for all six of our 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a son, Joel, living in Kindersley finishing 
up his level 3 power engineering. And he’s going to fulfill my 
obligation I made to his mom to build her a house this summer. 
We sold ours before this all happened, and I made a promise. 
So he’ll be building a house this summer. 
 
We have three teenaged daughters after that, and things are 
always exciting around our house. My first daughter, Mary 
Jane, she’s moving here to Regina to take dental hygiene and 
I’m looking forward to having her here. She’s going to look 
after me, I’m sure. Our second daughter is Sara, now in grade 
11. She’s my joyful conscience who keeps her dad in line if I 
get a bad attitude. And then we have a girl, Rachel. She’s in 
grade 9, full of life and laughter. And then I have a son David 
who waits for me at the door with a football every Thursday to 
get back from Regina, and he’s keeping me in shape running 
patterns for him. Finally, Mr. Speaker, my wife tells me that 
this is our last child. It’s our daughter Hanna. She’s in grade 1, 
and she’ll always be her daddy’s little girl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my first budget, and it’s funny that I had a 
little experience before it was revealed to the province. I 
thought it was a pretty neat deal to get a peek behind the curtain 
and be able to see the budget before it was presented. So me 
and the other two newbies were brought in and shared the 
budget there. And you know, some people talk about what 
about this heartless cuts or heartless taxes from our side of the 
House. And so I saw a little bit of that with the tax on used 
vehicles. 
 
I, because of the six kids, drive what my children call a 
Hutterite van. And so I had a deal lined up, Mr. Speaker, to buy 
a hybrid car. I thought it would be great and had a good deal. I 
was going to transfer the money that night. My wife was going 
to pick it up the next morning. And our heartless Finance 
minister told me at the end of that meeting, so now that you’ve 
heard the budget, none of you will be able to buy a used car 
until after the budget’s revealed. 
 
So I’m looking forward to paying the tax on that used car, Mr. 
Speaker. But you know, I wouldn’t call it heartless, Mr. 
Speaker, because, you know, I’ve been in a spot where I 
couldn’t afford the newest of vehicles, and my son is in that 
spot today. And I know he just happened to buy a car for 
$4,900. And for those who can’t afford the tax, Mr. Speaker, we 
can see the heart of the government in providing cars without 
tax for those who can’t afford it. 
 
Concerning the budget, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak at it 
from a personal perspective and from a perspective of those in 
my constituency. And personally I’m proud to be part of the 
Saskatchewan Party and believe that our Finance minister, 
though it was a very difficult time in her life, did a great job in 

presenting a good, a very good budget for this time. 
 
We all should have guiding principles in our life that filter the 
decisions and the choices that we make. Otherwise, Mr. 
Speaker, we can get pretty far off track. It’s very natural to 
judge ourselves by our intentions and others by their actions, 
Mr. Speaker. But having time to reflect and judge ourselves 
according to our guiding principles, it’s an important part of 
life. 
 
And you know, I normally carry the . . . I’m a card-carrying 
member. I left mine at home though, and asked around our 
caucus office, anybody got a card? And so Kimberley Rathwell 
is the one actual card-carrying member in the caucus office. 
And so I’m going to read some of the guiding principles. It 
says: 
 

Economic growth and job creation through the private 
sector, not government, as the engine of the economy; 
 
Smaller, less intrusive, more efficient government; 
 
Steady, gradual reduction in government spending and 
taxation while maintaining a firm commitment to balanced 
budgets; 
 
. . . A strong social safety net which protects those who 
truly need support while encouraging individuals to 
become self-sufficient. 

 
[21:15] 
 
If we didn’t follow these guiding principles, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know. These principles are clearly seen in the budget 
that’s been presented. I’ve always tried to spend less than I’ve 
earned, to save all that I can, and to share when someone needs 
help, when I see a need. Those principles have served me well 
so far, Mr. Speaker, and I see them in this government’s 
principles as well. They have a budget plan that is on track to 
get back to balanced. 
 
I’m willing to guess one or two of us over the years have had 
unforeseen shortfalls or expenses in our personal lives. We’ve 
maybe had to put an expense, car repair on a credit card that we 
didn’t have the money to cover. And yet we had to work hard to 
get back to the place where that credit card was paid off. But we 
also have debt, healthy debt that’s not reactionary to our 
circumstances, debt like our mortgages that we systematically 
plan. And that’s one thing that I hope the members across the 
floor understand. You know, there’s good debt and there’s bad 
debt. 
 
That’s why I’m glad to be a part of this government, who seems 
to have the same guiding principles that I do. Though their 
responsibility is so much more vast than any of us individually, 
I believe we have leaders who treat other people’s money as if it 
was coming out of their own pocket, and they treat debt to the 
same degree as they would treat their own personal debt. 
 
I spent some time, Mr. Speaker, with people in our own 
constituency after the budget was released and I was glad to see 
that, though there was an acknowledgement that things are tight 
. . . And it reminded me of a picture I’d once seen. It was from 



3906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

the ’30s and a couple of farmers are standing in their field and 
they’re awfully thin. One has straw in his mouth, and they’ve 
both got their belts pulled in and there’s six loops hanging out 
the bottom, and the gophers’ holes were above ground. And the 
one farmer said to the other, he said, well I guess we’ll just have 
to tighten our belts a little. 
 
And though there was an acknowledgement that things may be 
a little bit tight, there was an overall consensus from the 
business people, the educators, farmers, retirees, doctors, 
nurses, students, and families in general, that they appreciate 
what our government is doing to balance the budget. We’re glad 
this government is committed to staying on track to balance. 
There’s a security and assurance that comes from being fiscally 
conservative through difficult times even though the initial 
desire is to keep spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a community where, if it wasn’t for 
the farmers, none of us would be there. The four RMs that line 
up at Melfort grow enough grain and oil seeds to manufacture, 
to bake bread, to give a loaf of bread for every single home in 
the GTA [Greater Toronto Area] every single day of the year. 
So those farmers in my area feed the GTA. 
 
And you know when I was born in 1971, a bushel of wheat was 
how much? $5. A bushel of wheat was $5. Today, what’s a 
bushel of wheat? $5. You know things are tight. Things are 
tough, but we in Saskatchewan prairies are resilient and we can 
figure things out. We don’t need the government to step in and 
help us out in every way. We believe in small government — 
less intrusive, more efficient. 
 
We believe that economic growth and job creation should come 
through the private sector. I spoke to some businessmen in our 
constituency, two men specifically that employ about 1,000 
people together. And so I asked them what they thought, and it 
was interesting to see that they wholeheartedly agreed with a 
quote from the Saskatchewan Construction Association that 
says: 
 

Finally, for a budget based on private sector growth, the 
government has done an excellent job of staying out of the 
way of private sector’s . . . on the road to growth. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this country was not built by the 
government. This country was built by pioneers and people who 
got together and looked after the needs of one another. We built 
our schools. We built our roads. We built our barns. And we did 
that together. I’ve watched in my own constituency. In times 
when you need to tighten your belt, you’ve got to look to your 
people. 
 
And in the town of Melfort we wanted to see something for the 
people. We saw a lot of single moms, a lot of people who had 
both parents at work. And they would take their child out of 
school and they would take them to the doctor, and they’d wait 
in that doctor’s office, and they would find that the doctor 
would be at the hospital. And the doctor wouldn’t come back, 
so they’d have to take their child back to school and go back to 
work and make another appointment. So we talked with one 
another and we said, you know, what we really need to do is we 
need to get a clinic attached to the hospital, so that those doctors 
when they go to check their patients, they can go in, they can 

check their patients, and they can be right back. 
 
So I am glad to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of our 
community came together with business and they built a clinic 
without the government’s help, and we housed those doctors. 
Made in Saskatchewan, made-in-rural-Saskatchewan solutions 
for rural Saskatchewan problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget has done many great things for our 
community. It’s not just the people looking after themselves. 
We’ve repaved many . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Am I at 18 
minutes? Wow. And I am done. Wow, how did 18 minutes go 
by so quick? So anyways, they’ve paved some roads. Fifteen 
per cent extra, they’ve given us the PMR, which is looking after 
our school buildings — 15 per cent. You know, putting on 
roofs, you know, when you can’t afford to build a new . . . 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of money’s been spent by the 
government in my constituency. People are thankful. People are 
happy. And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, when it comes time, 
I stand and I’m going to vote in support of our budget and not 
for the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As everybody 
would say, it’s always a privilege to stand in this House and 
enter into the debate. It’s hard to believe; I think this is number 
18 or 19. Not that I’ve entered into each debate, but we’ve been 
able to be here and listen to that many budgets, and that’s really 
quite a scary number when you think about it. I never believed 
that I would be here for that many, but here I am. 
 
I want to just first of all comment on the three new members on 
this side: the member from Swift Current, who spoke yesterday; 
the member from Kindersley, who spoke earlier today; and now 
the person that I have to follow, the member from Melfort. And 
what an amazing job that all three of those have done. I can tell 
you, I can tell you back in ’99 when there was 17 of us doing 
our maiden speech, they were not nearly that solid, and we got 
the party to this point. Can imagine where the party’s going to 
be with people like that taking it from here on in? So 
congratulations to them. They did a great job. And I was really 
sad to hear that your time had run out because you certainly 
could have taken some of my time. It’d be a lot more 
entertaining than what I have to say. 
 
I do want to, as many members have talked about, is talk a little 
bit about my constituency. Then I’ll talk a little bit about . . . 
First I’ll talk a little bit of who I want to thank, then a little on 
the constituency, a little bit about the budget, and then my 
favourite part, going after the opposition. 
 
I’m going to try and hurry through the first four topics so I can 
spend a fair amount of time on that latter. I don’t know if I’ve 
ever spoke when I looked across and saw such a blank look on 
all the members’ faces on the other side. You know, there’s just 
no expression over there whatsoever. In fact, yes, it’s probably 
the best group of opposition I’ve seen any time that I’ve risen in 
this House. But okay, anyway, back to the matter at hand. 
 
I’m very blessed, as we all would say, that we get to represent 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3907 

one of the best areas in the province. I think I do, Indian 
Head-Milestone. Have had that opportunity since 1999 — 18, 
19 years going on. Great people, amazing people. Mainly deals 
with agriculture until you go to the very north of that 
constituency in the Qu’Appelle Valley and the people up and 
down the lakes and really the resort area of Fort Qu’Appelle, 
because it’s a four-season resort area. Whether it’s a ski hill in 
the wintertime or the lakes in the summertime, great location. 
But great, great people up and down that area and all 
throughout the constituency. I’m very blessed to represent 
them. 
 
I’m also blessed to have such a strong — as many people have 
said — constituency assistant, Nicole Entner-McCullough, who 
has been my constituency assistant since 2007 and does a great 
job every day in the office dealing with the constituents. And 
we’re very, very fortunate. Don’t have a lot of complaints. 
Some issues every so often that we can help work through, but 
generally, you know, very self-supporting constituents that 
don’t look at government as a solution. They look at what can 
they do as a solution as opposed to turning to government and 
saying, what can government do to get me out of my problem. 
And so we’re very, very fortunate. But I’m also — again as I 
said, having Nicole run the office — very fortunate. 
 
I want to thank Cindy, my wife. Of course as we all have said: 
you don’t get here on your own, and you certainly don’t remain 
here on your own. You need support at home. 
 
I’m not sure whether the boys know I’m an MLA though. They 
probably aren’t really following my career very much, and I 
don’t know why that would be. They seem to have their own 
career going on. And it’s interesting, because of course they, 
you know, if you would measure success by recognition or high 
profile, they’ve been fairly successful. They’ve made quite a 
name for themselves, both of them, whether it’s in the 
competition side or on the media side. But on a regular basis I’ll 
run into somebody that knows a heck of a lot more of what 
they’re doing than what we do, what Cindy and I do at times. 
Because of Instagram or whatever else that people follow them, 
they seem to know what the boys are doing more than what we 
do. 
 
I just want to briefly say — and I haven’t had a chance publicly 
really to talk much about it, not that I don’t know if anybody 
would really be interested — but just a little bit about the 
Olympic experience. It is, you know, just a rare occasion that 
you can go to an event like that and not only just go to an event 
like that and take the Olympics in, but also then to see one son 
compete and the other one be in the broadcast industry, which I 
mean . . . Wow, CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]? 
Really, Craig? But no, they’re covering the Olympics. So to see 
him cover . . . And it was really quite an amazing experience.  
 
But I think it would be much more fun if you could go there 
without people involved, because when you have someone 
involved the pressure, and especially when the person would go 
in, like Mark went in as probably a favourite, as the favourite to 
bring home a medal for Canada. And you just . . . And I 
remember four years ago how the pressure was so intense. And 
I don’t know what he felt; I didn’t really care what he felt, but I 
felt the pressure as parents. 
 

And you know, when you’re going in as the favourite there’s 
only one place to go. You can win and do what is expected of 
you, or you may not win and the letdown, and certainly there’s 
that feeling. But what I would say, my real thought on the 
Olympics is any person that can go and compete at that level is 
an amazing person, an amazing athlete that’s had to go through 
an awful lot to get to that point. If you’re fortunate enough to 
compete in the Olympics and land on the podium, it is 
absolutely amazing because of all that needs to be gone 
through. 
 
And we certainly had it happen in our family with Mark, you 
know, being in that serious accident about a year before and 
then landing on the podium in the slopestyle. But for those that 
finish on the top of the podium the stars absolutely have to 
align, and every person that walks out of that competition with 
a gold medal, or team that walks out of those competitions that 
happen once every four years with a gold medal, you know it 
just is awe-inspiring to think of what they have had to go 
through to get to that point, all that had to happen that day to 
make that happen. 
 
You know, I can say that Mark ended up with a bronze in the 
slopestyle, which was great. He was favoured going into the big 
air. He had great warm-ups. He had great two days before. He 
was on top of his game. And for those that’ll say well, you 
know, he was injured, he would not say that because none of 
those factors contributed to his result. It was just that day he 
wasn’t on. And for somebody to end up on the top of the 
podium once every four years in the Olympics is an absolutely 
amazing feat. 
 
So what I would say also, probably the hardest-working person 
that I saw there was Craig. He was very, very busy not only 
calling the snowboard events, but also hosting an evening show 
with Kelly VanderBeek as well as then doing interviews on the 
side with athletes for the other interest stories that he was 
conducting. 
 
So, you know, you think you would go there and you would see 
your kids — we were there for 15 days in South Korea — that 
we would see the boys a fair amount. And we really didn’t see 
them at all. We had lunch a couple of times with Craig and 
really didn’t see Mark very much at all. So it really is not a 
family holiday. It was cold. It was windy. There was very little 
English spoken. It was really tough to get around. The logistics 
were really, really difficult. But other than that, it was a really 
great experience. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Now to the budget. I don’t know if anybody’s keeping track. I 
forgot to start my clock. So how far have I gone now? Five 
minutes probably. So the budget. You know, this budget, I 
really think the title says it all — it’s On Track. The province is 
on track; the government is on track. And I think anybody that 
looks at this budget in isolation is making a great mistake 
because this isn’t a budget that can be looked at in isolation. 
This is part of a three-year package of budgets: last year being a 
very difficult budget; this one perhaps not quite as difficult; and 
next year getting back to balance. 
 
Because I think all of us in this House have the responsibility, 



3908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

and especially the members on the opposite side of the House 
have the responsibility of first of all answering this question: do 
you believe that a province should run a balanced budget? 
Because if you don’t, then deficits are okay, because deficits are 
okay in many other provinces right now. Alberta will say yes; 
it’s eight and a half billion dollars in debt. We’re not sure when 
we’re going to get out of a deficit position — maybe in five 
years; maybe in 10 years — with no plan to get out. And right 
now what is really scary . . . Because it’s our tax dollars too, 
even though we’re not the government federally, but it’s our tax 
dollars to have a federal government that is spending money 
with no idea of how to get out of deficit. 
 
Now difficult decisions were made last year, absolutely. And 
there was some tax increases and there were some budgets, you 
know, maybe cuts to some, not maybe quite as drastic as what 
the opposition tries to make it out. But those tough decisions 
had to be made because fundamentally our government believes 
that deficit budgeting is not okay, that deficit budgeting cannot 
go on year after year after year. We have to have a plan, and it’s 
a three-year plan to get to balanced budget. 
 
That’s why this On Track is so important. It’s not a siding, track 
siding. It is the long track. It’s the long road. First year, difficult 
decisions. This year, maybe not quite so bad — no tax 
increases, increased spending on a lot of areas. But more 
importantly, it keeps us on track to be at balance next year, 
which puts the province in a very good position. Let’s hope the 
commodities turn around, seeing oil prices increase. Let’s hope 
commodities turn around, that it will loosen the pressure off a 
little bit. But if it doesn’t, the projections in this budget, put 
forward by the Minister of Finance and cabinet and the Sask 
Party as a whole, will have us in a very good position 
generations ahead. 
 
And you know, it’s not . . . when you listen to the opposition, 
day in and day out, you’d almost think or swear that we weren’t 
spending any money. We have expenditures of $14.6 billion is 
our expenditure line in the budget. Now that’s . . . what’s $14.6 
million? That’s $40 million a day our government is spending. 
And when you listen to the opposition each and every day, 
number one, it’s not enough. You’d swear we’re not spending 
anything in health care or education. That is simply untrue: $40 
million a day to put us to a $14.6 billion expenditure budget. 
Spending in health care, spending in education — is it as much 
as what they want to spend? Absolutely not. 
 
But you know, I’ve been listening to the new Leader of the 
Opposition, and it’s interesting, his philosophy. His philosophy 
is spend, for sure, but the more you spend, the more you save. 
And that’s what his philosophy is. And it’s very evident when 
you look in the platform of that member, of the Leader of the 
Opposition, which they all support now because that is their 
leader, even though I know a lot of the members on that side 
had somebody else in mind for a leader. I think there was only 
one caucus member that was supporting, but all 11 members on 
that side now support a document like this, which is $2.5 billion 
a year. And you know, so that’s just a typical idea of how you 
can spend your way to save money. 
 
I understand the philosophy, and there’s a couple of members 
here that have been Health ministers, and you’ll have a lot of 
groups come in and they’ll say, you know, if we can spend here 

and spend here, we’ll save here. You can continue to spend and 
in theory, it makes, you know, it kind of makes sense. But until 
you . . . the reality, there just is not enough money to spend to 
get to that point. 
 
You have to make those decisions of what is feasible in a 
balanced budget, and I think that’s what the government has 
done very, very well, whether it’s the spending in health care 
and the continuation of infrastructure projects that are going to 
be legacy projects for this province, a province that has never 
had a children’s hospital — only one other one in the nation 
that didn’t have a children’s hospital — a legacy project here in 
Saskatchewan as a children’s hospital. The facility in North 
Battleford, I remember touring it many times. And that is a 
legacy hospital, a new psychiatric hospital in North Battleford. 
The other one was over 100 years old. That’s the spending that 
is being done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ensure that we have the 
infrastructure moving forward. Those are just a couple of 
examples in health care. There are many in education I could 
talk to. 
 
Certainly the east Regina bypass is a legacy project for this 
province. This isn’t a one-year or one-term project. This is a 
legacy project that will increase the efficiency of traffic flow 
around this city, into the GTH, out of the GTH, connecting the 
national highway system. It is a project that, quite frankly, if the 
NDP were in power and they wanted to go back to the original 
drawing of perhaps three bypasses and then connecting into the 
Ring Road . . . That’s what, when they talk about $400 million 
. . . That project is not even . . . should be just completely wiped 
off the map because it just doesn’t make sense. And the project, 
the legacy project, the east Regina bypass, certainly does. 
 
But I think, you know, I could go on and on about all the 
benefits of the budget, and there’s certainly many more that I’m 
just touching. So many members have spoke so well about, you 
know, the expenditures that we have put in place, the fact that 
there’s no tax increases and how important that is. The whole 
piece around the carbon tax, I think each and every one of us on 
this side could spend our 15 minutes on why there shouldn’t be 
a carbon tax. I wish each member on that side could stand up 
and debate that, why they think there should be a carbon tax, 
because it would be extremely detrimental. 
 
But I really think that after the budget and listening to the critic, 
who is here now — I’m glad to see that she’s here — after her 
comments after the budget . . . Now I realize that, you know, 
the room is full and it tends to be a little bit of a partisan group. 
There tends to be I think probably a little bit more, few more 
Sask Party supporters than NDP. Mind you, in most rooms in 
this province there’ll be a little more Sask Party supporters than 
there’ll be NDP supporters. 
 
But it was really interesting to hear the — and other members 
have talked about it — but to hear the member from 
Humboldt-Watrous talk about the budget and then the critic get 
up and completely be on the exact opposite page, and watching 
the faces of so many of the supporters. And a lot of them were 
our supporters, and so I can understand that. 
 
A lot of them certainly were neutral — the cities, the RMs, 
SARM, and the construction association — a lot of those people 
that were neutral and talking to them after, they really kind of 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3909 

questioned what did that critic listen to. Did they listen to the 
same budget? And I know, you know, there’s spin on both 
sides. They’ll go, the opposition will spin it one way and we’ll 
spin it the other. But when you’re spending $40 million a day or 
$14.6 million and then you hear the critic stand up and talk the 
way she did. You know, the only person that I really saw 
clapping heartily at the end of that was Don Cody with his 
orange from Prince Albert; he thought it was a great speech. So 
she did have one supporter in the room, but the rest of the 
people I think certainly questioned it. 
 
The other thing that I find interesting, really quickly, with the 
member, the Finance critic for the NDP . . . We’ve talked about 
the document that their leader has put forward and we’ve said it 
was $2.5 billion, $2.5 billion a year. And every so often she’ll 
say, how did you cost that. We don’t think that’s right. Well if 
it’s not 2.5, what is it? 1.5? 2 billion? They will not cost their 
own document. 
 
So my point to the opposition is, I think they have done a 
marvellous job over the last 11 years in opposition. I think 
they’ve got a long ways to go yet to get better at it, Mr. 
Speaker. I think they’ll be there for sure another eight years. 
I’m predicting another 12 to 16 years on that side, and I think 
by that time they’ll have it down. I think they’ll be pretty good 
at opposition by that time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you can’t be irresponsible in opposition and 
put out a document like this without costing. It’s absolutely 
irresponsible. And if you want to talk about why they’re not 
getting traction across the province . . . I was at a reception 
tonight, and there was a couple of them there. And after 
listening to the opposition speeches and the doom and gloom in 
this province that it must be in if you listen to their speeches, 
and then you go to a reception and you talk to the business guys 
. . . Is it as robust as it was three or four years ago? Absolutely 
not. Is it better than it was 10 years ago? Absolutely. And 
they’ll say it person to person to person, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has a long ways to go to get 
credibility, and it starts tomorrow when they’re going to vote 
for their amendment which none of us will, Mr. Speaker. 
Because what they should be doing is voting for the budget 
because that’s what I’m going to be doing. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, mister deputy deputy speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to rise this evening and contribute my thoughts to 
the budget. Because I’m entering into this debate fairly late in 
the lineup, I’ve had the . . . well I would want to say privilege 
but I’ve heard a lot of folks on the other side, so I don’t know if 
it was necessarily a privilege or if I’ve done something terrible 
in a past life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But in any event I’ve had the 
opportunity to hear many, many speeches from both sides of the 
Chamber, and it helps. It’s hard to have new things to add, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I will do my best this evening. 
 
I do want to join colleagues on both sides of the Chamber to 
pay my respects and let all know that my thoughts are with all 
of those impacted by the Humboldt bus tragedy. We know that 
it’s impacting many people, not just families and friends, and it 

hurts them in a way that I don’t think anyone else can really 
relate to, but it is a tragedy that reverberates throughout the 
entire province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I do want to take the opportunity as well to welcome to the 
Chamber the members from Melfort and Kindersley and Swift 
Current who have all done their maiden speeches over the last 
two days, and I hope that their experience in the House is 
everything that they thought it would be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I do also want to take this opportunity to thank those who allow 
me to do the work that I have the honour of doing in this House, 
including my loved ones, my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
sacrifice a lot so I can be here, and I do very much appreciate 
that. I also want to thank my constituency assistant, Nathaniel. I 
know a lot of folks on both sides have taken the opportunity to 
thank their constituency assistant and I want to do the same. 
He’s been working with me since I was elected in 2016 and 
before that he was a friend, and surprisingly to me he continues 
to be one even though he is now my constituency assistant. As 
if we don’t spend enough time together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re also gym buddies. Three times a week we get up early in 
the morning and we go to LG Fitness, which is a good Douglas 
Park business. Actually the owner, Leslie Genoway, I just 
noticed was nominated for a YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association] Women of Distinction Award. 
 
And I’m sure members opposite aren’t surprised to know that 
Nathaniel and I are going to the gym, because my muscles are 
essentially bursting out of my blazer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 
I’m sure they’re happy to know which gym I’m attending so 
that they’ll all sign up soon. But don’t go to the 7 a.m. class. 
That’s my class and it’s my stress-relieving class, but 6 a.m. 
would be great time for folks if they’re looking for a way to get 
jacked like me and find a way to relieve some stress, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I do want to take some time, and I know my time is limited. 
I want to enter some of the thoughts that I have with respect to 
the budget, some of the concerns we’re hearing from 
stakeholders, and the concerns I’ve been hearing in particular 
from constituents, because if you’d hear the rhetoric and the 
spin from the other side, you would think that everything is 
fine. 
 
[21:45] 
 
And one of the things I was hearing a lot when I was walking 
around the rotunda on budget day and talking with stakeholders 
were stakeholders that were a bit deflated, that were 
disappointed by the budget, but as they were saying to me, not 
as disappointed as they were the year prior. And they didn’t 
necessarily want to speak as loudly as they did last budget 
because at least it wasn’t as bad as last year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that’s a real sad thing to hear from the folks who 
are doing such great work across our province, that if the 
government treats them bad enough, that they’ll take what they 
can get. 
 
So our job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in opposition is to be that 
voice and to help amplify that voice that we’re hearing from 
those folks. And I do want to read a few of the quotes into the 
record, because I heard quite a few quotes from the other side of 



3910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

folks who were saying that this is the greatest budget since 
budgets have ever existed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they’re 
failing to mention some of the other folks that we’re hearing 
from. 
 
The first one I want to read is Deena Kapacila, who is the VP 
[vice-president] of operations and finance for the University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And she 
said: 
 

Some students are coming to me saying they’re working 
two or three jobs. To tell them to get a fourth job to try to 
pay for university, it’s just not an option . . . We want to 
stay here, but that Sask advantage . . . seems to be leaving 
students behind . . . I don’t see a future for me here. 

 
Another one is from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
president Patrick Maze: “With more students and fewer 
teachers, today’s budget won’t make it any easier to meet the 
needs of students.” 
 
Here’s another one. Mark von Schellwitz who’s from 
Restaurants Canada said: 
 

The Saskatchewan government has not done enough to 
offset the pain of last year’s anti-foodservice budget . . . As 
a result of these tax increases, Saskatchewan restaurant 
sales were down by a staggering 4.5 per cent, resulting in 
the loss of 1,700 industry jobs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, 4.5 per cent in the restaurant industry is quite 
devastating. Their margins, profit margins, are often relatively 
small. So when you see a 4.5 per cent decline, that means 
closed businesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that means closed 
local businesses that are supporting local people, that are 
helping our local economy, that are hiring local folks, and that’s 
really devastating. And that’s one of the things I wanted to add. 
Members opposite don’t like it when we talk about the last 
budget and they don’t like how we talk about how this budget 
did nothing to offset the devastation that was in the last budget. 
And that’s important for us to continue talking about because 
those impacts are still very real for Saskatchewan businesses 
and Saskatchewan families. 
 
Another quote for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is from University 
of Regina president, Vianne Timmons. She said, “It isn’t 
keeping up with our pace of enrolment, and our costs that we 
can’t control, like increase in electricity, water, all of those 
costs. So it means we will have to look at cuts, for sure.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cuts to universities have been quite severe, in 
particular last budget. And it’s not being relieved by this 
particular budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This budget doesn’t get 
us back to where we were prior to 2017. So that’s still quite 
devastating. When we saw universities being forced to find 
ways of offsetting the cuts to their funding, they were cutting 
programs. They were cutting teachers. They were cutting 
professors, while at the same time we’ve seen tuition increase to 
a very staggering level, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what we’re 
hearing now is that’s not going to change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And we’ve heard from the minister in question period over the 
last few days. When she talks about this issue, she talks about 
finding other streams of funding for the universities and the 

universities need to be finding other ways of funding, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the important thing when we’re talking about the budget 
and we’re talking about these issues, budgets are — and other 
people have said it more eloquently than me — budgets are 
where you can see the values in a government. So what we see 
from this government are cuts to education, which means cuts 
to our future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Even the minister herself, she wasn’t talking about it in this 
respect, but was talking about how beneficial a university 
degree can be to that person who attains that university degree. 
And when we have students who are going . . . And we’re 
hearing more and more, students who are getting suitcases for 
their grade 12 graduations and being sent to other provinces for 
their university education because the tuition here is 
significantly higher than tuition in other provinces, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Let me read to you another quote. This one’s from Peter 
Gilmer, the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry, and he said: 
 

Even though vacancy rates are going up, we certainly 
know that rent is not going down. It will be a real disaster 
unless they significantly fill in the gap, and quite frankly I 
just don’t trust them to do that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and this is talking about one of the particularly 
most heartless cuts in this budget, which was the shutting down 
of the rental housing supplement program, which is really going 
to affect the most vulnerable. It’s pretty similar to the cut we 
saw last year to SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability], the changes that were made to SAID where the 
housing top-up would be not given to new recipients and would 
be cut if there were any changes. 
 
So I have constituents who call my office who are in precarious 
housing situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are living in, the 
best way I can say it is non-optimal living situations. They’re 
living in places that are not clean. You would not want your 
family member living there. But they are continuing to live 
there because they cannot lose that top-up. And they do not 
want to move because they will lose that top-up and they will 
not be able to find a place to rent. Because although vacancy 
rates are going up, the cost of living in these apartments is not 
going down. The cost of rent is not going down, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s the problem. 
 
And we hear members opposite chirp about the social housing 
vacancy rates, but we’re also hearing about social housing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as even that is being made unaffordable for 
those who need to use that. So when social housing is 
unaffordable, we have a very serious problem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Let me read another quote for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
from Anderson Auto Sales manager, Rod Dorn. “A lot of 
families have trouble affording vehicles as it is right now, and 
they’ve stretched their budget to the limit, so to add another 
$600 onto an automobile is going to make it tough for them,” 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3911 

And this is with respect to the recent change, the recent tax that 
the government made, the PST they’ve added to used car sales. 
And I’m trying to find — here we go — some quotes. This is an 
interesting turn that’s happened by this government, 
considering the then opposition leader at the time, Brad Wall, in 
2007 campaigned and advocated for removing PST on used 
cars. And when he did that, he said, “Saskatchewan people 
expect their government to do things that make sense and taxing 
the same car over and over every time it is sold just doesn’t 
make sense.” He also said, “A Saskatchewan Party government 
is committed to fairness and common sense in our tax system 
and will eliminate this form of double taxation,” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So again that’s another . . . They like to talk about how they 
didn’t raise the taxes this year, but we’re seeing yet again more 
PST expansion creep. We’ve also seen, similar to what we saw 
last budget, we saw one or two rollbacks but we’re still hearing, 
like I said, the devastation that the restaurant tax had or the food 
tax had on restaurants. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still hear about the devastation that the 
expansion onto construction has had on that industry, and as a 
result on our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And don’t forget 
the expansion on kids’ clothes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There was nothing in this budget to roll any of those provisions 
back. Instead we’re seeing a PST increase, PST expansion onto 
used cars. And now we’re hearing that SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] is going to be responsible for 
determining whether or not a private sale is at market rate or 
was at the appropriate evaluation, and then they are going to 
apply either the red book value or the sale value, whichever one 
was higher, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And hearing that sort of 
government interference from a Tory government is quite ironic 
to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to read another quote for you. This is Dave Nelson, 
Canadian Mental Health Association: “For the fourth year in a 
row, we have zero per cent.” And then another quote from him: 
“You cannot keep and maintain and attract professional staff if 
you keep losing every year,” Mr. Speaker. And he’s talking 
about the concerns about the lack of mental health dollars in 
this budget. And I do know that this is a very important issue on 
both sides of the House, and everybody has some experience, 
directly or indirectly, loved ones or otherwise, who’ve had 
challenges in mental health. And I do think that everyone 
knows that the concerns around access to mental health services 
is a real one and is experienced by many, many. 
 
But like I said, budgets are indications of values of a 
government, and this budget failed to match the federal mental 
health dollars, which frankly was surprising to me, Mr. Speaker. 
The way we were hearing in question period, the way the 
Minister of Health was talking, I was pretty sure that we were 
going to see a real influx in mental health dollars. So I don’t 
know what happened there. I don’t know what went wrong. It’s 
really unfortunate. Not only is it an important issue and it’s 
turning into a crisis not just in our province, but I would say in 
our larger community, in the country, but it also . . . You also 
see the effects that not adequately providing mental health 
services has, not just in Health but in many other ministries as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We see it in education, in the classrooms. When children don’t 
have access to support services, those strains fall on the teacher. 
And when we see cuts to education budgets, that problem gets 
compounded because those extra supports that are in the 
education sector that are meant to fill in the gaps for those who 
can’t access, for example, the health sector, are gone, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also see it in justice as well. The access to health care 
providers and mental health supports in our jails is dismal, and 
that’s an understatement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We should be 
ensuring that there is ample access because we don’t want those 
inmates back in jail again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to 
make sure that they’re not reoffending. 
 
I also have done a few ride-alongs with some police officers in 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I find that, and I’ve also heard 
but I’ve also saw, that police officers spend a lot of their time 
answering and responding to mental health calls, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And oftentimes that requires them to take an 
individual who is undergoing mental distress to the hospital. 
And they have to stay with them sometimes for upwards of 12 
hours because it can take that long to be able to see somebody, 
to access those services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s tying up 
our police resources — that should be out answering calls on, 
you know, matters of crime — in our health care sector. 
 
So when you fail to make these investments, it actually ends up 
costing more money in the long run. Because we see the 
devastation in education. We see the devastation in justice. We 
see the devastation in corrections and policing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[22:00] 
 
I already mentioned education already a little bit, but I do want 
to say that that was another one that I was actually expecting to 
see more of a rollback than we did this time around. It sounded 
in question period, the way the minister was talking, I totally 
thought that we would see funding, at a minimum, at the level 
that it was prior to 2017, back in 2016, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
What we instead saw was a $24 million shortfall from where we 
were in 2016. That’s not to account the thousands of more 
students we have coming into our system in 2018. 
 
And the members opposite talk like we should be thanking 
them for the $30 million they did put back into the system. And 
I think it’s best described by if the government took 20 bucks 
from me and then handed me 15 back, they’d expect some 
applause. But that’s not how that works in my world, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Or I know it’s also not how it works in the 
world of the members on this side of the Chamber. 
 
So because of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for all of the other 
reasons that I expressed, and many more that I would love to 
talk about had I had more time, I will of course be supporting 
the very reasonable and well-thought-out amendment that was 
put forward by my colleague, and I will not be supporting the 
budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 



3912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I get 
into talking about the budget, I’d like to acknowledge a few 
people over at my constituency, my family, and all the thanks 
for the support over the last few years here. 
 
First of all, I’d like to thank my wife for all the hard work and 
support, that she supports me through being here in the 
legislature; and for many years, my colleague, the minister from 
Wood River. The years in the municipal politics that I’ve been 
in, it’s been quite a few years and she kept the home fires 
burning. I’d like to mention one thing. I had a mixed-grain 
farm, which no longer is a mixed-grain farm. Over the years I 
spent in municipal government, the cows seemed to disappear. 
She wasn’t a real fan of doing chores. 
 
But also I’d like to thank my kids. My oldest, Nicole, and her 
husband, Eric, they live right outside the city here in Grand 
Coulee with my two grandsons, Kohen and Hudson. I’m very 
proud of Nicole. She’s a teacher. She’s on maternity leave right 
now. And Eric works for SaskEnergy. 
 
My son Burton and his wife, Audrey. He’s an RCMP officer. 
They’re actually nice and close to the city too. They are 
stationed out here right outside of White City. They were 
transferred from the northern community of Pelican Narrows 
down here. And my son is in general policing just outside the 
city, but is also on the ERT [emergency response team] team 
for the RCMP. And Audrey works in the crime department out 
of “F” Division at Depot. 
 
I have my youngest daughter, Brittany. She is in Lethbridge. 
She’s an RN working on becoming a nurse practitioner. 
Unfortunately she seems to be pretty stable right there. Hoping 
someday she’ll come back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Also I’d like to acknowledge the glue that’s in my constituency 
office. It’s Twila. Her family went through some devastating 
times last fall with the fires. Her son and her husband were 
caught in the fires and were within inches of losing their life. 
But the health care system within the province and within our 
neighbouring province of Alberta, both individuals survived 
and are doing quite well. Her son Evan has a long ways to go 
yet as far as his recovery. 
 
Also I’d like to acknowledge the voters of the Cypress Hills 
constituency for all the support that they’ve given me over the 
last little while. I’ve got to say it’s one of the best areas to 
represent. 
 
And I’d like to get into the speech for the budget. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my privilege to stand in support of the budget. This 
government has shown clearly that we are keeping 
Saskatchewan strong with the 2018-19 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I start talking about the budget, I want to 
take the time to acknowledge everyone that has been affected 
by the tragic accident within Humboldt Broncos. 
 
What an amazing province and country we live in. It has truly 
been amazing to see the support that has come from not only 
the community but from around the world. The acts of kindness 
and support truly make everyone believe in mankind. It shows 
how the country can pull together to support those during their 

time of need. It allows the families to have the support that is 
needed when their world has been turned upside down — the 
hockey sticks being put out with respect to the teams and their 
families, wearing the jerseys, and supporting the yellow and 
green. 
 
I personally have seen and have been part of an emotional 
devastation that has happened during the scenes of a tragic 
situation. I have witnessed and have been part of the 
communities when they’ve pulled together and reached out to 
support their neighbours, as they did when my constituency had 
those tragic fires in Burstall and Tompkins last fall. 
 
Volunteers came out to fight fires they have never witnessed 
before. In the aftermath, people prepared meals, worked 
countless hours, and laboured and helped above and beyond 
their own workloads. Side by side, everyone worked beside 
each other, many hands making lighter work for everyone 
involved. Companies, RMs, towns offered their services and 
equipment and manpower. These wonderful people and 
communities allowed the families that had been injured to take 
the time that was needed to heal and get their feet back 
underneath them. It strengthened our communities and brought 
people closer together and made them achieve things they never 
thought possible. 
 
It is hard to lose a loved one, to see them injured or hurt. There 
isn’t a manual to tell you how long it takes to heal. The only 
thing we do know is that it takes time. But eventually the hurt 
will lessen. Your lives are forever changed in the blink of an 
eye. Remember to take time to reminisce. Take time to stop and 
enjoy all the big and little things in your life. Continue to use 
the strength and support of those that surround you. Remain 
strong. Believe that eventually, time, things will get better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize all the front-line 
workers, nurses, doctors, EMS [emergency medical services], 
staff, police officers, and firemen who all stepped up to the 
plate to offer their level of expertise to those injured in this 
horrific accident. The professionalism in taking care of the 
injured and their families during this time of need was 
outstanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STARS also played big part in transportation of 
the injured on that tragic day. STARS, the Shock Trauma Air 
Rescue service, which has been operating in Western Canada 
providing highly specialized air medical services to the people 
for over 30 years, STARS offers a lifeline anywhere in our 
province offering advanced, quick health care services. STARS 
and the Saskatchewan emergency medical services system 
together provide services with quick emergency response times 
across the province. Mr. Speaker, it is a crucial link to rural and 
isolated areas and hope and life-saving transportation in a quick 
time frame to those that are injured or ill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has provided funding to STARS 
since 2012 for their annual operating costs. This government 
makes sure health care is provided to those in remote and 
isolated areas a priority. STARS has provided care to 2,200 
patients in the province since its start in Saskatchewan, 757 of 
those injured in 2015-2016 alone. The STARS flight team 
consists of advanced care paramedics, critical care nursing, and 
physician oversight which are also available on flights if 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3913 

required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government appreciates the rural fire 
departments, their staff, and their volunteers who help assist the 
STARS teams with landing and takeoff. Mr. Speaker, we are 
constructing new helipads to help serve the new Moose Jaw and 
children’s hospital. We need to continue to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people as the services for STARS continues to 
grow. 
 
I want to finish by saying STARS and all the other air 
ambulances are a key part of provincial network emergency 
medical services that include our ground and air first 
responders. Mr. Speaker, the government and the caucus have 
shown clearly that we are keeping Saskatchewan strong with 
the 2018-2019 budget. 
 
The job of every member of the Legislative Assembly is to help 
keep Saskatchewan moving forward and shaping the better 
province for today, tomorrow, and the future. This is a job we 
all take seriously. These decisions are what was needed to meet 
the challenges we are facing, and I believe that the end results 
will be what is needed to bring the budget to balance over the 
course of the next few years. 
 
The most important part of any budget is to keep the revenues 
and expenditures manageable. With the resource revenues 
declining over the last couple of years, our government is faced 
with economic and budgetary challenges in the 2018-2019 
budget. Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget continues to commit to 
moving away from relying on resource revenues and continuing 
to build a solid foundation using the revenues . . . resources 
during these challenging times. Our government will continue 
to do that and keep the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the financial strains, our government made tough 
decisions. We will continue to invest in our province’s future, 
keeping the deficit and the debt in control. Mr. Speaker, we still 
maintain infrastructure throughout our province. It will keep our 
economy growing, create jobs, making it easier to move 
products and sustain economic growth. Any investment that 
will benefit our province for years to come, improving quality 
of life for the generations to follow — these smart, strategic 
investments will help grow our economy and make 
Saskatchewan even a better place to call home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget contains a strong investment in 
education: 2.5 billion will be invested in programs and services 
to continue with supporting child care, early years, libraries, 
and pre-kindergarten to grade 12, investing in the future of the 
children of our province. The increases in funding will allow 
school divisions to invest at the classroom level, to invest in 
supporting our teachers and educational support staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education plays a great . . . [inaudible] . . . role in 
everyone’s lives. Getting a proper education is very necessary. 
It improves us with fundamental tools we’ll continue to use 
throughout our lives. Just like food is necessary to maintain a 
healthy body, education provides us with mental, physical, and 
social well-being, so we can be successful in our personal 
growth for the future. 
 

We as a government want to continue to ensure that we are able 
to provide important tools offering support and strength in 
classrooms for our children, our communities, and our province. 
Schools are the hearts of our communities. It provides stability 
within our communities. Mr. Speaker, the NDP closed 176 
schools during their time in power. 
 
Education is a fundamental part of the foundation of our 
province, and our government wants to make sure we are 
providing the right services in the right locations, using the best 
delivery options possible. 
 
We want to ensure education remains relevant and viable. Mr. 
Speaker, every year to continue to support the growth of child 
care spaces across the province, over the last 10 years we have 
added 8,500 new child care spaces, 70.5 per cent increase since 
2007. We continue to invest in our youth, our future, which we 
feel is very worthy of investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is dedicated to meeting the 
challenges before us, controlling and reducing spending, and 
ensuring our economy remains strong. As a government, we 
took the time to look at every area of service delivery, to every 
area of service delivered, to ensure that the resources are being 
used in the most effective and efficient manner. 
 
I want to point out that this government has been a leader in the 
field of health care since we took office in 2007, including a 
reduction of wait times and the increase in health care spending. 
Our government has shown not only does it benefit urban care 
centres, but also those in rural and remote areas in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, we have made significant improvements towards 
creating facilities, providing innovative services, and recruiting 
health care professionals throughout the rural and remote areas 
of the province. 
 
[22:15] 
 
In the area of physician recruitment for the province, the 
numbers speak for themselves. With increases in physicians 
from the previous government’s time in office, this is nearly 
750 more licensed physicians and over 3,400 more nurses. 
Saskatchewan lost more than 173 doctors and over 450 nurses 
during the previous government’s time in power during 2001 to 
2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was not only physicians and nursing that have 
increased since 2007. The number of specialized specialists in 
Saskatchewan has gone up as well. The Canadian Institute of 
Health Information even recognized Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, as one of the two provinces with the highest physician 
growth rates in the past five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government strongly supports resource-based 
industries. This year’s budget will see 1.5 per cent increase in 
the Ministry of Energy and Resources’ budget. The increase of 
750,000 will contribute to mineral development strategy to 
create an incentive to encourage further mineral exploration and 
development in the province. An additional $1 million will 
continue to support the integrated resource information centre, 
strengthening the province’s approach for pipeline regulations 
and safety. Mr. Speaker, supporting these incentives in the 
energy sector continues to strengthen and support our alliance 



3914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

with the oil and gas industry to ensure that we are continuing to 
operate safely within our province. 
 
We continue to invest in strategies to support and encourage the 
mining industry in the exploration of minerals throughout the 
province. Our government recognizes the significant potential 
the mining and industry offers to our province. They create 
many jobs within our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agriculture plays a large part of 
everyday life. The 2018-2019 budget invested $378.6 million 
towards the agriculture sector. The work on the farm or ranch 
differs throughout the year, with each season bringing its highs 
and its lows, with its rewards as well. Spring is a very busy time 
of the year for agriculture — newly worked soil when planting 
a crop, or the sight of a newborn calf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget includes an increased funding for 
agriculture in many different aspects, one being for animal 
protection. The new three-year funding agreement will provide 
800,000 a year. Throughout all the diversity, producers always 
emerge stronger than before. They bind together and support 
each other and display Canadian pride that has sustained 
farmers and ranchers for so many centuries. 
 
On our modern farms, youth are more knowledgeable in 
achieving things our forefathers never thought possible. Our 
governments want to continue to support agriculture investing, 
agricultural research, and continue to support management 
programs such as crop insurance. Agriculture is the foundation 
of our province and our government wants to make sure we are 
providing the right services in the right locations, using the best 
delivery options possible. 
 
We are asking producers and industry how we can better serve 
them and how we can ensure activities remain relevant and 
available. With the industry forever evolving, extensive 
activities needed to drive sustainable growth and ensuring that 
producers stay competitive in the global market, agriculture 
research will continue to be supported with investment of 31.8 
million being funded by the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fostering programs for new technologies 
and increased funding for food centres, livestock, and forage 
centres, supporting farmers and ranchers to continue to develop 
and produce self-sufficient, high-value operations. Our 
government wants to ensure that our next generation is in a 
good position to build their futures right here at home. 
 
Over the last decade Saskatchewan agriculture’s exports have 
grown. Our producers have harvested around 35 million tonnes 
in 2017 alone. The fifth consecutive year of the province’s 
harvest has been more than 30 million tonnes. Mr. Speaker, last 
year’s ag exports were the fourth largest on the record with a 
total of 13.5 billion, an increase of more than 60 per cent since 
2010. 
 
In all, Saskatchewan’s ag food exports make Saskatchewan 
agriculture the most diversified market for any sector in the 
Canadian economy. We can be proud of the work that our 
producers do every day. Not only does this hard work benefit 
our province but it benefits our nation as well. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as a government we have honoured the 
commitments we have made to those who have supported and 
who have voted for us. Our government has taken the time to 
listen to the people of our province and we have acted. Our 
government has made a choice that we will define our future. 
 
We are continuing to move forward and keep up the 
maintenance on our aging infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, our 
highways handle a lot of wear and tear in the Southwest 
between agriculture, oil field, and general traffic. We continue 
to invest in our highways to ensure that they remain safe and 
sustainable for years to come. 
 
The 2017-2018 budget investment of 10.9 million towards the 
highways construction, repair, and maintenance. Last summer 
Highway 13 from Eastend to the junction of Highway 21 had 
been worked on with medium preservation being done to it. 
This year’s budget will continue to see more maintenance 
repairs on 800 kilometres of highway improvements being done 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this budget. I’m proud of the 
decisions that we have made. This budget shows that our 
government cares for the people of Saskatchewan. We’re 
growing to continue moving forward and returning the budget 
to balance. And I support the 2018-2019 budget and not the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As 
always, it’s a great honour to rise in this great room in this 
beautiful building to speak about this, I think, very solid budget. 
I’m very impressed with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And before I start my remarks I want to mention last week I had 
the opportunity to speak on our day of condolence about the 
accident. And I just want to tell the people of Humboldt and the 
Humboldt Broncos organization, and especially the family and 
friends and loved ones of those who were closest to the 
accident, that we are all thinking about you. And since our day 
of condolence we’ve found out that people around the world 
are. They are aware of what happened on that intersection of 
Highway 35 and 335. And there’s been an outpouring of 
support and caring from around the world, and I hope that that 
can help bring those families and loved ones strength at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we get elected into this place, especially on 
this team on this side of the floor — I’m not so sure there’s 
much of a team on the other side, Mr. Speaker, but there is an 
organization — we are committed to being part of this team 
when we get elected over here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
hear a lone voice in the wilderness, Mr. Speaker. But not so 
much on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to mention my family: my wife, Linda; and my 
daughter Stephanie and her husband, Gabe, and their sons 
Stewart and Jack; and my daughter Alison and her daughter 
Liberty; and my son Lee and his wife, Jessie, and their daughter 
Josie, and little Sam, my youngest grandson, two years old the 
other day. That’s why we do it, Mr. Speaker. 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3915 

And they quickly learn when we get elected to this place, on 
this team that is charged with governing the province at this 
point in time, that the things they like to do sort of have to work 
around our schedules here. And it’s . . . I don’t know if they 
think of it as a hardship, but it’s a little different life. You don’t 
necessarily get to do the things they’d like to do as a family all 
the time when they’d like to do them. And they make those 
sacrifices so that we can be here, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
thank my family. 
 
And in my constituency office I have a force of nature, Terry 
Lynn Carefoot, and she’s awesome. She keeps me organized, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to run out of time here. There were a few things I 
wanted to talk about. I want to talk about the contrast between 
the way that we govern this province and the way that the NDP 
used to when they had the opportunity, or should I say before 
they squandered the opportunity to do that, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a couple of lists of things I wanted to read, had time permitted, 
that would illustrate the contrast between a responsible budget 
like the one our Finance minister presented here in this budget 
cycle and what they did. I wanted to go through a couple of lists 
of items that they spent money on in those days, Mr. Speaker. I 
won’t have time for that. 
 
But I will say that this budget is very responsible. It’s a budget 
that’s well thought out. It’s a budget that we can all be proud of. 
And it’s a budget that the people of Saskatchewan are very, 
very comfortable with, Mr. Speaker. And you know . . . Oh, I 
guess I’d better not start; I don’t have time. But in any event, 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I think since my time is almost 
over . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll stay as long as you want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Yes, I bet. Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
consented to stay as long as I want. How’s that with you, sir? I 
didn’t think so. Okay, I’ll wrap up. This budget is, it’s on track, 
Mr. Speaker. It shows confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it’ll keep Saskatchewan headed in the right 
direction, Mr. Speaker. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I support 
the budget and I will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Seeing that it is very near to the time 
of adjournment, this House will stand adjourned until tomorrow 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3887 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3890 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3891 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3893 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3896 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3899 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3901 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3904 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3906 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3909 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3912 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3914 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


