


















































April 19, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 19, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3941 
 April 19, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I have a group in the Speaker’s gallery with 
us today. I’d like all members to recognize a group from the 
Open Door Society, Regina Open Door Society. This is the 
INVOLVE group, and INVOLVE is Integrating Newcomers 
with Volunteer Opportunities to add Leadership Value Through 
Education. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity the past number of probably five years 
to go and spend time with the graduates of this program, and 
it’s amazing. The stories of resilience and gratitude for being 
here is immense. And it’s a good reminder for all of us that 
were born here, just how important it is, number one, to be in 
Saskatchewan, to be a full participant, to volunteer, to be a part 
of a community. And again we are so grateful and thankful that 
you’ve chosen Saskatchewan. Thanks for the value that you’re 
going to add to this province. And as we’ve always said, “from 
many peoples, strength.” 
 
With us today in this program is Arfrina Disha — give us a 
wave; thanks — Frank Ma, Shameem Ferdous, Alberto Ortiz, 
and Mussarat Parveen. Again I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to join with you in welcoming the group 
from INVOLVE here today, in my capacity as Minister 
Responsible for Immigration. We very much appreciate the 
relationship that we have with the Regina Open Door Society 
and with the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. These 
folks do just wonderful, wonderful work, day in and day out, 
working with newcomers to our province to make sure that they 
have the tools to be successful here in Saskatchewan. And they 
have made an incredible contribution. They just really, really 
have. And I want to thank you on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan for the work that you do with INVOLVE. 
 
I want to, in a more broad context, thank the Regina Open Door 
Society for the work that they do. We have had 100,000 
newcomers from outside of Canada arrive on our shores and 
this province over the course of the last decade. And it’s an 
unprecedented and I think really an untold story to some degree, 
the contribution that’s being made and the volume of 
newcomers here. So I want to thank you, welcome you, and 
encourage you to continue the great work that you’ve been 
doing. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in with 
yourself and the minister opposite in welcoming our group from 
the INVOLVE program at the Open Door Society to the 

Legislative Assembly today. 
 
As critic for immigration, I want to welcome you on behalf of 
the official opposition. I hope you enjoy the proceedings today 
and enjoy watching question period. It’s so promising to see 
this level of engagement with civic process and interest in 
what’s happening at the legislature. So I want to welcome you 
and ask my colleagues to join with me in welcoming you to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce several guests 
that I have in your gallery this morning. They are — if they 
could just give me a little wave — Matt Patton and Darienne 
Page. They’re both from the ride-share company Lyft. Along 
with them is Dan Moulton. He’s from Crestview Strategy. It is 
my pleasure to introduce them, and it was my pleasure along 
with the Minister of Government Relations this morning to 
meet with them. 
 
And you know, impaired driving is a major thing in our 
province and a factor that we’ve been working on for a long 
time. And these folks have some great ideas that can assist us 
with that battle against impaired driving. And we look forward 
to them coming to our fair province and providing ride-share 
services throughout the province, not just in Regina and 
Saskatoon, but throughout the province. 
 
So I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them to our 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, in the west gallery, a group of 30 grade 8 students 
from M.C. Knoll in Yorkton, about a block from my house. I 
think there’s also a group of grade 7’s in town this day as well, 
and maybe I’ll be meeting with them a little bit later. 
 
With them, their teachers, Jason Trost and Jessica Cannon along 
with educational assistant Jonathon Muir, and also with them a 
fellow I know very well as a chaperone, Kirk Weinmaster. 
Although knowing Kirk, I’m not sure if he’s chaperoning the 
kids or the kids are chaperoning him today. 
 
And I know for a fact that off of Facebook that Pat Rawlick, the 
bus driver, was driving them again today. He never comes in 
the Assembly, but I want to acknowledge bus driver Pat 
Rawlick as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you, it is my pleasure to stand in my seat today and 



3942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

introduce my daughter, Miranda Morstad, who is seated in your 
gallery. Miranda is a grade 1 teacher in Saskatoon, and she is in 
town looking at wedding venues for this summer. So I’m very 
excited that we had the opportunity to do that last night. And 
this union will actually bring our families together as she is 
marrying Dave Forbes’ nephew, Jon. 
 
So, Miranda, I’d like to welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly and I’d like all members to help me welcome her. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure to join with the member from Estevan to 
welcome Miranda to her legislature. We’re really looking 
forward to the celebration this summer. It’s a wonderful thing, 
marrying my nephew Jonathon and it . . . Well yes, I don’t 
know if it’s a slippery slope but I’ve got to say she’s in the right 
profession — teachers, teaching in Saskatoon. You know, I’m 
actually on leave from Saskatoon Public and it’s a wonderful 
school division. 
 
So welcome to your legislature, Miranda, and we look forward 
to great things in the years ahead. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to say a quick word of congratulations, and it’s nice to see, 
you know . . . Sometimes in this building we talk about across 
the aisle. It’s good to see that going down the aisle as well. But 
who knows where it’ll all wind up. 
 
But I just want to say a special word of buenos dias to my good 
friend, Alberto Ortiz. I had the pleasure of taking some classes 
with Alberto at the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of 
Public Policy, and I think I still probably have some notes that I 
need to return to Alberto that of course helped me pass that 
course. But it’s really good to see Alberto here today at his 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if I 
could, I’d like to recognize four people in the west gallery. 
They are from the prayer group and they come here every 
Thursday and offer prayers for both sides. I notice they’re 
behind that bench because they probably need it more. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they are from Moose Jaw. They are, sitting in the 
gallery, Agnes Slavin — if you’d give us a wave — and Dianne 
Green, along with Barb and Robert Brown that come up here 
from Moose Jaw. So I’d ask everybody to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce my 
nephew who unexpectedly showed up here today. Seated in the 
west gallery, Brad Wiszniak. He’s here to observe what goes on 
in the Assembly. So I would ask everyone to welcome him. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Okay, right on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate that. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition to 
get big money out of Saskatchewan. And the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to bring to our 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, and even 
those outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties; and that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics.  
 
And we know that over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan 
Party has received $12.61 million in corporate donations and, of 
that, 2.87 million coming from companies outside 
Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve their politics. It should belong to them. 
And we know that the federal government and the provinces of 
Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British 
Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level the 
playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws, to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Spiritwood, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Rabbit Lake, Shell Lake, 
and Mildred. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today and present a petition for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert. The undersigned residents that signed this petition want 
to bring the following points to your attention: that the 
Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3943 

connects the southern part of the province to the North; and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today; Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution; that local municipal 
governments have limited resources and require a second bridge 
to be funded through federal and provincial governments and 
not a P3 [public-private partnership] model; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert in this critical infrastructure issue. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert, using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
The individuals who signed this petition come from the city of 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of intimate partner violence. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having the highest 
rates of domestic violence amongst all of the provinces, and we 
must do much more to protect survivors of domestic violence. 
For many of them, Mr. Speaker, the violence will follow 
survivors to their workplace. 
 
The signatories to this petition are calling for the government to 
provide five days of paid leave and up to 17 weeks of unpaid 
leave to be made available to workers who are survivors of 
domestic violence, Mr. Speaker. This is similar to what we’re 
calling for in our private member’s Bill No. 609. This is the 
fourth time we’ve presented this particular provision in a bill, 
and it’s time for the government to step up, do the right thing, 
and pass that bill. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina and Swift Current. I do so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

evening was a celebration of business excellence at the 17th 
annual Business Excellence Awards in Moose Jaw. I, along 
with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, attended this 
prestigious event with over 120 nominations and 61 finalists in 
13 categories. 
 
Among the winners is JGL Livestock being awarded the 
Business Leader of the Year. The owners, Bill Jameson and 
Robin Gilroy, are very deserving of this award as they have 
shown outstanding growth in their industry and tremendous 
community support throughout the Moose Jaw area. 
Congratulations also to Cypress Paving on being recognized as 
the Business of the Year, as well as winning the Community 
Involvement Award. 
 
Three new categories were added this year including #trending, 
recognizing businesses who excel in the use of social media; 
Moose Jaw and District Farmer Award, highlighting successes 
and efforts in promoting the agricultural industry; and the 
Newcomer Entrepreneur for businesses developed by new 
entrepreneurs in the community. 
 
The Business Excellence Awards was a great success with a 
record crowd of over 400 people in attendance. Mr. Speaker, 
business is alive and well in Moose Jaw, and we continue to 
grow our population and create jobs and opportunity in our 
community. Thank you to the Moose Jaw Chamber of 
Commerce for hosting this event and promoting businesses in 
Moose Jaw. I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
2018 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards nominees and 
winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Roots of Empathy Program 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on March 8th I was invited to 
attend a grade 1 classroom at Gordon Denny Community 
School in Air Ronge. There I learned about a special program 
being taught by Crystal Peters called Roots of Empathy. 
Gordon Denny Community School is a leader in the empathy 
movement, which helps to develop more compassionate 
students and combat bullying. The program has grade 1 
students connected with a nine-month-old baby, where they 
sing songs and play together. 
 
Roots of Empathy is an international, evidence-based classroom 
program that has been shown to show reduction in levels of 
aggression among schoolchildren by building social and 
emotional skills and increasing empathy. The program is 
designed for children aged 5 to 13. In Canada the program is 
delivered in English and French, and reaches rural, urban, and 
remote communities, including indigenous communities. The 
program is also in New Zealand, the United States, Ireland, the 
UK [United Kingdom], Germany, Switzerland, and Costa Rica. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Gordon Denny 
Community School, the only school in the North pushing this 
new initiative and helping to develop more students with 
empathy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 



3944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

Swift Current Broncos in Western Hockey League Playoffs 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise 
in the Assembly today to talk about the last Saskatchewan team 
left standing in the Western Hockey League playoffs, my 
hometown Swift Current Broncos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not been an easy road. In the first round of the 
playoffs, the Broncos faced off against the Regina Pats, who 
took them to seven games. And then in the second round of the 
playoffs, it was the team with the best regular season record in 
the WHL [Western Hockey League], the Moose Jaw Warriors, 
and that also went the limit for the Broncos who had a 
convincing seventh-game victory there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos will face off, starting Friday 
night in Swift Current, against the Lethbridge Hurricanes — a 
team with whom they made a blockbuster trade earlier this 
winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my nearly 22 years of living in Swift Current, I 
can’t recall a time where there’s been this kind of excitement 
around the Broncos. There were people from all around the area 
taking in the games. That’s assuming they can find tickets, 
because it’s a sellout every night, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Broncos are encouraging their fans to make some noise, to ring 
those cowbells at the hockey rink. And if there’s one thing we 
can all use more of, it’s more cowbell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to head coach, Manny Vivieros, 
the entire coaching staff, the front office staff, the team behind 
the scenes, and most of all the players who have created a 
momentum and a buzz not seen in a long time. Hats off to the 
entire Swift Current Broncos organization for the tremendous 
pride they have brought to Swift Current and indeed to 
southwest Saskatchewan. And there’s still a long road to go. Go 
Broncos. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Hip Hop Hoop Dance Brings Cultures Together 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Friday the 13th can be daunting 
for the suspicious, but it was a great day in Regina Douglas 
Park. That day, I attended a production of Hip Hop Hoop Dance 
at Balfour Collegiate. Hip Hop Hoop Dance ran as part of 
Globe Theatre’s Shumiatcher Sandbox Series from March 29th 
to April 7th, and then hit the road on a 27-schools-in-20-days 
tour across the province. 
 
World champion hoop dancer Terrance Littletent collaborates 
with interdisciplinary artist Chancz Perry to produce a 
cross-cultural fusion of First Nations hoop dance and North 
American hip hop. Both engaging performers share an 
historical, educational, and inspirational outlook of the two 
dance genres. 
 
As CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] noted: 
 

Their collaborative Hip Hop Hoop Dance tells a story, 
exploring the topic of reconciliation through the art of 
movement. It’s a sharing of cultures, both between the 

dancers and with the audience. 
 
As Chancz said in an interview: 
 

. . . [with both of them] being people of colour, they had 
both experienced aspects of colonialization and 
assimilation. 
 
Perry said they quickly recognized the similarities between 
their respective cultures’ art forms, traditions and beliefs. 

 
He said: 
 

We thought, we should celebrate this and build a piece that 
would recognize not only the celebration of similarities 
between cultures, but to celebrate the differences that are 
so unique. 

 
The Globe Theatre demonstrates its commitment to 
reconciliation, and giving back to young people in 
Saskatchewan with initiatives like these. I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating Terrance, Chancz, and the entire 
creative and production team for the show Hip Hop Hoop 
Dance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Rural Municipality of Wilton Receives 
Safe Employer Award 

 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise in the 
Assembly today and acknowledge the RM [rural municipality] 
of Wilton No. 472 for winning the 2018 Safe Employer Award 
through WorkSafe Saskatchewan. 
 
Founded in 2007, this award honours an employer who shows 
leadership in health and safety beyond the requirements of the 
industry and legislation. The RM has become a provincial 
leader in promoting and protecting its employees, the public, 
and the environment. They achieve this by proactively 
measuring its safety management system through multiple 
levels of assessment, inspections, and training. Employees are 
also engaged in this process through safety incentive programs, 
biannual safety recognition events, and monthly safety 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s innovative practices such as these that have 
resulted in the RM winning the award this year and placing in 
the top three in 2017. I want to acknowledge two individuals 
specifically: Dale Tremble, the OH & S [occupational health 
and safety] manager for the RM; and Darren Elder, the chief 
administration officer. Both Dale and Darren have played an 
instrumental role in making the RM a safe place to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, WorkSafe Saskatchewan’s Mission: Zero 
initiative launched in 2008 with the goal of achieving zero 
injuries, zero fatalities, and zero suffering in the workplace. 
Thanks to safety leaders like the RM of Wilton, 88 per cent of 
employees have reached Mission: Zero. On behalf of this 
Assembly, I want to congratulate the RM on receiving the Safe 
Employer Award. Thank you. 
 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3945 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 

Assiniboia Athlete Named to Canadian All-Star 
Football Team 

 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud to rise today in the Assembly to acknowledge the 
success of a very young constituent of mine. Derek Beaubien is 
a grade 10 student at Assiniboia Composite High School, and 
despite being only 15 years old, Derek is an accomplished 
football player. Derek was recently chosen to represent Canada 
in the Under 16 International Bowl as a member of the West 
All-Star team. The competition will be held next January at the 
AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas, home of the Dallas 
Cowboys. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the International Bowl features a series of team 
activities, practices, scrimmages, and games showcasing the top 
players from United States, Canada, Japan, Mexico, Norway, 
Sweden, Finland, and Denmark. Derek will be competing 
against the best that the world has to offer in his age group, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising that Saskatchewan is well 
represented at this event, especially along the offensive line, 
where Derek is one in a long line of successful Saskatchewan 
players. The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport can attest to 
our province’s success in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I want to 
congratulate Derek for making Team Canada and wish him and 
the entire team the best at the International Bowl. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Sask Valley. 
 

The Legacy of Gordon Kurbis 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the Assembly today to acknowledge a beloved man from the 
town of Biggar. Gordon Kurbis, a local farmer and active 
member of his community, recently passed away. As a final 
gesture towards the community and the province he held dear, 
he chose to donate substantial sums to multiple organizations 
across Saskatchewan. Last week his family met with these 
various organizations to help carry out his last wishes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon’s donations included $25,000 to the 
Redeemer Lutheran Church, $50,000 to the Biggar Hospital, 
and $50,000 to the health centre long-term care. Gordon also 
donated $50,000 to the Royal University Hospital, and after 
learning about the Humboldt Broncos tragedy, the family 
designated money specifically to the trauma unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon is a true example of the dedication to 
community and others that exist in this province. Even at the 
end of his own life he was thinking of what he can do for 
others. Our thoughts and prayers are with the Kurbis family at 
this assuredly difficult time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I would like to 
thank Gordon Kurbis and his family for the generous donations 
to the organizations that were near and dear to him. Thank you. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Irrigation Project Approval Process 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question 
for the Premier today: is it standard practice for the Water 
Security Agency to grant project approval to projects that have 
been found to already be in violation of environmental 
protection orders? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
went out to the rotunda yesterday and he made some false 
allegations with respect to an irrigation application that was 
approved through some type of a backdoor process or 
something of that nature, Mr. Speaker, and this simply is just 
not true. 
 
And it’s an insult, quite frankly, to the process and to the 
officials that are working, the professional public service who 
manage the irrigation approval process here in the province 
through Water Security Agency, through the Ministry of 
Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, these officials told me at the time and 
they assured me again yesterday that Mr. Boyd’s application 
was handled in exactly the same way as anyone else’s would 
be, Mr. Speaker. They felt no pressure whatsoever from my 
office or any political office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the fact of the matter that Mr. Boyd was investigated; he 
was charged; he pled guilty, Mr. Speaker, and he was fined with 
one of the largest fines under the environmental habitat 
protection laws proves, I think, to the people of the province 
that they can be assured that he was treated in exactly the same 
manner as anyone else would be through this approval process, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the Premier, 
as we’re talking about being treated exactly the same: is it 
standard practice for deputy ministers to take an active role in 
moving forward an irrigation permit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as minister of Environment, I 
met with people across this province on different water projects 
that we had, whether it was with municipalities or corporations 
that were looking to access water, whether it was with . . . And I 
met with the president of Water Security Agency quite often, 
Mr. Speaker, as well as all levels of the Water Security Agency, 
ranging right to the local regional office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we met with municipalities. We met with corporations. We 
met with individuals that had come together with watershed 
groups, Mr. Speaker, on larger drainage projects in the 
province, including I looked at plans in and around the Quill 
lakes, Mr. Speaker. I met with individuals on water conveyance 
projects, Mr. Speaker, to move fresh water around this province 
as well. So it is not out of the ordinary for all levels within the 



3946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

Water Security Agency, right to the minister, Mr. Speaker, to 
meet with people across this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve obtained an email from June 
5th from a director at the Water Security Agency to the 
agency’s president and CEO [chief executive officer] and cc’d 
to their general counsel. The email reads in part, and I’ll quote: 
 

Just an FYI on the Bill Boyd irrigation project we’ve been 
working on. We’re in a position to issue our approvals 
based on modifications to the plans previously submitted. 
On Friday the Ministry of Agriculture asked us to hold off 
on issuing until they discussed the project with the 
Ministry of the Environment, as it was learned that 
WHPA-designated lands adjacent to Mr. Boyd’s property 
had been broken in contravention of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the permit that the Ministry of Agriculture asked 
to be held off on was issued two months later, with full 
knowledge of the violations with which Bill Boyd was later 
charged and for which he was convicted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what role did the then minister of the Environment 
play in addressing the Ministry of Agriculture’s concerns in 
ensuring Mr. Boyd’s permits were issued? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — The pump site was intended to be 
constructed on private land, but the boundary of the land was 
incorrectly surveyed due to the surveyor using a deflection from 
the survey pin of 90 degrees rather than 93 degrees. 
Construction of the pump site and supply line began before the 
error was discovered. A special lease was issued to cover the 
pump site and the supply line. This lease was subject to the 
Crown lessee agreeing to surrendering the land, including the 
special lease. 
 
That cultivation was discovered on June 6th, ’17. And special 
leases are issued in circumstances where land use or land 
acquisition does not fit within normal day-to-day operations of 
the Ministry of Agriculture lands branch, and to date 148 such 
special leases have been issued. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question was for 
the Premier, asking him what role did he as minister of the 
Environment play in addressing the Ministry of Agriculture’s 
concerns in ensuring that Mr. Boyd’s permits went ahead. And I 
think that’s particularly germane as we consider the other 
questions that have not yet been answered. Is it standard 
practice to grant approval for projects that have already been 
found to be in violation of environmental protection orders? 
And is it standard practice for the deputy ministers of multiple 
agencies to get involved in a single permit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, what has happened here is not 
unusual, Mr. Speaker, and I would add that all members of this 
House are always . . . disclose their, all of their conflicts of 
interest, Mr. Speaker, to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
But when I was Environment minister, Mr. Speaker, I looked at 
plans, as I said, for all sorts of projects across this province — 
municipal projects, drainage projects, water conveyance 
projects, and yes, irrigation projects from time to time. 
 
However, in each of those projects the answer was always the 
same. Here’s the process: through Water Security Agency, 
Minister of Agriculture, contact them for the permits to ensure 
that the project is constructed in the right way with appropriate 
permits, Mr. Speaker. I was never involved in any of these 
projects, Mr. Speaker, directly in the approval process. And I 
was not involved in the approval process in this case, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s done by officials through different ministries, with 
no influence and no interference from elected officials, from 
elected members. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — No involvement or influence from elected 
officials. The email from the director of licensing and water use 
continues, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll just quote the email, if you’ll 
allow me: 
 

I’ve just heard that this afternoon there was an unscheduled 
meeting between the deputy ministers for the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Environment with Alanna Koch [who 
you’ll remember as a recent runner-up in the Sask Party 
leadership and former deputy minister to the Premier] and 
the Associate Deputy Minister of Agriculture also in 
attendance. 
 
Operational staff from the ministries of Agriculture and 
Environment are to attend the site tomorrow and inspect, to 
get the most up-to-date info on what has to be done and 
will be reporting back to their deputies before taking 
further action. 
 
Mr. Boyd was contacted and may be attending the meeting 
as well. We’ve been asked to continue to hold off on 
issuing any approvals for the time being and will do so. 

 
This email raises a number of questions, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll 
start with one. Is this the sort of high-level treatment a deputy 
minister of the premier, deputy ministers from multiple 
ministries, any other person can expect when they apply for an 
irrigation permit with this Sask Party government? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve also been made aware of 
an email that was sent to the Leader of the Opposition and cc’d 
to the Minister of Environment here this morning from Susan 
Ross, the president and CEO of the Water Security Agency, a 
letter, and it went to address some comments that were made in 
the rotunda yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And I quote these 
comments by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

If a colleague comes to you and says off the side of a desk, 
in a hallway conversation, can we just roll ahead with this? 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3947 

I think that that is the moment, that’s a red flag for any 
minister to say that, you know what? I appreciate your 
question and this really needs to go through the proper 
channels. 

 
And I can assure the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
this did go through the proper channels, Mr. Speaker, as he was 
referred to the appropriate agencies like anyone else, Mr. 
Speaker, as is quoted by the emails from the members opposite. 
 
And in the email that was sent by Ms. Ross this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, it says this: 
 

I note that in the legislature and in the media you state that 
Mr. Boyd was treated differently and used back channels 
to advance his application for a water rights licence. This 
is not the case. 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, in that same conversation in the 
rotunda, Mr. Speaker, in that same rotunda, the Premier said 
yesterday that he had had conversations with Mr. Boyd, or 
indicated that he may have had conversations with Mr. Boyd 
about this project. So I would like to know: did that hallway 
conversation happen? Did you discuss this project with Mr. 
Boyd? When did that happen, and what did you tell him? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I said it and it’s true. I did 
have a conversation with Mr. Boyd. I had multiple 
conversations with individuals in the watershed and the Quill 
lakes area, Mr. Speaker, with those downstream. I had multiple 
conversations with a number of different people across this 
province over drainage permits, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at 
their plans as well. I had conversations with members of the . . . 
people in the potash industry, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at their 
plans. 
 
I had a number of conversations, as minister of this file, with 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and advocates for moving fresh 
water across this province, Mr. Speaker, to increase irrigation 
opportunities. And I looked at those plans, Mr. Speaker. And 
the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is as the president of the 
Water Security Agency says, as I am saying, Mr. Speaker, this 
application was referred to the Water Security Agency and the 
other ministries in the same way that each of those other 
conversations that I had. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province can be reassured 
that that’s the case. And when the rules weren’t followed, Mr. 
Speaker, this case, this individual was investigated like anyone 
else in the province. He was charged, Mr. Speaker, because he 
was out of compliance. He pled guilty, Mr. Speaker, had one of 
the largest fines under our environmental laws here in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this proves to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan that no matter who you are, Mr. 
Speaker, you will be treated in an identical fashion in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we still haven’t heard whether that 
conversation took place and what that conversation was like. 
And when you think about a minister, a member like Mr. Boyd 
who’d been involved in the land deals around the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub], Mr. Speaker, who had been found later to 
be in conflict of interest because of his involvement in an 
immigration scheme, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about a 
member like Mr. Boyd, that raises extra red flags. But we have 
a situation here where the project had already been found to be 
in violation, already been indicated to have broken the law, Mr. 
Speaker, and the permit was applied afterwards. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what were the Premier’s reasons for signing 
off on a permit that he’d been asked by the Minister of 
Agriculture to hold off on just two months previously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t sign off on permits, 
Mr. Speaker. That is not what a minister does. That is why we 
have the Water Security Agency and all of the qualified public 
servants that we have in that agency, Mr. Speaker. And they do 
a great job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have stated, I have stated, Mr. Speaker, that this 
application process was handled in the identical fashion that any 
application process would be across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
It was referred to the officials in ministries and in the Water 
Security Agency, Mr. Speaker. When Mr. Boyd did not follow 
the process, he was, as I said, he was charged, Mr. Speaker. He 
pled guilty. He was assessed with one of the larger fines under 
our environmental policy here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The president of the Water Security Agency has assured the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, through email, that this is in 
fact the case. Mr. Boyd was treated in exactly the same fashion 
that any of the other people, that I or the president of the Water 
Security Agency or any other ministry official across 
government would have been treated in, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
know exactly what the Leader of the Opposition is insinuating. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
. . . I hear about doing politics differently, and that’s exactly 
what we need to do. We need to have accountability and we 
need to make sure that ministers and members are treated in a 
special way — that we are not first in line, but we’re last. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what this indicates, what this suggests is that 
there has been special treatment to approve a project that had 
already been found to be illegal, and that this happened on the 
Premier’s watch. And not only did it happen, it happened 
bringing in deputy ministers, bringing in deputy ministers, a 
deputy minister of the premier, of Agriculture, of Environment. 
How, Mr. Speaker, is this Premier going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that that’s the normal process, that that’s the way 
every person in this province would be treated? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, a couple of things that I would point out. Mr. Speaker, 



3948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

a water rights licence is one step in a process, in an irrigation 
process application, but it’s not the final approval. You have to 
be able to show, and the Water Security Agency has to be able 
to grant that there is enough water for your project, but that’s 
one step in the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the president of the Water Security Agency 
points out in the letter to the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

The water rights licence and approval to operate water 
diversion works issued to Mr. Boyd under the Act was for 
the use of water in the operation of his irrigation works as 
they existed. These approvals are under different 
legislation than the charges that were subsequently laid. 
The expectation of the staff involved in water rights 
licensing and approval to operate a water diversion at the 
time was that Mr. Boyd would comply with the immediate 
EPO for shoreline remediation and the project would 
continue. 

 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, of the 11 applications last year that were 
reviewed by the Water Security Agency, the average day from 
application to approval was 78 days. For Mr. Boyd it was nearly 
100 days, Mr. Speaker, so clearly it shows that Mr. Boyd wasn’t 
treated any differently. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we hear the minister trying to say 
that there’s a wall between these processes. But in the message, 
we heard the Water Security Agency saying that they had been 
asked to hold off on issuing until they discussed the project, as 
it was learned the WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] 
designated lands adjacent to Mr. Boyd’s property had been 
broken in contravention of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
Obviously this is a significant concern that WSA [Water 
Security Agency] does pay attention to. 
 
If you want people in this province, if the Premier wants people 
in this province to believe that this was done in the same way it 
had been done for any other citizen in Saskatchewan, well I 
think we have a whole lot of explaining to do. Mr. Speaker, we 
would like to hear from the Premier: how did this compare to 
how a regular person would have their process approached? 
Would they have all of these deputy ministers, all of this 
process involved? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as the president points out 
in the letter, Mr. Boyd inquired about the steps to obtain a water 
rights licence and was referred to the water rights licensing 
division as we do with any other client. He was provided with 
information and application forms. The WSA officials are 
professional public servants and acted appropriately throughout 
this case. I am confident that Water Security Agency, Ministry 
of Agriculture, and Ministry of Environment officials acted in 
accordance and took the appropriate actions in bringing forward 
this file that ultimately ended up in enforcement actions against 
Mr. Boyd. He was treated the same way every other citizen 
would have been had he or she taken the same actions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out on numerous occasions, 
there is a process to follow. Mr. Boyd was in contact with 
officials on that process, Mr. Speaker. He applied for a water 
rights licence, Mr. Speaker. That is a part of the irrigation 
process, Mr. Speaker, and obviously he was not in compliance 
with the entire process. He was investigated, charged, and was 
found guilty, Mr. Speaker, and has been levied by the courts 
one of the largest fines to an individual in respect to a matter 
like this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Government Transparency 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Bill Boyd, the DNA of the Sask 
Party, was found to have a conflict of interest when he went to 
China and pretended to be a minister after he was no longer in 
cabinet, all to get funding for the irrigation scheme that is at the 
heart of this matter. He committed crimes in relation to this 
irrigation scheme and has been found guilty and has been fined, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’ve been here before. We’ve stood in this Assembly 
and continually asked the members of the cabinet about their 
decisions when they voted to flip land at the GTH. But we still 
don’t have the answers from any of those questions. The entire 
cabinet, in fact the entire Sask Party wears that, Mr. Speaker. 
When will they finally come forward with what they know 
about what went down at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
been a member of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. She 
knows full well that we will not comment on something that’s 
before the courts or under active investigation. Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t control that process. We don’t control the timeline of that 
process, and she knows it full well, Mr. Speaker. She sits in her 
desk and she chirps about it just below what the microphones 
might pick up. 
 
[10:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what she’s talking about is an invitation that 
we would in some way meddle or interfere with a court process. 
And, Mr. Speaker, to that member and to the citizens of this 
province, I would say that that is something that is not going to 
happen under our watch. That process will go ahead in the 
ordinary and usual fashion, and we will stay absolutely and 
completely hands off of that process. If she wishes to wade in, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s between her and whatever else she decides 
to do, but not from this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Saskatoon Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday in question period, I had a little bit of déjà vu. When 
I asked the Highways minister about the Saskatoon bypass, the 
minister called it the same thing. Not only was the minister a 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3949 

little uneasy answering the questions, his colleague from 
Martensville seemed to correct him on the language, maybe to 
call it a freeway. A former minister herself, she knows full well 
the financial and political implications of mismanaging a billion 
dollar bypass and how that type of thing can land a member in 
the backbenches pretty quick. She knows and the minister 
knows we don’t need history repeating itself. Even in the early 
stages, land acquisition, cost, and design seem an awful lot like 
the Regina bypass. 
 
Can the minister commit today that as the project moves 
forward, the contract will be going to Saskatchewan world-class 
companies and not an overseas conglomerate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon expressway, whatever we want to call it, is only in 
the planning stages, Mr. Speaker. We have targeted or focused 
the area on where it’s going to be. We’re only in the planning 
stages, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t even gone to anywhere near to the 
design stage. This project is 5 years, 10 years out, Mr. Speaker. 
We have at least narrowed the window on where the 
expressway or freeway, whatever we want to call it, will be, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s a long ways down the road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t seem to get a 
clear answer from the minister on the issue. Yesterday he called 
it a Saskatoon bypass and today it’s a freeway. But 
Saskatchewan taxpayers know there’s nothing free about the 
Sask Party megaprojects. And let me be crystal clear: the 
auditor said early consultations on the Regina bypass that took 
place provided business owners and municipalities a good 
indication of where the route would go. She said this insight 
could have led to land speculation and skyrocketing costs. 
 
And again, there’s a detailed road to riches map on the 
Saskatoon bypass project that’s easily accessible for anyone 
wanting to make a buck. How can the public be assured that the 
Saskatchewan Party government isn’t going to repeat the same 
mistakes on the Saskatoon bypass as they did with the Regina 
bypass? And what specific measures are being taken today to 
make sure this doesn’t happen again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of the 
Regina bypass. There is nothing . . . That is a great project. The 
biggest thing that’s going for that project, Mr. Speaker, is 
safety. And I want to quote the member opposite for what he 
said about the Regina bypass, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . it should be stated right at the [very] front, Mr. 
Speaker, that one of the things that’s really important to 
this side of the Assembly is that it is important that people 

out there understand when it comes to the Regina bypass, 
the NDP are in full support of having the bypass built, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 

 
That’s quoted in the Economy Committee, April 29th, 2014, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it should also be noted, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
Regina bypass being built, Mr. Speaker, this is from Randy 
Schultz, White City fire chief, Mr. Speaker, on October 30th, 
2017: 
 

Before the construction, I couldn’t tell you how many 
accident scenes we were on where we were using jaws of 
life. Now I can’t tell you the last time we used . . . [the] 
jaws [of life]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s about safety, and that’s what we’re here for, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Coverage for Taxi Drivers Injured at Work 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, people across our province 
were shocked by the attack against Muhammad Umar, a taxi 
driver here in Regina. He was stabbed in the throat, chest, and 
stomach after a violent attack last Friday morning. 
Unfortunately this isn’t the first time a taxi driver has been 
attacked on the job and seriously injured in our province. 
 
Taxi drivers in Saskatchewan aren’t covered under workers’ 
compensation, and their workplace injuries aren’t covered under 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] either. No one in 
our province should have to go without supports when they get 
hurt on the job. Will the Sask Party commit to changes today to 
help taxi drivers who are injured at work? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we naturally have very 
much, a lot of sympathy, on behalf of all members, to anybody 
that’s hurt on the job either through violence or through any 
other . . . [inaudible] . . . It’s something that we all should take 
seriously and consider carefully, and I appreciate the member 
raising the issue. 
 
I asked for this information from the WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] earlier. What can happen is that a taxi 
driver can regard her- or himself as being self-employed and 
can apply for and receive workers’ compensation coverage. If 
they don’t and they’re regarded as an individual or separate 
contractor, they would not receive the coverage. If in fact they 
work for somebody else, where they’re under a situation where 
they are under a contract of employment, then they would be 
covered. 
 
So there appears to be some situations where they would be 
covered, some situations where they aren’t covered. In our 
province the workers’ compensation scheme does not 
automatically cover employers. It’s directed to . . . [inaudible] 
. . . and help with employees. 



3950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

I’ve asked the Workers’ Compensation Board and our officials 
to look at it and see whether there’s something that is there. But 
what I would urge all people to do if they’re in a situation . . . 
[inaudible] . . . is obtain the coverage. It’s very low cost and it 
does provide them some protection as self-employed workers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 125, 
The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this be read again? I recognize the 
Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to table the answer to question 224. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 224. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 

Support for Construction of Trans Mountain Pipeline 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a great 
birthday gift the Deputy Whip placed upon me today, to have 
this opportunity. And I do take that quite seriously, as this is an 
opportunity, an opportunity in which I am very pleased to have 
the ability and the opportunity to put forward a motion, a 
motion regarding the federal Trudeau government’s 
unwillingness to act on the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain 
pipeline expansion project. 
 
This project has obviously captured much media coverage, Mr. 
Speaker. This fact is both surprising, and yet it shouldn’t be. 
The absolute dysfunction and continued hypocrisy of the BC 

[British Columbia] provincial and the federal Liberal 
governments of late is not really surprising anymore, Mr. 
Speaker, yet it continues to be extremely disappointing. The 
underachievement bar of the Trudeau Liberals somehow 
continues to be lowered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Trans Mountain system idea was conceived in 
1951, constructed and began operation in 1953. Similar to many 
other pipelines across the nation, including this province, this 
system and systems like it have operated and maintained safely 
and efficiently for decades. This project, and others of its kind, 
would bring Western Canadian oil production to tidewater 
markets, expanding markets that will pay fair price for our 
products, rather than discounted prices that our producers have 
been basically forced to take with our oil predominantly going 
south to the US [United States], Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read an article that I ran across last evening, and I’d 
like to share that message. And it’s from a Seattle, Washington 
resident, Mr. Speaker, that put a letter in a Lower Mainland BC 
newspaper. And it reads as follows, and I quote. The caption is: 
 

Thank-you B.C. for the oil discount 
 

. . . thanks to the citizens of B.C. who seem once again to 
have blocked . . . [another] oil pipeline to the coast. Those 
of us living south of the border will continue to enjoy 
importing your oil at substantial discounts while exporting 
our oil from gulf ports at world-market prices. Your gift to 
us, around $100 million per day Canadian, is greatly 
appreciated. We marvel at your generosity while doubting 
your sanity. All of this will have zero impact on the global 
climate, of course. 

 
That’s from Adam Lloyd of Seattle. 
 
It goes to show that it’s quite obvious to people on both sides of 
the border, Mr. Speaker, that BC is out of line, and BC knows 
they’re out of line. Everyone in Canada knows that BC is out of 
their jurisdiction, but the federal government just doesn’t seem 
to want to take the necessary steps. 
 
Scotiabank actually estimated that the current discounts on oil 
products, at the current levels if sustained, cost the industry 
$15.6 billion a year. Our government estimates that 
Saskatchewan producers lose 2.6 billion of this total annually. 
And that would equate to approximately 210 million in lost 
royalty revenue for this current budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain pipeline is an 
expansion project. The system already exists. It’s not a brand 
new system. Those opposed to it are acting like it’s a brand new 
megaproject by an unreliable operator with an unproven track 
record in the industry. This couldn’t be further from the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. Kinder Morgan has thousands of kilometres of 
operating pipeline throughout North America. The Trans 
Mountain system has been in operation for 65 years. 
 
I’d like to present a few more facts on Kinder Morgan and its 
system, Mr. Speaker. Kinder Morgan, as I stated, is a pipeline 
transmission company based in the US that operates systems in 
Canada, including Saskatchewan. The Trans Mountain system 
is an 1150-kilometre system that has safely carried crude and 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3951 

refined oil products to BC ports since 1953. Currently the Trans 
Mountain system delivers approximately 300,000 barrels of 
crude and refined oil per day. The proposed expansion project 
would carry an additional 590,000-plus barrels per day of 
diluted bitumen from the oil sands, tripling the overall daily 
capacity to nearly 900,000 barrels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project has been rigorously reviewed and 
accepted by all applicable levels of government, both federal 
and provincial. The debate on this should be over. We shouldn’t 
be talking whether this pipeline should be built, it’s when. 
 
The obstruction of this project by the BC or Green Party or the 
coalition of the same really isn’t surprising. It’s probably 
surprising to them how successful it’s been, but it’s not 
surprising that they’re not in favour of it. They’ve admitted 
they’re out of their jurisdiction, but surprisingly — or not so 
surprisingly — the unwillingness of the Trudeau Liberals to 
move forward is the big picture. 
 
[11:00] 
 
It’s now starting to become even more apparent that there is 
perhaps a systematic attack being launched on the entire energy 
industry. Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that the Trudeau Liberals 
are openly embarrassed by our oil and gas industry. Instead of 
being proud champions for our clean, safe, and global-leading 
industry, Mr. Speaker, he is ashamed of it. And even though the 
demand for that energy is as strong as ever, he continues to take 
that stance. 
 
The Trudeau Liberals are openly ashamed, as I said, of our 
industry, Mr. Speaker. Ashamed of an industry that operates 
under the highest environmental standards in the world, yet has 
to compete with foreign oil that has very low standards. He is 
ashamed of an industry that contributes to the GDP [gross 
domestic product] of every Western province, including 15 per 
cent to this province’s GDP. He is ashamed of an industry that 
sustains thousands of jobs across Western Canada. 
 
He has plenty of reasons to be ashamed, Mr. Speaker. Ashamed 
that Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain pipeline is not already 
under way. Ashamed that the Energy East pipeline was 
scrapped because of the federal policies that are unfair and 
discriminatory to our own producers and transporters, Mr. 
Speaker. Ashamed of the forced implementation on carbon 
pricing across the nation. Ashamed of himself and his 
government’s save-the-world policies by crushing our most 
vital industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are industry and economic leaders far more 
knowledgeable than I that are speaking out. I would like to read 
an excerpt from a letter that was sent to the Prime Minister’s 
office a week ago today, I believe, April 12th letter to our Prime 
Minister and cc’d to Premiers Notley and Horgan, urging them 
to meet and resolve this issue. We now know that that meeting 
took place with essentially no result. I will read one or two 
small paragraphs from that correspondence, and I quote: 
 

It’s deeply concerning that a project that has gone through 
rigorous review, including four years of consultation and 
numerous federal and provincial conditions is now in this 
situation after being given a green light to proceed. This 

threatens to provoke a crisis of confidence in Canada’s 
regulatory processes with far-reaching implications which 
go well beyond this project. It threatens to send a message 
to investors that Canada cannot be trusted. It puts billions 
of dollars of government revenue at risk — billions that 
pay for things that Canadians need, from teachers to MRI 
machines to affordable housing and further investments in 
protecting the environment.  
 
Many small and medium-sized business owners, 
construction workers, people who support their families in 
manufacturing, and indigenous Nations are now unfairly 
caught in the crossfire as a result of the uncertainty 
surrounding this project’s future and, collaterally, our 
county’s growing uncertain investment climate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just another letter written by big business 
or self-serving entities that you may think are just related to the 
oil patch. Mr. Speaker, this correspondence is signed by 75 
members across the nation, from Vancouver to Halifax. 
Twenty-five signatures on this correspondence are from BC 
entities alone. So the people of BC are not totally onside with 
their own provincial government’s policy on this. We have 
chambers of commerce, hotel and lodging associations, real 
estate associations, trucking, pipeline construction, mining, 
heavy equipment associations, Mr. Speaker, mayors, reeves, 
taxpayers, independent business, the CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business], Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation — the list goes on and on. 
 
Anyone that thinks this project only affects companies like 
Kinder Morgan and pipeline companies or the oil industry is 
delusional, Mr. Speaker. Projects like this affect this whole 
country, whether we want to believe it or not.  
 
Mr. Speaker, some folks, and some folks maybe even sitting on 
the other side of the House and maybe even the Leader of the 
Opposition, I believe, has openly stated that that the action 
taken on this side of the House by our Premier is, he’s trying to 
“get into the story,” openly criticizing, accusing our Premier 
and this government of using this issue as a political posturing 
opportunity. Defending our people and our industries, I don’t 
think, is playing politics, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply doing the 
right thing. 
 
To quote the Premier, “We are doing what it takes.” Doing what 
it takes to make BC know they are out of line. Doing what it 
takes to push the federal government to get this project under 
way. Doing what it takes including necessary legislation that 
would allow us to legally turn off the taps similar to what 
Alberta is doing. This isn’t playing politics. It’s taking action — 
taking action, taking a stand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of getting on board, the opposition continues to be the 
same old NDP [New Democratic Party] which chooses to get in 
the way. Playing politics to me, Mr. Speaker, is taking action 
like supporting something as ridiculous as the Leap Manifesto. I 
spent some time on that website last night. I was aware of their 
basic ideology but was quite blown away to actually read parts 
of it. Quite disturbing actually. 
 
I don’t have any confirmation, but I’ve been told that some 
members opposite support it. I understand that with the federal 



3952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

NDP leader, some of the policies created federally are in favour 
of some of the Leap principles but, Mr. Speaker, that document 
itself is not proper. It is an attack on the industry of oil and gas 
in general, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know how anybody can 
honestly support that and say they’re in favour of the industries 
that lead this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How am I doing for time? Well I am going to skip forward. I 
missed a lot of great opportunities, but I think that the message 
is out there that the same old NDP does not promote what we’re 
doing on this side and that’s fine. I hoped they would consider 
this motion, supporting it, and I would like to put forward that 
motion now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that I would like to put forward the motion: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
act immediately to ensure the construction of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline; and 
 
That this Assembly rejects the actions by the Government 
of British Columbia to stop an energy project that is of 
national interest. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kindersley has moved: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
act immediately to ensure the construction of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline; and 
 
That this Assembly rejects the actions by the Government 
of British Columbia to stop an energy project that is of 
national interest. 

 
Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to point out at the start that this project . . . and certainly 
the intent that the opposition has as it relates to the pipeline. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no question that the Trans Mountain pipeline is 
a very critical and crucial part of our economy here in 
Saskatchewan, as we do want to get our product to tidewaters, 
Mr. Speaker. So whether it is grain, whether it is potash, or 
whether it is oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective we 
know how crucial the link is that the Trans Mountain pipeline 
offers to the people of Saskatchewan, to the Western economy, 
Mr. Speaker, and to our Canadian economy as a whole. 
 
So I want to make it very crystal clear to the member from 
Kindersley and to the current government, the Saskatchewan 
Party government, that the NDP do support the motion that’s 
moving forward, in the sense of making sure that we all are on 
the same page when it comes to protecting jobs here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Our number one concern, Mr. 
Speaker, has always been and will always be that crucial 
balance we talk about, is to ensure that the economy, we have a 
full employment economy and to create jobs, important jobs 
such as the Evraz operation where 1,100 jobs are at stake, Mr. 
Speaker. The balance that we talk about — and it’s really 
important right across the country, that other provinces talk 

about — is to ensure that we’re not at the same time 
compromising our environmental standards. That balance must 
be achieved, but there’s no question in our minds that the job 
issue is very, very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need on this particular action plan is that 
this project has been approved. There’s no question from our 
perspective. It has been approved and it has gone through a 
rigorous process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, we need to see leadership 
on this particular file. It’s a bit concerning to me, Mr. Speaker, 
when the member from Kindersley knows very well the 
importance of this particular file, the importance of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline, when he turns halfway through his speech 
and saying, how much more time do I have? Mr. Speaker, we 
need to afford much more time on this issue than ever before 
because this matter is really important and we cannot diminish 
the importance of this discussion, Mr. Speaker, by simply 
turning around and saying, how much more time do I have? 
And most of the time that they spoke about was the Leap 
Manifesto. That is not proper and that is not fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is we have to afford this as 
much time as we possibly can, as much time as we possibly 
can. And I would suggest that the Saskatchewan Party look at 
their own track record and their history, Mr. Speaker, because 
as much as they want to be critical, Mr. Speaker, we want to be 
pragmatic on this side of the House. We want to be supportive 
of this Trans Mountain pipeline and, Mr. Speaker, leadership is 
required on this matter all the single time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason why, the reason why the Sask 
Party lack credibility on this file, Mr. Speaker, is on a number 
of fronts. Number one, despite the fact that they’ve had record 
revenue and have been in power for 10 years, they have failed 
miserably to even lay one inch of pipeline to tidewater. They 
have not achieved nothing when it comes to the notion of trying 
to get the pipeline in place, Mr. Speaker. They have not laid one 
inch, one inch, one inch of pipeline in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, they have cut funding 
to climate change and green energy . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They have also cut 
funding to climate change and green energy, Mr. Speaker. So 
you look at their history, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
history. They have not laid one inch of pipeline, Mr. Speaker. 
They have cut funding to climate change and green energy, Mr. 
Speaker. The balance that we talk about in the Assembly is so 
important to get the public of Saskatchewan to know two 
things. We’re concerned about jobs. We want to make sure we 
get our product to market. That’s essential to our economy, 
especially in an economy based in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. But 
the oil and gas and the potash industry are also vitally 
important. 
 
So essential to our economy is to create jobs and to attract 
investment and to get our product to tidewater. That is an 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3953 

essential part of what we’re arguing here today, Mr. Speaker. 
But the corresponding responsibility of government is to also 
balance those against environmental standards. Well what 
happens is the Saskatchewan Party have not laid one inch of 
pipe. They have cut their funding to climate change and 
addressing the challenges around — or the opportunities 
associated with — green energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important for people to know that again, once again the 
Sask Party have not disappointed us. All they have done is play 
silly politics with this matter when it’s vitally important that we 
provide leadership on this front to make sure that we protect the 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, to make sure we get our product to market, 
Mr. Speaker, and to point out that we need that Trans Mountain 
pipeline, Mr. Speaker. It is so important to Western Canada. It 
is so important, Mr. Speaker, to the province of Saskatchewan, 
and it is important to all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
We heard about the polling numbers in which the Canadian 
people want to see this investment, Mr. Speaker. And as we 
increase capacity in our pipeline system, it really allows more 
use of the rail system and the other transportation avenues to 
move potash and to move our grains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on this side of the Assembly, the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party are very clear. The Trans Mountain pipeline 
is something that we support. We see it has gone through a 
rigorous process. It was approved. We want to see it happen, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s vitally important to our economy, 
vitally important to us, and vitally important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So you have to take the time, and you can’t simply diminish the 
argument. You can’t simply diminish the argument around the 
importance of oil and gas development in our province to 
talking about the NDP and the Leap Manifesto. That is not fair, 
Mr. Speaker. It is not fair to the people of Saskatchewan. It is 
not proper to give justice to this argument in this Assembly. 
You have to be pragmatic. You’ve got to be responsible and 
you have to provide leadership. 
 
So yes, federal Liberals need to provide leadership on this front, 
but the Saskatchewan Party also got to do their work, because 
I’ll go back to my point, Mr. Speaker, that they have failed to 
lay one inch of pipe, Mr. Speaker. They have failed to lay one 
inch of pipe, Mr. Speaker. And secondly is they have 
compromised a very meaningful balance to the people of 
Saskatchewan when they do not have, Mr. Speaker, a climate 
change action plan, and when they cut funding and refuse to 
embrace the opportunities of green energy. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an injustice to the whole effort that we’re 
trying to achieve today, and this is why it’s important that we 
clarify from our seat the importance of oil and gas development 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. We want the 
Saskatchewan Party to be responsible. We want the 
Saskatchewan Party to co-operate with the opposition on this 
front. And we want to see action on that pipeline, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll say it again. I’ll say it again, that we must consult with the 
people all the time, Mr. Speaker, on matters of this importance. 
And I point out that industry people need to be consulted. And 

we’ve had those consultations; we will continue to have those 
consultations. 
 
And the second point I’d also raise, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit 
disappointed with the Premier when he pointed out that they 
aren’t going to consult the First Nations in Aboriginal, 
indigenous communities in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to take all of our efforts. Our motto in 
the province is “from many peoples, strength,” Mr. Speaker. 
And the First Nations and Métis people and all indigenous 
people throughout this land can offer valuable partnerships in 
trying to achieve some of the objectives attached to the Trans 
Mountain pipeline, Mr. Speaker. They understand the 
importance. 
 
So the indigenous people of Saskatchewan should be engaged. 
They should have that consultation avenue afforded to them, 
Mr. Speaker, because they can invest in this opportunity. They 
can provide a labour force in this opportunity. They can provide 
incredible insights on environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. 
They can give us great knowledge. They can give us great 
opportunity to strengthen our position as it comes to getting our 
product to market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First Nations and Métis and indigenous people of Saskatchewan 
can offer an incredible value and can be great allies in this fight. 
And yet here once again, we see no consultation on the First 
Nations and the indigenous people of Saskatchewan as 
expressed by the Premier. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the history of this, there’s no 
question: we support the project. It’s gone through a rigorous 
process. It’s been approved. And we say it’s time to get it built 
so we can get our product to market and we can save those jobs, 
jobs, jobs here in the province of Saskatchewan. Our people 
deserve that work, but we must do our homework and we must 
be responsible in this position. So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
important we continue some of that work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak to this debate for the people of my 
constituency. It’s a very important issue facing our nation and 
our province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve told many people in the past that your best 
friends are the ones who will tell you what you need to hear and 
not what you want to hear. It’s easy for those who don’t love 
you so much to flatter you, but the truth can hurt at times. And 
we all have blind spots, Mr. Speaker, that keep us from seeing 
our obvious mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell a story that will allow me to draw 
something out. My son, the day before his 15th birthday, 
phoned myself and asked if he could bring his dirt bike in from 
the country. He wanted to go out with his friends. And so I said, 
you go ahead and do that. So the next day I heard a story that 
my son had jumped a hill in our community. And in my 
community we don’t have a lot of hills. It’s fairly flat so we 
have to build ours, and we built this one right beside the 
football field at the high school. And my son chose to jump that 
hill during the season opener for the Comets, Mr. Speaker. 



3954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

And so I wasn’t alarmed at first, but the next day I found out 
that he was actually planning this, so I was a fair bit upset with 
my son. And I remember that day, maybe being a little more 
upset than I ought to have been, I took my son into the police 
station and I had him apologize, and I told the police that they 
should fine him. 
 
And so my good friend, at that point he phoned me. And I 
didn’t answer; I was quite upset. So then he texted me. And so 
when I read that text, Mr. Speaker, what I read was, Todd, I 
think you’re more concerned about your own reputation than 
you are about your own son. And those words were true, Mr. 
Speaker. I didn’t want to hear them but he was a good friend 
and he spoke them to me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to challenge the leader of our 
opposition and I would like to say to him that he needs to 
consider not being tempted to being concerned about his own 
reputation. Because our reputations are something very 
important to us, Mr. Speaker. There is always a temptation to 
stand for our own reputation rather than for those people that 
we love. And I think the people of this province are the ones 
that we need to consider in this whole pipeline issue — put 
aside our own political lines and stand together. 
 
It’s likely, Mr. Speaker, if you were to ask the Prime Minister 
or the Premier of British Columbia, who is the MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] for Melfort? They would likely 
say, I have no clue who the MLA for Melfort is. But you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? I’m well known with the Star City Elks 
club, you know, from my constituency. But I’m not sure if 
Premier Horgan has heard of me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, because I know that they respect him and I would 
like him to stand for our province in a time when he can stand 
and make a difference. And I know that he can. I’m sure that 
he’s being pulled in many different directions, Mr. Speaker, but 
I would like to remind him of what he already knows, that 
leaders show their character and their worth in the difficult 
times, in the times when things might be unpopular and even 
cost them personally. 
 
You know, we lost $210 million worth of royalties in 2017. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, my constituency in my hometown, we 
would like to get a CT [computerized tomography] scanner. 
We’re in line for that CT scanner. It’s been promised for us in 
the past. We’ve got some roads that we would like to be 
resurfaced. We’ve got some schools that we increased the PMR 
[preventative maintenance and renewal] to 15 per cent. But 
there’s always more money to be spent on schools. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 the population has increased by over 
100,000 people in this province and we’ve added, Mr. Speaker, 
4,300 nurses, 750 doctors, 40 schools, 25 major renovations. 
But you know, we have these expenses incurred, Mr. Speaker, 
because our population is growing. And we have a plan. We 
need to support the economy. And I’m sure that the members 
opposite have constituency needs as well. And I would like to 
say that that $210 million that we lost in 2017 could be 
supported. We could get that back with the support of the leader 
across the floor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our farmers in my constituency, you know, this pipeline means 

more to them than some of us might realize. In 2013-2014 it 
cost us $6.5 billion in Western Canada in lost revenue because 
of the logjam at the railcars. We couldn’t get railcars to take our 
grain to market. And so we’re plugging up our railcars, our train 
lines, where we could have a pipeline opened to take that oil 
safely to sea. 
 
We need to be able to stand for our farmers in my part of the 
world, Mr. Speaker, because those are the ones who put 
millions of dollars into the ground every spring. And at the end 
of the season, they take that grain and they expect that they can 
get it to market. But, Mr. Speaker, you know, a lineup is a fairly 
difficult thing. Some of us stand at a buffet, we’re worried 
about the lineup; others at the washroom during a Rider game. 
But you know, for a farmer to stand and wait for the trains to 
get open so that he can sell his grain to pay his bills, so that he 
can spend his money in his local economy, that is a very 
important thing. 
 
And so I want to see the members across the floor work 
together with the current government. You know, we all saw 
displayed before our eyes, you know, that during the hockey 
season, during the football season, basketball season, whatever 
it might be, when the puck is dropped, when the ball is chipped 
off, after the opening kickoff, you know, we fight with one 
another in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. But when the game’s 
over and when the season’s done and crisis hits, we stand 
together. We stand unified. And I would like to ask the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, to join the leader of this 
province. 
 
You know, I don’t think he’s that bad of a guy, our Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. On the very first day in office he came to Melfort. 
And it was interesting. Why would you come to Melfort? It’s 
on his way home. But anyway, it was great of him to do it. He 
supported my campaign which, you know, I got in so I have to 
thank him for that. But then he went with me to some doors, 
and then we went to a Mustangs game. And you know, I just 
had to say that he didn’t embarrass me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I think that that would be a great opportunity, for the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Premier of our province to get 
together and show what can happen in times of crisis. Because I 
believe that there is a crisis, Mr. Speaker — $210 million sitting 
on the table that could be spent in all of our constituencies. And 
yet because of the logjam, because of the holdback, whatever’s 
going on in British Columbia . . . Lord, I just don’t understand 
what they’re thinking. I don’t understand why our Prime 
Minister wouldn’t stand up for the people of Saskatchewan and 
push that project through. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
remind the Leader of the Opposition that Saskatchewan may 
fight after the puck is dropped, but when the season’s over we 
need to stand together for the good of the whole. 
 
And you know, I think that he has more opportunity to 
influence in this case than most of us. And I was there when I 
watched him read a passage. He selected a passage of scripture, 
Micah 6:8. And I really appreciated that, Mr. Speaker, when he 
read that because that is one of the most important portions of 
scripture. And it says, he’s shown thee, O man, what is good; 
and what does the Lord require of you but to do justly, and to 
love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God. And you know, 
in this case I think the just thing to do, the merciful thing to do, 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3955 

would be to stand with our Premier and fight. 
 
You know, I was thinking I could call it a man-bites-dog story, 
but I didn’t know how either of the two of them would take it. 
But you know, in the media, to see the Premier and the Leader 
of the Opposition standing together, I think that’s the kind of 
thing that we’ve been talking about, doing politics differently, 
standing together when the province needs us. Even though 
we’ve had our differences in the past, I challenge the Leader of 
the Opposition to stand with his Premier and make a difference 
for our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise on this debate. And I do want to wish the 
member from Kindersley a happy birthday. I hope this isn’t a 
. . . I think this is a good way to spend your birthday, debating 
this important issue, and I think it’s a fitting one. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And I want to say that the motion that he’s brought forward is 
very interesting, and as I look and read through it, it seems one 
that we can get behind. And so the member from Melfort 
should realize that there’s nothing at all in this motion that we 
haven’t said or agreed to. And it’s been in the media that in fact 
our Speaker has been very clear when we say, “call upon the 
federal government to act immediately to ensure the 
construction of the Trans Mountain pipeline.” We’ve been very 
clear about that. We’ve been very clear that it’s a federal 
responsibility, and it’s their job to make sure this pipeline gets 
built. This is very important. This is what this motion says. And 
it also says the “. . . Assembly rejects the actions of the 
Government of British Columbia to stop an energy project that 
is of national interest.” And clearly this one is of national 
interest and one that we need to all get behind, and we’ve been 
very clear about this. 
 
I think it’s very important that we just reflect on a moment and 
that, you know, this has gone through the regulatory process. 
Very important that we understand that the work has been done 
by the National Energy Board and in fact, from what I 
understand, that it started some back in 2014. So this hasn’t 
been rushed through. There are some — and I’ll talk about this 
in a moment — 157 stipulations that have to be met. But a lot of 
them happen along the way as they’re doing the expansion. And 
of course it’s like any kind of expansion. There’s inspections 
along the way to make sure that it’s all done to the letter, the 
application, and that the variances aren’t extreme. 
 
And so we’re very supportive, and this is not anything unusual. 
And I think that we have to be very careful at this time. And we 
see the members . . . You know, this is a difficult thing because 
we want to make sure that the pipeline gets built and gets going 
right away. We understand there are timelines, pressures that 
happen, but we can’t be outsmarted by Prime Minister Trudeau 
and the kind of things we’ve seen unfortunately from this 
government already where they seem to be locked into their 
ideology and in fact refuse to make movement when we know 
it’s in the national interest or the provincial interest that we 
move forward. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to say that it’s been a long 
tradition on this side of the House, and everyone I think in the 
House understands how important the resource sector is to 
Saskatchewan’s economy and how important it is that we get 
our exports to market. It’s something that’s important to our 
economy here, and when we can make that happen in a way 
that’s both environmentally sustainable and economically 
viable and also meets the social needs . . . And we’re thinking 
about if we are to eliminate poverty throughout the world and 
that people have a similar kind of standard of living, it’s 
important that we make some movements on this. 
 
So this is very, very important and we need to take the time to 
get behind this but make sure there are no unintended 
consequences, that we don’t act recklessly, that our actions are 
purposeful and well thought out and strategic, and that we get 
the message clearly to the federal government: step up to the 
plate; make sure that the work gets done. 
 
The one example — and I know that my colleague from 
Fairview, the critic for jobs, will talk more about this — and 
one particularly . . . And I’m surprised that the government side 
hasn’t talked about this yet, and maybe they will in their next 
group, is talk about Evraz here in Regina and how important 
those jobs are to Evraz, and how that if this delay continues, 
that there will be layoffs, and what that means for the facility 
here, but more importantly for the people who work here. 
 
And so this is a story that came out just about two months ago, 
February 2018, and the headline was, “Evraz North America 
says its Regina facility could face layoffs if the Trans Mountain 
pipeline expansion in B.C. is halted.” And we need to make 
sure it continues. “Evraz was awarded the contract to build 
275,000 tons of pipe in May last year,” and of course they 
employ some 1,400 people, and what that will mean to the 
people here in the city of Regina. 
 
So this is a multi-faceted concern that we have, whether it’s the 
pipe, whether it’s the oil, whether it’s the work for the 
pipefitters, the people who work on the pipeline directly. And I 
think it’s very important that we take this seriously but we put 
the pressure on the place where it is most likely to have some 
effect, and that is at the federal level. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you saw the polls that came 
out yesterday from Angus Reid Institute. And it was very 
interesting because this was a major poll and the release was 
dated April 18th, 2018 that gives a little bit more insight into 
what people across Canada are thinking. And of course the most 
interesting one now, we understand, is and I’ll read the headline 
from CBC that was posted yesterday morning, “More British 
Columbians now support the Trans Mountain pipeline project 
. . . Nationally, 2 in 3 Canadians say B.C. is wrong . . . to stop 
the pipeline from moving forward.”  
 
So that’s interesting to see how people are coming together 
across this. They’re understanding the impact in Canada is 
huge. It’s particularly important in British Columbia and 
Alberta, but we can’t stand by because as an exporting 
province, we want to make sure that product gets to ports in 
Canada, that we have some control over that. And so that’s 
very, very important. 
 



3956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

I want to say that . . . I’ll read actually from the polling itself 
done by Angus Reid Institute, Canada’s non-profit foundation 
committed to independent research. And they went through a 
very thorough polling process both within Canada and, as I 
said, specifically in British Columbia. And some of the key 
findings are that two in three Canadians, 64 per cent, now say 
the BC government is wrong to block the pipeline, and that’s a 
9-percentage-point increase since February.  
 
So that’s pretty critical. And asked who’s doing a good job in 
this conflict, what were people thinking about the leadership 
here in this crisis. Asked which leaders in the conflict are doing 
a good job or a bad job, just over 4 in 10 Canadians say Rachel 
Notley is doing a good job — 42 per cent. But, Mr. Speaker, 
fewer said this of the Prime Minister — 36 per cent — and then 
again Premier Horgan was at 31 per cent. 
 
So we can see that really we need to put the pressure on Prime 
Minister Trudeau to get to work and do the job that he’s 
supposed to do. 
 
And so they talk about the events of the past weeks have 
arguably done more to focus national attention on Kinder 
Morgan’s Trans Mountain pipeline than in the last two years. 
And so they want to see Justin Trudeau reassert the federal 
government’s jurisdiction on the file. And that’s very, very 
important. 
 
So a very interesting report that we have from Angus Reid 
Institute on what’s really happening in Canada, what people are 
feeling about this. They’re saying you have to step up to the 
plate. This is what this motion says before us, so we can get 
behind that. And we say, hey, that is exactly how we called it, 
what our leader called it, and said it’s a federal issue, that we 
have a national interest to make sure this pipeline, when it has 
met the National Energy Board’s criteria — it’s met its criteria 
— and well it has 157 stipulations to meet along the way. This 
morning when I was reading that, I think it’s like a building 
certificate you get. You get it along the way so you can’t say 
this is how I’m going to redo my basement, and it’s all done. 
That’s not how it works. It gets inspected along the way to 
make sure it’s meeting the environmental standards, the 
economic standards, and social standards along the way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to look forward to a lot of 
questions on this because it might be just, hey, I agree. 
Wouldn’t that be interesting? Seventy-five minutes and it was, 
hey, I agree, you know. No, I know they probably want to 
throw other things in there. We’re seeing they’re throwing 
everything, including the kitchen sink, in. We’ll see how that 
plays out in questions. But, Mr. Speaker, I think we all have to 
say this pipeline is in the provincial interest, whether it’s Evraz, 
whether it’s the oil sector. We think this is an important debate 
to have today. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Trans 
Mountain pipeline is a very important topic since many jobs are 
related to this gas and oil industries, direct or indirect. Mr. 
Speaker, when we go outside these days, we need to zip up our 
fleece, grab our rain jackets and boots, all of which are made 
out of oil and gas. From sunglasses to flip-flops, running shoes 

to umbrellas, pantyhose, shoe polishes, oil and gas products 
keep us protected, active, and stylish. Some world-famous 
brand names rely on oil and gas to deliver their unique benefits. 
For example, you can keep dry with Gore-Tex, stop a bullet 
with Kevlar, and stay connected with Velcro — all made with 
petroleum. 
 
It is estimated that currently more than 6,000 products are made 
from oil and gas. Clothing is just one part of our life in which 
oil and gas play a part. In fact, there are literally thousands of 
products made from oil and gas, many of which you probably 
use every day. Things like fuel, cleaners, tools, plastics, sports 
equipment, safety gear, medicine, electronics, cosmetics, 
construction material, home furniture, and many more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
By stopping Trans Mountain pipeline is actually an act to 
putting the country in crisis, affecting the whole chain of 
businesses around the country, and threatening thousands of 
jobs in Saskatchewan and in the country. Evraz has indicated 
that there could be layoffs at Regina plant if the Trans Mountain 
pipeline expansion is halted. These are the jobs that employ real 
people. Those livelihoods and businesses are being threatened 
with obstructionist attacks on the fed-approved pipeline. 
 
The members opposite have spoken about jobs a lot in recent 
months, but they do not seem to be grasping the incredible job 
losses that would come without supporting our energy industry. 
It is truly puzzling, Mr. Speaker. It is just a few people are 
talking of our economy into hostage, and totally unaware of 
economical consequences which result in a job loss, and shorten 
the food on the dining table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 33,430 jobs were created from 
oil and gas industries. And 533,000 total direct and indirect 
job-related in Canada, Mr. Speaker, individuals working in 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador. 
 
And faster wages growth connected to the industry’s economic 
growth, even if they were not employed in energy sectors. 
Those people with a high school education working in 
Saskatchewan and in Alberta experience faster wage growth 
than those working with university degrees, resulting in the 
reduction of wage inequality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadian oil imports surged to their highest level 
in four years in 2016. Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries barrels sailed into eastern Canadian refineries. The 
National Energy Board released data showing Canada imported 
759,000 barrel of oil per day in 2016, which is the highest level 
of oil import received by country since 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NDP opposing Kinder Morgan pipeline, and 
having no problem when we import $7 billion oil from other 
countries. They’re threatening our economy, our growth, and 
our employment. Imports also come from Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Saudi Arabia, 
Algeria, Nigeria, and United Arab Emirates. 
 
Algeria in particular sent 113 per cent more oil to Canada 
between 2015 and 2016, boosting shipment from an average of 
39,000 barrels per day in 2015 to 84,000 barrels per day last 
year, as American supply ship their barrels elsewhere. Nigerian 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3957 

oil imports also rose 80 per cent year over year; 73,700 barrels 
per day in 2016. 
 
Similarly, Saudi Arabia has increased oil shipments to Canada 
from 73,000 barrels per day in 2014 to 84,000 barrels per day in 
2015, and close to 87,000 barrels per day in 2016. 
 
[11:45] 
 
It seems crazy to me that people in BC who support the 
environment would prefer to buy their oil from Algeria and 
Saudi Arabia, countries not only with significantly worse 
environmental practice than Saskatchewan, but with abysmal 
human rights record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government estimates that the lack of pipeline 
connection to tidewater costs Saskatchewan $210 million in 
royalties in 2017, and the cost of Saskatchewan producers is 
$2.6 billion. 
 
According to Scotiabank, pipeline approval delays have 
imposed clear demonstrable and sustainable economic cost on 
the Canadian economy. If maintained at current level, the 
discount on the Western Canadian oil would shave 15.6 billion 
in revenue annually from the sector. Mr. Speaker, this is 
absolutely not wise that we import oil from other countries and 
leave Saskatchewan’s oil and gas sector behind, at 15 per cent 
contribution in our GDP. 
 
In 2017, Saskatchewan is number two in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
and number seven in the world for the best investment climate 
for oil and gas according to the Fraser Institute. The value of the 
province’s total oil production for 2017 significantly increased 
over the value of 2016, rising from 6.9 billion to $9.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Trans Mountain pipeline is currently being 
blocked by John Horgan and the BC NDP. This has resulted in 
disputes between the Alberta and BC government, and Alberta 
has stated that they will go as far as shutting off the valves 
completely cutting off BC from its oil. And our Premier has 
stated that if this should happen, Saskatchewan will stand with 
Alberta, that when BC fuel tanks dry, Saskatchewan will not fill 
them up. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, when asked then what about their thoughts, 
they say it is the federal matter; it is not our matter. Mr. 
Speaker, 64 per cent of Canadians agree with the statement that 
BC government is wrong to oppose the expansion of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline. Unfortunately the members opposite seem 
to make up the minority who think BC is right. It shows that the 
members opposite are out of touch with not only the people of 
this province but with the majority of the people in this country, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a news release from the Canadian energy 
board that: 
 

Canada has a strong refining industry but processes only a 
fraction of its own crude oil production, according to the 
National Energy Board . . . 
 
The refinery overview states that only 30 per cent of 
Canadian crude oil is processed by Canadian refineries. 

This is mainly due to the size of Canada’s refining industry 
compared to the resource size, the location of its refineries 
and the lack of cross-country pipeline connectivity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I proudly support our energy sector and that’s why 
I will be supporting this motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter 
into the debate on this motion today, although I have to say that 
I don’t really think we’re having much of a debate because I’ve 
read the text of the motion and we are in agreeance with the text 
of the motion, Mr. Speaker. So I think there has been some 
miscommunication about what this whole debate is about. 
 
But I’m happy to weigh in and provide some of my thoughts, 
Mr. Speaker, particularly in light of some of the rhetoric that 
we’ve heard from the other side in this debate or in this 
discussion. So I’m happy to weigh in and provide some of my 
thoughts. 
 
So I will say that if we’re looking at the text of the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, we are on the same page as the members opposite. 
This is a project that we support. It’s a national project. It needs 
to go forward in order to serve the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people. We have been clear on that. Our leader 
has been clear on that statement. 
 
This has been a position we have held for years on this side of 
the House so it’s a little bit puzzling to me that the members 
opposite are coming in and stating that we are opposed to it for 
some reason. I’m wondering where they get their research from 
or what they’re referring to because we are certainly in favour 
of this project going forward. 
 
So we support the expansion of the Trans Mountain pipeline. It 
has been through an extensive process, which some of the other 
members have talked about, for National Energy Board 
approval. It meets the triple bottom-line standards so we know 
that it’s going to be good for people and the planet as well as 
our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a process that was in place. People thought it was going 
forward, and now we have a gridlock, Mr. Speaker. So we have 
been in favour of this. We continue to stand in favour of this 
and I will expand a little bit about what some of those reasons 
are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of the National Energy Board approval, some 
background on what happened there, Mr. Speaker. On 
December 16th, 2013 Trans Mountain filed a facilities 
application for the project with its regulator, the National 
Energy Board. On November 29th, 2016 the government of 
Canada granted approval for the project. In addition, on May 
19th, 2016, following a 29-month review, National Energy 
Board concluded that the project is in the Canadian public 
interest and recommended the federal Governor in Council 
approve the expansion. These approvals will allow the project 
to proceed with the 157 conditions that my colleague from 
Saskatoon Centre identified. 
 



3958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

There’s been extensive consultation that’s taken place in this 
process, Mr. Speaker, and this is one of the other reasons why 
we are supportive. For almost five years there were 
consultations with thousands of individuals through 159 open 
houses, workshops along with the pipeline and marine 
corridors, and more than 1,700 meetings between project team 
members and stakeholder groups. So we’ve seen extensive 
consultation take place in this project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This pipeline has tremendous importance to people across this 
country and also significant importance to people across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. The economic benefits are quite large. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada has talked about some of the 
employment and fiscal benefits in a news release on January 
6th, 2016. It goes, “benefits . . . to the Canadian economy 
extend well beyond the construction and operations of the 
pipeline.” It estimates: 
 

. . . three new impacts associated with the project . . . 
would generate 678,000 person-years of employment and 
$18.5 billion in revenues for federal and provincial 
governments over the first 20 years of operations. That 
works out to an average of almost $1 billion in economic 
activity and nearly 34,000 jobs annually for 20 years. 

 
Also, according to the National Energy Board, “Benefits of the 
Project,” this is a summary of their overall recommendations on 
the expansion project, Mr. Speaker: 
 

increased access to diverse markets for Canadian oil; 
thousands of construction jobs and hundreds of long-term 
jobs directly related to the Project across Canada; 
the development of capacity of local and Indigenous 
individuals, communities and businesses; 
considerable benefit from direct spending on pipeline 
materials in Canada; and 
considerable government revenues from the Project. 

 
And it goes on and on. And I’ve got some other sources here, 
but I don’t have that much time, Mr. Speaker. So there are 
benefits to the project. 
 
Some of the benefits that I think we need to spend some time 
talking about, Mr. Speaker, are the benefits to workers right 
here in Saskatchewan, right here in Regina, in particular at 
Evraz and that’s the steelworkers, Mr. Speaker. And some of 
my colleagues have alluded to the fact that Evraz has an 
extensive contract here. We’re talking about 75 per cent of the 
steel for this project being an Evraz contract. 
 
My colleagues and I, a few of them, had an opportunity to meet 
with the steelworkers USW [United Steelworkers] 5890 earlier 
this year to talk about the implications of this project for them. 
We very well understood the implications, and I’ll share a 
couple of them. We know that this is over a year of work at full 
tilt for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also talking about 1,100 jobs that we could see lost. And 
I have an article here from the Regina Leader-Post on February 
8th that says, “Evraz says layoffs likely in Regina if Trans 
Mountain pipeline expansion is halted.” So I’ll just read a 
couple of pieces of that article, Mr. Speaker: 

Workers in Regina started building pipeline for the 
expansion in October . . . production is to continue until 
May 2019. [So it’s about a year and a half of production, 
Mr. Speaker.] Evraz was awarded the contract to build 
275,000 tons of pipe in May last year. Evraz employs 
approximately 1,400 people throughout its Regina 
plant . . . 
 
Asked Thursday if jobs at the Regina plant would be 
affected were the project to be stopped, Evraz spokesman 
Christian Messmacher said in an email there would be 
“significant layoffs.” He said production capacity could 
change based on what orders the plant receives from the 
company heading Trans Mountain, Kinder Morgan. 

 
And I’ve got some other sources here, Mr. Speaker, but the 
main point here is we are concerned about jobs. We are 
concerned about these good-paying steelworker jobs that are in 
our province. Evraz has low carbon emissions. You know, they 
use some recycled steel. It’s quite something to learn about their 
processes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to be able to keep these jobs in the province. This is 
going to have a significant impact for us in Saskatchewan if it 
does not go forward. So we need to protect these jobs. We stand 
with Saskatchewan producers. We know that our economy is 
resource based and the expansion of this pipeline is important to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we are missing at this point in time is leadership from the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister’s job is 
to keep provinces moving in the same direction and that has not 
happened right now. And as my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre identified, people are not happy with how Prime 
Minister Trudeau is dealing with this. He identified the most 
recent Angus Reid survey that talked about the leadership that 
we’re seeing at the federal level, or the lack thereof. 
 
And this is an important piece, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s also 
important to look a bit at what the Sask Party’s record has been 
on this file. And the Sask Party has failed to address climate 
change and is clinging to this idea that they need to gain 
credibility on this file because they’ve lost their credibility on 
the environment. It makes them harder to move forward. 
They’ve failed to lay an inch of pipeline to tidewater over 10 
years. They’ve cut funding for climate change and green 
energy, Mr. Speaker, and they have no plan to reduce 
greenhouse gases. 
 
So the members opposite have a role to play in this as well, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re looking for leadership at the federal level. We 
continue to be united in calling on the Prime Minister to act and 
to be able to move this pipeline forward, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The time for 65 minutes of debate is over. 
Now it’s time for 10 minutes of questions. I recognize the . . . 
Questions, questions . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it’s 
usually them, but I recognize Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on May 3rd, 2012, 
the member from Athabasca as well as others from that side of 
the House voted against a motion to support Keystone XL 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3959 

pipeline. Move forward to today, Mr. Speaker, and the member 
from Athabasca said he and the NDP wholeheartedly support 
pipelines. My question is for the member from Athabasca: how 
can you possibly convince the people of Saskatchewan you 
support pipelines, considering you don’t seem to know 
yourself? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we voted 
against, Mr. Speaker, at the time was the fact that the Sask Party 
had record revenues and then they had record tax increases and 
now we have record debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
And the point I was making at the time, Mr. Speaker, is that 
despite the fact that we had an industry that was thriving in the 
province of Saskatchewan, all that debt, all those tax increases 
hurt industry right across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I go back to my earlier point. How many inches 
of pipeline did they build when they had record revenue and 
record tax increases? Not one inch, Mr. Speaker. So we don’t 
take any lessons from him as to how to build the economy of 
Saskatchewan and the entire Sask Party caucus. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Sometimes you have to really wonder about where they get 
their research done. I’ve noticed a real decline in the quality of 
research over there and the consistency. 
 
Now I want to ask this question here. In June of 2016, the Sask 
Party put forward a debate on important pipelines, but failed to 
include Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain pipeline. To the 
member from Regina Pasqua: why did the members opposite 
not include Kinder Morgan in this debate, and why did they not 
support this pipeline from the very beginning? Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a member 
from the other side, a few members agree with the Leap 
Manifesto and a few people, a few members agree that Kinder 
Morgan should go ahead. The members who agree with Kinder 
Morgan should go ahead, I hope they will not go out and 
change their minds as the Leader of the Opposition did that 
other day, Mr. Speaker. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our leader has been 
front and centre on this file since day one, and the federal NDP 
leader has categorically stated his opposition to the Kinder 
Morgan project. I wonder if the member from Saskatoon Centre 
could share with us any specific correspondence and/or 
discussions that his leader has had with the federal leader or the 
leader of the BC NDP in supporting this file. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is really an odd 
question coming from that side when that exact side over there 
with their federal . . . When they had a prime minister, Harper 
couldn’t get anything done, couldn’t get a thing done. So what 
are they . . . This is interesting. You really shouldn’t live in 
glass houses. So this is really odd, the pot calling the kettle 
black. Very odd, very odd indeed. So, Mr. Speaker, the question 
remains, after all these years, after all this money this 
government has had, they haven’t been able to deliver one inch 
of pipeline to salt water, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A segue, 
my question to the member from Kindersley: as pointed out by 
my very learned friend from Saskatoon Centre, the question I 
have for you . . . Just give me the information. I want to ask the 
member from Kindersley, how many inches of pipeline to 
tidewater have been built under the Sask Party government’s 
watch? Can you give me an answer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to thank 
the member from Athabasca for the biggest softball I’ve ever 
seen in my life. Mr. Speaker, and to the member: we don’t build 
pipelines in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for NEB [National 
Energy Board] projects. We do not have any authority to 
approve NEB projects in this province.  
 
And I’m as new, I’m as green as grass, and the member from 
Athabasca’s been here a lot longer than I, Mr. Speaker, so he 
should probably be able to know some of this information better 
than I. But the NEB controls pipelines across our provincial 
borders, Mr. Speaker, and it is not a mandate of this House to 
handle those matters. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen over 
the past few months incredibly weak leadership from the Leader 
of the Opposition. When it comes to the federal carbon tax, 
wave the white flag. Yesterday in his scrum on the issue of 
pipeline debates, he said it’s a federal issue and the province 
shouldn’t take any action. Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s got an 
opportunity to show leadership. We know that he received a 
substantial contribution from John Horgan and the BC NDP, so 
obviously he’s got a relationship with them. 
 
Could the member for Saskatoon Fairview confirm to this 
House that indeed her leader has actually shown some 
leadership, phoned his counterpart in BC, and defended 
Saskatchewan’s interests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 
the member opposite for the question. I think our Leader of the 
Opposition has shown tremendous leadership on this file. He 
has been, in a word that the members across like to use a lot 
with their previous premier, “unequivocal” in his support for 
Kinder Morgan, and I’ve been proud of that. So I think that 



3960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

there is no question on this, Mr. Speaker. And I think that the 
members opposite can do a little bit more research, read through 
Hansard, pay attention to the scrums, and they will have a 
better idea of what our position is on this file. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
issue of credibility and weak leadership, we have a lot of 
questions for the government over there, and the leadership. 
 
And so to the member from Melfort, I have this question. What 
are they going to do to improve their credibility on files like this 
when they have such weak leadership? We see cuts to the 
climate change branch, some 18 per cent. We see dropping the 
ball on the $62 million in green infrastructure. They’re getting 
simply outsmarted by Trudeau. What are they going to do to up 
their game over there? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
question from the member of Saskatoon Centre. But you know, 
when I see what’s going on here with the pipeline today, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s our Premier who is showing great leadership in 
going to speak with the Prime Minister. And he seems to be the 
one leading the charge when it should be the Prime Minister of 
our country, as it’s under their jurisdiction. And I appreciate the 
fact that I’ve heard from the other side that they are onside, and 
I look forward to them supporting our Premier as he pursues 
moving the pipeline forwards. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to join in this conversation and debate today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve heard a lot of fairy tales coming from that side of 
the House, especially from the member for Athabasca. And 
when he talks about not building an inch of pipeline, and how 
they know how to be stewards of the economy, it makes me 
laugh, Mr. Speaker. They had 16 years to try and work with 
people of this province to build an economy, and they failed 
each and every time. People left this province in droves because 
they drove them out because there was no economic 
opportunity for people, for businesses, for entrepreneurs. 
 
So to the member from Athabasca — who I do understand he’s 
been here for a long, long time — but if in fact it does come to 
pass that there has been some pipelines built, and I know he 
added on “to tidewater” just in his last question . . . But, Mr. 
Speaker, if he does not believe there’s been any pipelines built, 
will he go to Evraz and tell those employees, you’ve built no 
pipelines? Will he go to Evraz and tell those people, you don’t 
need your jobs? 
 
So to the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker: will he admit 
that there’s hard-working people at Evraz that have built 
pipelines and contributed to this economy? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, if the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres wants a lesson as to what we did when we were in 
government, it took us 15 of the 16 years we were in 
government cleaning up the last Tory mess. Let’s not forget, 
let’s not forget your history. And the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres, you only got two more days before your federal 
nomination and then you’re out of here. We will stay here and 
continue fighting for Evraz and the people of Saskatchewan as 
long as we’re sitting here. 
 
The Speaker: — Time for a 75-minute debate thankfully is 
over. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 606 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 606 — The Election 
(Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m really 
honoured to be able to rise and speak to this bill. I think it’s one 
of the most fundamental bills that has been brought forward in 
this Assembly, probably since I got elected, because this deals 
with the essence of democracy, and that is fairness, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Big money has crept into the Saskatchewan political donation 
lexicon in many ways. And I think it’s a real problem for 
fairness in democracy and that people are very, very concerned 
about the attitude of this government when it comes to big 
money. 
 
I just want to start off by talking about a Mainstreet poll that 
was conducted in 2016 because I think this is a bit of a shock 
for this government. And obviously this government doesn’t 
really care what the people of Saskatchewan think and they just 
keep doing what they want to do. And the problem is that a vast 
majority of people in Saskatchewan actually reject what this 
government is doing when it comes to using out-of-province 
donations, and this government has turned a blind eye. They 
have become tone-deaf when it comes to what people think in 
Canada, and particularly here in Saskatchewan, about their 
actions collecting out-of-province donations. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are saying they can’t 
hear me but that doesn’t make sense because they must be 
hearing me. But obviously they choose to ignore the people of 
Saskatchewan and what people of Saskatchewan care about 
when they continue to stubbornly go ahead with the out-of-date 
laws we have when it comes to campaign donations. 
 
Since 2006 we know the Sask Party has received funding from 
registered charities, cities, towns, and municipalities, 
universities, local school boards, regional health authorities, and 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3961 

Crown corporations. You have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, how 
that can be seen as acceptable. They also have accepted, and 
this is the real kicker, Mr. Speaker, over $3 million from 
out-of-province donors. Two million alone came from corporate 
donors in Alberta. So you have to ask yourself, what do those 
corporate donors expect in return? And how does that serve the 
people of Saskatchewan when they are collecting money from 
corporate donors in Alberta? How is that serving the public 
interest of people here in this province? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about influence and you talk 
about . . . If they weren’t so concerned about it, Mr. Speaker, 
maybe they should just pass the law. This is a very simple bill, 
and it sounds like they actually support it. 
 
Now this bill, I just want to go through some of the numbers. 
Seventy per cent of people believe in Saskatchewan . . . This is 
people from every one of their ridings. Seventy per cent of 
people in Saskatchewan think that we should not be allowed to 
collect out-of-province money. That’s 70 per cent. Only 10 per 
cent of your voters believe that you should be doing what 
you’re doing, only 10 per cent. 
 
And we’re certainly onside with this bill, Mr. Speaker. So if this 
government had any courage at all, if they had any breath of 
courage, they would support this bill and they would have 
passed it already years ago. I hope that many of you are talking 
to your 70 per cent of your electorate who are telling you that 
this is a wrong bill. This bill is . . . This is the right bill. The 
actions of this government are wrong. 
 
Other questions that have been asked about registered charities 
and government-funded organizations, should they be allowed 
to donate to our political parties? Eighty per cent of 
Saskatchewan people are saying no. And what’s most 
embarrassing about the actions of this government and makes 
Saskatchewan people look bad is that we’re the only province 
who does this, Mr. Speaker. We’re the only province in Canada. 
It makes us look unbelievable. It makes us look . . . the wild 
west really. And I think that’s what it’s been called by people. 
For example, CBC did a report that said the province has a 
reputation as being the wild west when it comes to campaign 
finance laws. Mr. Speaker, is that how we want our province to 
be viewed by the rest of Canada, the wild west? It’s 
embarrassing. It’s embarrassing and it’s a disgrace to what 
democracy means, where everybody’s vote should have the 
same amount of influence, Mr. Speaker. But when we’re taking 
$2 million from corporate donors in Alberta, I think that really 
sort of colours what the individual feels about how their vote 
matters, or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even during their leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker, a number 
of their leaders took donations from different corporations. 
Alanna Koch had 29 corporations who donated to her 
campaign. The Premier had 27 companies contributing to his 
campaign. And I think the member from Willowgrove raised 
the most money overall. Thirty per cent of his $165,000 in 
donations came from five companies that donated $10,000 each 
to his campaign. Even the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, he got 
. . . Nearly 20 per cent of his donations came from one 
company, Redhead Equipment. And the next company that 
gave him a lot of money was Regina-based Pow City 
Mechanical. They gave him $10,000. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m having a little bit of difficulty even 
hearing myself with the member from Martensville and the 
member from Indian Head and Walsh Acres offering their 
commentary. They certainly would have the opportunity to 
discuss this bill at some point if they wanted to step up to the 
plate. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Perhaps we could find out what they think about Saskatchewan 
people being incredibly disappointed in this province’s lax wild 
west campaign contribution laws. Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
listening to the people they represent, and that is shameful. If 
they’re not going to listen to the people they represent, then 
who are they listening to? Well I think we know, Mr. Speaker, 
when we see the amount of corporate donations that come in 
from outside of the province. 
 
Now I have a suggestion for the members opposite. If they 
don’t like the particular bill that my colleague has tabled and 
they don’t like the way it’s worded, why don’t we look at what 
some other provinces are doing? 
 
In British Columbia, if you look at their Election Act, you will 
see first of all a definition of who can contribute. And that 
definition says this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

“eligible individual” means an individual who is, or was 
immediately before the date of the individual’s death, 
 
(a) a resident of British Columbia, and 
 
(b) a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident as defined 
in the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act . . . 

 
Only individuals, only individuals can contribute in British 
Columbia. So take that back to your caucus meetings, folks. 
 
Section 186 of the British Columbia Act says: 
 

A person must not make a political contribution unless the 
person is an eligible individual. 

 
So that’s a choice. BC legislation. What does the Alberta 
legislation . . . If you don’t like David . . . or the member from 
Saskatoon Centre’s wording . . . Apologies to my colleague. If 
you don’t like the wording suggested in Bill 606, what about 
Alberta? Maybe that would be more acceptable to the members 
opposite. That is called the Election Finances and 
Contributions Disclosure Act and it says in section 16(1): 
 

Only a person ordinarily resident in Alberta may make a 
contribution to a registered party, registered constituency 
association, registered nomination contestant, registered 
leadership contestant or registered candidate. 

 
Alberta has gone further. They’ve actually got a limit on 
contributions and that’s section 17(1). You might want to 
consider that: 
 

Contributions by a person ordinarily resident in Alberta 
shall not exceed in any year $4000 . . . 
 



3962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

And it goes on to say under what conditions. 
 
Now if BC, Alberta, and the Saskatchewan bill aren’t good 
enough for members opposite, how about the Manitoba bill, Mr. 
Speaker? Let’s have a look at that one. Section 33 says: 
 

Only an individual normally resident in Manitoba may 
make a contribution. A person or organization other than 
an individual normally resident in Manitoba must not 
make a contribution. 

 
And section 34 tells us that there are limits and it’s a $5,000 
annual contribution limit. So that’s where Manitoba’s gone. 
 
Now if Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC aren’t good 
enough for these members opposite, what about Ontario? Let’s 
have a look at Ontario. Contributions, section 16(1): 
 

Contributions to parties, constituency associations, 
nomination contestants, candidates and leadership 
contestants registered under this Act may be made only by 
persons individually. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so there’s another choice for members opposite to 
consider maybe that 80 per cent of people of Saskatchewan 
would like them to take action on. 
 
Okay. If they don’t like BC, they don’t like Alberta, they don’t 
like Saskatchewan’s proposal here on the floor, they don’t like 
Manitoba’s choice, they don’t like Ontario’s choice, well 
maybe we should look at Quebec, Mr. Speaker. What does the 
Quebec law say about contributions for political campaigns? 
This says: 
 

The contributor must sign . . . a declaration stating that his 
contribution is made out of his own property, voluntarily, 
without compensation or consideration and that it cannot 
be reimbursed in any way. In addition, the name of the 
employer of the contributor is now required on the 
contribution receipt. 
 

Now that goes a little further than what’s being tabled here I 
think, but you could show where the people of Quebec take this 
very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and they listen to what the people 
they represent would like to have them do. 
 
This prohibition in Quebec, who is allowed to make donations: 
 

Legal persons [such as] (companies, unions, etc.) are 
strictly forbidden from making contributions. 

 
And when an offence is committed with respect to those 
provisions, you can be fined from $5,000 up to $20,000 and you 
would also suffer some loss of rights. 
 
So this is a very, very punitive law, and I’m sure members 
opposite are going to, you know, go home and think about this 
and take a look at some of the election laws that are in place 
across Canada. Because I’m sure they really care about what 
their members and what their electorate wants them to do and 
represent the will of the people, because that’s what they were 
elected to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In Quebec the total amount that any individual can contribute, 
Mr. Speaker, is $100. Now I’m not thinking that this bill is 
going that far. It’s not saying you can only contribute $100. So I 
think, you know, we’re kind of settling into the middle of the 
pack here when it comes to the bill that’s on the table today, the 
bill that we’re debating. So I don’t think members opposite 
would be interested maybe in going as far as Quebec, but you 
know, it is something that they may want to take a look at if 
they truly want to represent the people that elected them. 
 
Nova Scotia . . . Why don’t we keep going further east, Mr. 
Speaker? What’s happening in Nova Scotia? We’re talking 
about section 236 of the Elections Act, and there it says: 
 

An individual resident in the province may make a 
contribution to one or more . . . parties . . . 

 
And there is a total in subsection (3), a cap of $5,000. 
 
So that’s where Nova Scotia’s at — individuals only, and 
certainly not out-of-province. They have to be living in the 
province and they can’t spend more than 5,000. That sounds 
very similar I think to the bill that’s on the table here today. So 
the citizens of Nova Scotia and the Government of Nova Scotia 
has heard the people and they’ve taken that action. 
 
Newfoundland is part of the wild west, Mr. Speaker. Currently 
they’re the only other province in Canada that allows donations 
by corporations and trade unions. So that’s the one outlier other 
than Canada. 
 
And of course we can look at the federal law as well. The 
federal doesn’t have . . . I don’t think they have a cap on 
donations. But there is a prohibition, and here is what it says: 
section 363(1) of Canada Elections Act. And it says: 
 

No person or entity other than an individual who is a 
Canadian citizen or is a permanent resident as defined in 
subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection 
Act shall make a contribution to a registered party, a 
registered association, a nomination contestant, a candidate 
or a leadership contestant. 

 
And if you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that is the same clause that 
we find in the BC legislation. 
 
So I think this is something that I’m hoping backbenchers will 
have the courage to bring up to their cabinet. And so, you know, 
it’s time for us to move forward into the 21st century, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s time for our government to show some leadership 
here, and it’s time for our government to listen, truly listen, to 
what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
And what concerns me more than anything, Mr. Speaker, is the 
appearance of influence. Whether or not there’s been much said 
by the former premier that, you know, we have to represent the 
people that do business here too. That’s not the goal of 
democracy at this point in time. It’s one person, one vote. And 
that’s a cherished value that I think this nation, the western 
world, and anywhere where democracy is the chosen form of 
government, where there’s one person, one vote. That sort of 
distorts, Mr. Speaker, what that concept of one person, one vote 
is. 



April 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3963 

And when you think about . . . I think about people that don’t 
even want to vote, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t feel like 
they’re being counted. And when they see news stories like 
CBC reporting $2 million coming from corporations in Alberta 
. . . Those corporations can’t even donate money in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, but they’re allowed to donate outside of Alberta. How 
can that possibly be right? 
 
And we know that the former premier, Brad Wall, was taking a 
top-up from his party, that the corporate donations to the party 
were being used to fund his own salary, Mr. Speaker. That is 
something I think the people of Saskatchewan, and obviously 
the results of the poll, tell us, that it’s overwhelmingly 
unpopular with the people that elect these people, Mr. Speaker, 
the people who have elected all of us. And when it’s that 
unpopular, Mr. Speaker, you would think that the backbenchers 
would start talking to the cabinet members, that they would say, 
come on you guys, we need to have a fair and democratic 
system of voting here. We’re way behind the eight ball when it 
comes to the entire country except, of course, Newfoundland. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that they would actually encourage their 
cabinet to have the courage to take a look at Bill 606 perhaps, 
perhaps the Alberta bill, maybe the BC bill, and the Manitoba 
bill. How about the Ontario bill? Maybe the Quebec bill, 
although I think that goes a little far, maybe even for this side of 
the House. The Nova Scotia bill, how about those, Mr. 
Speaker? They’re simple clauses and all they say is you have to 
be an individual resident in the jurisdiction that you’re voting 
in. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t rocket science, and I think it goes to 
credibility. I think it goes to credibility of the people that are 
making the decisions affecting all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, I think of people who have trouble getting to the 
polls. I think of people who feel disenfranchised. And when 
they see these kinds of stories you can understand why voter 
turnouts are becoming quite low in this province. And I think 
that’s something else that we need to be alarmed about when we 
want true representation by one person, one vote. 
 
I think these kinds of voter turnouts signify . . . and are 
alarming and should encourage the government of the day to 
say, we need to take this seriously. We need to understand why 
80 per cent of the people that live in this province do not like 
our campaign donation laws, why 80 percent of the people of 
this province do not like the fact that $2 million came from 
Alberta alone to support the coffers of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. Three million dollars in total outside the province 
came to fill the coffers of this government, who continues to put 
information out publicly about myself, for example, that is 
incorrect, and they choose to deliberately do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even the member opposite said today something that’s 
deliberately incorrect, and they don’t get called on it, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t get called on it. And the member from 
Regina said something about me that is incorrect, and he should 
apologize for it. The previous premier used to say it frequently, 
as did Bill Boyd, and they were not correct when it came to that 
comment, Mr. Speaker, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Three times the member opposite accused 
members of this side of making incorrect statements in the 
House, deliberately making incorrect statements. I would ask 
that she withdraw that and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell you . . . I will withdraw 
and apologize, but I’ll tell you what they are saying about me. 
 
The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I was paying close attention to 
the member’s speech. Her words that she was using were well 
within the definition of parliamentary language. I encourage 
you, Mr. Speaker, to review the record. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll review the record and report back. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I think it’s incredibly interesting how touchy 
these folk are, but when they say that I supported the Leap 
Manifesto, I never did. And I want to put that on the record here 
today. I have never, ever supported Leap Manifesto, but there 
are many, many individuals across the way who like to say that 
I did. 
 
Now if I can’t use that word that the House Leader was so 
offended by, I’m not sure what words are available that is 
parliamentary. But I can tell you that several of these members, 
and I can show you Hansard, Mr. Speaker, where they state that 
I supported the Leap Manifesto. I didn’t. So I would like to 
know why people like saying things that are not correct. 
 
What can I say, Mr. Speaker? What can I say? But those guys 
get away with it all the time and I’m tired of it. So it’s time for 
them to apologize for saying things about me that I never said. 
And I think that’s fully within the parliamentary rules, Mr. 
Speaker. Every one of them who has said that publicly should 
be apologizing to me. But do you think they’ll have the courage 
to do that? I think . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Yes, let’s move on with the motion. And I 
will review. I will review. But move on to the motion, please. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
hope that you review every one of the members opposite who 
have said those things about me as part of your review. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is not serving the people of 
Saskatchewan by refusing to pass this bill. This government 
should have the courage to reflect the will of the people of 
Saskatchewan and to have fair election contribution laws. Bill 
606 is such a law, and if they’re so offended by the fact that it’s 
a private member’s law, maybe they could look at some of our 
neighbours across this fine country and have a look at what 
other people in Canada are doing, because this law is important 
right now for them to have credibility, and for them to properly 
represent the people that have elected them. And we need to 
move forward on this, Mr. Speaker. 



3964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2018 

[12:30] 
 
So at this point . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Union donations, 
they get all hung up on that. If this member opposite would 
actually read the bill, she would see that union donations are 
included. So why is she so het up about that, Mr. Speaker? Why 
is she so excited about union donations when they’re in the 
bloody bill? Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — That’s definitely unparliamentary. I’d ask the 
member to withdraw. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I absolutely withdraw and apologize for that 
comment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, members opposite haven’t even read the bill 
because they don’t realize that union contributions are included 
as ones that should be banned, Mr. Speaker. So their indignance 
and their huffing and puffing about union donations means they 
don’t even take the time to read the bill, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is a shame and it’s a disgrace and it’s something that these 
members opposite need to remember who they’re representing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t have the courage to pass this 
bill, then they should at least have the courage to pass some 
form of contribution bill that brings us in line with the rest of 
Canada, because right now we look bad, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the end of my comments. I’m going to adjourn the debate on 
this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that this House do now adjourn 
for the day. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3941 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3941 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3941 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3941 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3941 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3941 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3942 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3942 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3942 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3942 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3942 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3942 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3942 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3943 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3943 
 Roots of Empathy Program 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3943 
 Swift Current Broncos in Western Hockey League Playoffs 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3944 
 Hip Hop Hoop Dance Brings Cultures Together 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3944 
 Rural Municipality of Wilton Receives Safe Employer Award 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3944 
 Assiniboia Athlete Named to Canadian All-Star Football Team 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3945 
 The Legacy of Gordon Kurbis 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3945 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Irrigation Project Approval Process 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3945 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3945 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3947 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Transparency 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 
 Saskatoon Bypass Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3949 
 Coverage for Taxi Drivers Injured at Work 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3949 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3949 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3950 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3950 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Construction of Trans Mountain Pipeline 
  Francis ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3950, 3959 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3952, 3959 
  Goudy ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3953, 3960 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3955, 3959 
  Fiaz ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3956, 3959 
  Mowat ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3957, 3959 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3958 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3959 



 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3959 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3960 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3960 
  Brkich (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 3963 
  Sarauer (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................... 3963 
  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 3963 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


